Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
Rules of Construction
CHAPTER
10
10.01 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION
10.02 INTERPRETATION
10.03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES
10.04 CAPTIONS
10.05 DEFINITIONS
10.06 RULES OF INTERPRETATION
10.07 SEVERABILITY
10.08 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS
10.09 REFERENCE TO OFFICES
10.10 ERRORS AND OMMISSIONS
10.11 OFFICIAL TIME
10.12 REASONABLE TIME
10.13 ORDINANCES REPEALED
10.14 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED
10.99 GENERAL PENALTY
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
Rules of Construction
CHAPTER
10
10.01 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION
The codified ordinances of the Municipal City of Auburn, Indiana, shall be designated as the Auburn City
Code or the Auburn Municipal Code.
The codification of ordinances for the City of Auburn, Indiana shall be performed by the City Legal
Department which shall provide the Clerk-Treasurer and City Information Technology Department with
ordinances in codified form for publication. Said publication shall take place upon passage of each new
ordinance or as soon as practical thereafter. The Auburn City Code shall be published on the City of Auburn
Municipal web-site and a hardbound copy of the same shall be made available at the Clerk-Treasurer’s
Office.
10.02 INTERPRETATION
Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the same rules of construction,
definition, and application shall govern the interpretation of this code as those governing the
interpretation of the Indiana Code.
Where a section of this code is followed by a reference to the Indiana Code, the reference indicates
that the section is analogous or similar to the cited sections in the Indiana Code. Footnotes, cross -
references, and other comments are by way of explanation only and should not be deemed a part of
the text of any section.
All provisions of this code are limited in application to the territorial boundaries of the municipal
corporation although the provisions may not be so limited specifically.
10.03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES
All provisions of Title I which are not incompatible with future legislation shall apply to ordinances hereafter
adopted which amend or supplement this code unless otherwise specifically provided.
10.04 CAPTIONS
Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter, and section numbers are employed for
reference purposes only and shall not be deemed a part of the text of any section.
10.05 DEFINITIONS
General rule
Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain or ordinary and usual sense. But technical words
and phrases which have a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to
their technical import.
For the purposes of this code, unless otherwise specifically provided, the following words and
phrases shall have the following meanings ascribed to them respectively.
? CITY , MUNICIPAL CORPORATION or MUNICIPALITY
The City of Auburn, Indiana.
? THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES
The Municipal code as modified by amendment, revision, and adoption of new titles, chapters,
or sections.
? COUNCIL
The Common Council of Auburn, Indiana.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
Rules of Construction
CHAPTER
10
? MAY
The act referred to is permissive.
? MONTH
A calendar month
? OWNER
Applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in
partnership, or joint tenant of the whole or a part of the building or land, either alone or with
others.
? PERSON
Extends to and includes person, persons, firm, corporation, co-partnership, trustee, lessee, or
receiver. Whenever used in any clause which prescribes and imposes a penalty, the terms
"PERSON" or "WHOEVER" as applied to any unincorporated entity shall mean the partners or
members thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers thereof.
? PERSONAL PROPERTY
Every species of property except real property.
? POPULATION
Refers to the population according to the most recent federal special or decennial census. This
definition applies even if the reference is to the most recent federal decennial census.
? PROPERTY
Real and personal property.
? REAL PROPERTY
Lands, tenements, and hereditaments and all chattels real.
? SHALL
The act referred to is mandatory.
? SIDEWALK
That portion of a street between the curb lines of the lateral lines of a roadway and the adjacent
property lines intended for the use of pedestrians.
? STATE
State of Indiana.
? STREET
Except as provided in the traffic code, the entire width between property lines of every way or
place of whatever nature when any part thereof is open to the use of the public as a matter of
right.
? YEAR
A calendar year unless otherwise expressed; equivalent to the words "YEAR OF OUR LORD."
10.06 RULES OF INTERPRETATION
The construction of all ordinances of this city shall be by the following rules, unless such construction is
plainly repugnant to the intent of the legislative body or of the context of the same ordinance.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
Rules of Construction
CHAPTER
10
"AND" or "OR"
Either conjunction shall include the other as if written "and/or," if the sense requires it.
Acts by assistants
When a statute requires an act to be done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as the
principal, the requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of the act by an authorized agent or
deputy. (IC 1-1-4-1)
Gender; singular and plural; tenses
Words denoting the masculine gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders;
words in the singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall include the singular (IC 1-
1-4-1); the use of a verb in the present tense shall include the future, if applicable.
General term
A general term following specific enumeration of terms is not to be limited to the class enumerated
unless expressly so limited.
Joint authority
Words importing joint authority to three or more persons shall be construed as authority to a majority
of these persons, unless otherwise declared in the law giving the authority.
10.07 SEVERABILITY
If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its application to any person or circumstance is held
invalid, the invalidity does not affect other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application.
10.08 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS
Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, the reference shall extend and apply
to the section referred to as subsequently amended, revised, re-codified, or renumbered unless the subject
matter is changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
10.09 REFERENCE TO OFFICES
Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any office, officer, or employee of the
municipality exercising the powers, duties, or functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any
transfer of functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
10.10 ERRORS AND OMMISSIONS
If a manifest error is discovered consisting of the misspelling of any words, the omission of any word or
words necessary to express the intention of the provisions affected, the use of a word or words to which no
meaning can be attached, or the use of a word or words when another word or words was clearly intended
to express this intent, the spelling shall be corrected and such word or words supplied, omitted, or
substituted as will conform with the manifest intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as
though the correct words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration shall be made or
permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of the error.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
Rules of Construction
CHAPTER
10
10.11 OFFICIAL TIME
The official time, as established by applicable state and federal law, shall be the official time within the city
for the transaction of all city business.
10.12 REASONABLE TIME
In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a reasonable time or requires
reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time or notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is
necessary for a prompt performance of the act or the giving of the notice.
The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall be computed by excluding the
first day and including the last. If the last day is Sunday, it shall be excluded.
10.13 ORDINANCES REPEALED
This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the provisions of a general nature pertaining
to the subjects herein enumerated and embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by
this code shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code.
10.14 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED
All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances pertaining to subjects not embraced
in this code shall remain in full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
10.99 GENERAL PENALTY
Whoever violates any provision of this code for which another penalty is not specifically provided shall be
fined not more than $2,500 for each offense.
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
City Boundaries
CHAPTER 11
Modified 6/City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances 5/18 | Page 11-2
City Boundaries
CHAPTER 11
11.01 CITY BOUNDARIES
Corporate boundary of the city. Beginning at the 1/4 post on the north line of Section 29 Township
34 north, Range 13 east; thence southerly to the center of this section; thence easterly, along the
east and west 1/4 line to the southwest corner of the southeast quarter of the northeast quarter of
said section; thence northerly along west line of the southeast quarter of the northeast quarter of
said section to the centerline of Cedar Creek; thence north 42 degrees 44 minutes 12 seconds east
488.60 feet along centerline of Cedar Creek; thence north 88 degrees 27 minutes 36 seconds east
634.61 feet; thence south 17 degrees 15 minutes 20 seconds east 152.47 feet; thence south 41
degrees 02 minutes 22 seconds east 62.5 feet; thence south 68 degrees 20 minutes 22 seconds
east 44.4 feet; thence south 84 degrees 59 minutes 32 seconds east 145.6 feet; thence south 77
degrees 08 minutes 22 seconds east 96.3 feet to the east line of said Section 29; thence south
along east line of said section 909.5 feet; thence south 88 degrees 17 minutes 39 seconds west
132 feet; thence south 00 degrees 28 minutes 38 seconds west 165.0 feet to the south line of the
northeast quarter of said section; thence east to the east line of said section; thence southerly along
the east line of this section to the north extended line of the Donald Shutt Amended Addition; thence
easterly along the north line of this addition to the east line of the west 1/2 of the southwest 1/4 of
Section 28 in this Township and Range; thence north along the east line of the west 1/2 of the
southwest 1/4 of said section, to the northwest corner of the Indian Village Subdivision as recorded
in Ordinance No. 1111 by the Auburn City Council; thence easterly along the north line of said
subdivision, to the north and south 1/4 line of said Section 28; thence south along the 1/4 line to a
point 690.2 feet north of the south line of Section 28; thence easterly 650 feet; thence southerly to
the south line of Section 28; thence westerly along the south line of said section to a line 300 feet
east of the west line of the east 1/2 of Section 33, Township 34 N, Range 13 E in DeKalb County,
thence southerly to the south right of way line of the abandoned Pennsylvania Railroad; thence
northeasterly along said right of way to the north and south 1/4 line of Section 33; thence southerly
along said 1/4 line to the east west 1/4 line said Section 33; thence easterly along said 1/4 line to
the center line of the Cliff-Metcalf Drain; thence follow said center line of Cliff-Metcalf Drain
approximately 1406.1 feet to the south line of the north 60 acres of the southeast quarter of said
Section 33; thence westerly along said line to the north and south 1/4 line of Section 33; thence
north 0 degrees 85 minutes 13 seconds west 213.80 feet; thence south 89 degrees 55 minutes west
172.58 feet; thence north 0 degrees 06 minutes east 35 feet; thence westerly along the south line of
the north 50 acres of the southwest 1/4 of Section 33 to the center line of the Cliff-Metcalf Drain;
thence south 09 degrees 19 minutes east 180 feet; thence south 31 degrees 09 minutes 20
seconds west 170.00 feet; thence south 70 degrees 00 minutes east 55.00 feet; thence south 00
degrees 44 minutes 50 seconds west 474.00 feet; thence north 89 degrees 55 minutes east 200
feet; thence south 00 degrees 44 minutes 50 seconds west 125 feet; thence south 12 degrees 03
minutes 20 seconds west 50.99 feet; thence south 00 degrees 44 minutes 50 seconds west 785.00
feet; thence south 89 degrees 44 minutes 04 seconds west 735.00 feet; thence south 00 degrees
44 minutes 50 seconds west 80 feet to the south line of Section 33; thence westerly along south line
of said section to the center line of County Road 31; thence southerly along said County Road in
Section 5 Township 33 north, Range 13 east in DeKalb County a distance of 839.8 feet; thence
north 89 degrees 25 minutes 30 seconds west to center line of CR 29; thence northeasterly along
said center line to the south line of Section 32, Township 34 north, Range 13 east in DeKalb
County; thence westerly along the south line to a point 301.4 feet west of the south 1/4 post of
section 32; thence south 587 feet; thence north 87 degrees 43 minutes west 1311.8 feet to the
center line of Cedar Creek; thence southwesterly along the center line to the south line of the B and
O Railroad right of way; thence southeasterly along said south right of way line to a line 1126 feet
east of the west line of Section 5, township 33 north, Range 13 east; thence south along said line to
the east and west 1/4 line of said Section 5; thence westerly along said 1/4 line to a line 1613.8 feet
Modified 6/City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances 5/18 | Page 11-3
City Boundaries
CHAPTER 11
west of the north south 1/4 line of Section 6, Township 33N, Range 13 east in DeKalb County;
thence north 9 degrees 36 minutes east 583.2 feet; thence north 66 degrees 0 minutes west to
south right of way line of the Penn Central Railroad; thence north 32 degrees 12 minutes east along
the south line of said railroad right of way 705.5 feet; thence south 55 degrees 45 minutes east 165
feet; thence north 87 degrees 49 minutes east 945.1 feet; thence north 6 degrees 00 minutes east
419.8 feet; thence north 1 degree 33 minutes west to the north right of way line of the B and O
Railroad; thence northwesterly along said right of way to the intersection of south right of way line of
the Penn Central Railroad; thence northeasterly along said south right of way 353.1 feet; thence
northerly to north right of way line of Auburn Street located in Spangler's Original plat of town lots in
Auburn Junction, Indiana in the southwest quarter of Section 31, Township 34 north, Range 13E in
DeKalb County; thence westerly along said right of way line to the east right of way line of the Penn
Central Railroad; thence northeasterly along said right of way to a line 508.15 feet north of the
south line of said Section 31; thence west along said north line to a line 482.01 feet east of the west
line of said Section 31; thence southerly to the north right of way line of the B and O Railroad;
thence northwesterly along said right of way to the west line of said Section 31; thence northerly
along said west line to the east and west 1/4 line of Section 31; thence westerly to the east right of
way line of Interstate 69 in Section 36, Township 34 N, Range 12 E in DeKalb County; thence north
and northeasterly along said right of way approximately 3037.4 feet; thence northeasterly along
same right of way approximately 506 feet to the east line of said Section 36; thence northerly along
the section to the north line of right of way of Interstate 69; thence westerly and northwesterly along
said right of way to a point 588 feet north of the extended south line of Section 30, Township 34 N,
Range 13 east; thence follow said east line of right of way for Interstate 69 to the south right of way
line of County Road 36A, said point having a concrete right of way marker; thence south 62 degrees
03 minutes, 11 seconds east along the south right of way line of County Road 36A for 618 feet to a
concrete right-of-way marker; thence continuing south 58 degrees 39 minutes 55 seconds east
along said right of way for 250.40 feet to the north south 1/4 line of said Section 30; thence north 39
degrees 38 minutes 55 seconds east for 25 feet to the center line of County Road 36A; thence
southeasterly along a curve to the right for 163.5 feet, said curve having a radius of 1158.93 feet
and a chord length of 163.37 feet and bearing south 45 degrees 37 minutes 34 seconds east, said
line being center line of County Road 36A; thence south 41 degrees 35 minutes 03 seconds east
along the center line of said County Road for 411.76 feet to the south line of the north 1/2 of the
northeast 1/4 of Section 30; thence south 40 degrees 03 minutes 20 seconds east along said center
line 522.15 feet; thence south 81 degrees 45 minutes 30 seconds west 204.96 feet; thence south 01
degrees 07 minutes 40 seconds east 128.97 feet; thence north 87 degrees 41 minutes 10 seconds
east 322.73 feet to the center line of the aforementioned County Road 36A; thence south 40
degrees 03 minutes 20 seconds east along said center line 376.45 feet; thence south 89 degrees
48 minutes 40 seconds west 384.41 feet; thence south 01 degrees 00 minutes 20 seconds west 500
feet to the south line of the northeast 1/4 of said section; thence easterly along said south line to the
east line of Section 30; thence northerly along the west line of Section 29 a distance of 643.5 feet;
thence east to the westerly right of way line of the NYC Railroad; thence northeasterly along the
right of way to the extended north line of Walnut View Addition; thence easterly along the north line
to the southerly extended westerly line of Grosscup's Urban Acres, a subdivision in the southeast
1/4 of the southwest 1/4 of Section 20 in the Township 34 north, Range 13 east in DeKalb County
as recorded in the Recorder of DeKalb County in Plat Book #4 at page #72; thence northeasterly
along the westerly line and its extension, to the north line of the southeast 1/4 of the southwest 1/4
of Section 20 excepting there from the building occupied by Allison Corporation; thence easterly
along the north line and the north line of the southwest 1/4 of the southeast 1/4 of this section thru
the northeast corner of the south 1/2 of the southwest 1/4 of said Section 20, to a point measured
50 feet radially, from the easterly right-of-way line of County Highway 427; thence northeasterly
Modified 6/City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances 5/18 | Page 11-4
City Boundaries
CHAPTER 11
parallel to and 50 feet from the easterly right of way line, to center line of County Road 38; thence
northwesterly along said center line to the north and south 1/4 line of said Section 20; thence
northerly along said 1/4 line 445.25 feet; thence southeasterly a distance of approximately 710.53
feet to a line 50 feet from the easterly right of way line of County Road 427; thence northeasterly
along said right of way to a point 2650.00 feet, measured along this line from the extended north
line of the County Road 38; thence east to the easterly right of way line of County Highway 427;
thence southwesterly along this right of way to a point 679 feet north of the south line of said
Section 20; thence easterly a distance of 183 feet; thence southerly a distance of 430 feet; thence
westerly to the north and south 1/4 line of Section 20; thence southerly along the 1/4 line to the
place of beginning.
All the territory within the hereinafter described boundary is now within the corporate limits the city
and the boundary of the city, and it, together with the territory set out in (A) above comprises the
entire corporation of the city. The following territory is also included. Beginning at the intersection
of the south right of way line of the Penn Central Railroad and the west section line of the northwest
1/4 of Section 5 Township 33 north Range 13 east and from thence as follows, south 27 degrees 19
minutes east 411.1 feet to the west right of way line of the Penn Central Railroad; thence north 32
degrees 12 minutes east on said west right of way line of Penn Central Railroad 810.2 feet to the
intersection of the south right of way line of the Penn Central Railroad; thence south 62 degrees 41
minutes west of said south right of way 698.3 feet to the place of beginning
The corporate boundary of the city comprises the territory set out in (A) and (B) above with the
exception of the following territory. Commencing at the point of intersection of the south line of
Section 33, Township 34 north, Range 13 east, Union Township, DeKalb County, with the center
line of Old Brick Road (County Road 46A); thence north 34 degrees 24 minutes 01 seconds west
along said center line 1107.00 feet to point of beginning; thence north 88 degrees 48 minutes 31
seconds east 294.25 feet; thence north 02 degrees 55 minutes 03 seconds east 99.00 feet; thence
south 88 degrees 53 minutes 32 seconds west 63.00 feet; thence north 01 degree 04 minutes 05
seconds west 204.97 feet; thence south 89 degree 22 minutes 20 seconds west 146.00 feet; thence
north 34 degrees 24 minutes 07 seconds west 153.94 feet; thence south 89 degrees 27 minutes 20
seconds west 167.40 feet to the east line of Rolling Meadows Plat 3 Section B; thence southerly
along said east line to the center line of Old Brick Road (CR46A); thence west 417.33 feet; thence
south 135 feet; thence east 504.33 feet to center line of Old Brick Road; thence southeasterly to the
point of beginning. Also excluding a tract of land bounded by the east right of way line of County
Road 29; and the north right of way line of Auburn Drive extending from the intersecting point of
County Road 29 and the south line of said Section 32; and the eighth line extended north to the
south right of way line of Old Brick Road (CR46A); thence westerly to the east right of way line of
CR 29, to the point of beginning.
(Amended 09.15.2017, Ordinance No. 2017-02)
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
City Emblems and
Designations
CHAPTER 12
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 12-2
City Emblems and Designations
CHAPTER 12
Table of Contents
12.01 CORPORATE SEAL
12.02 MOTTO
12.03 LOGO
12.04 CITY FLAG
12.05 BIRD SANCTUARY
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 12-3
City Emblems and Designations
CHAPTER 12
12.01 CORPORATE SEAL
The Corporate Seal for the City of Auburn, Indiana, shall be maintained by the Clerk-Treasurer and
shall identify March 26, 1900, as the date of Auburn's incorporation as a City.
12.02 MOTTO
The official motto of the City of Auburn is "HOME OF THE CLASSICS.”
12.03 LOGO
The official logo of the City of Auburn is a representation in white letters of the word "AUBURN,"
with the word "Indiana" placed underneath, displayed on a red field inside a five-sided shield, with
two sides joining at approximately a 45-degree angle at the bottom. The words “Home of
the Classics” may also be displayed on the shield.
The official logo is set forth at the end of this document.
The Clerk-Treasurer shall keep an official certified copy of the official City Logo on file at City Hall.
12.04 CITY FLAG
The City of Auburn may maintain a city flag which shall contain the City of Auburn logo and the words
“Home of the Classics” centered on a white field.
12.05 BIRD SANCTUARY
The City of Auburn shall be known as "A CITYWIDE BIRD SANCTUARY."
Appropriate signage displaying the words "Auburn, A Citywide Bird Sanctuary" and an image of
the Cardinal, Indiana's State Bird, may be erected and maintained at the principal highway
entrances to the City.
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Common Council
CHAPTER 31
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 31-2
Common Council
CHAPTER 31
Table of Contents
31.01 REGULAR DATE FOR MEETINGS
31.02 ORDER OF BUSINESS
31.03 CONTEMPT AND DISORDER IN THE COUNCIL ROOM
31.04 INTRODUCTION AND ADOPTION OF ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS
31.05 QUESTIONS OF ORDER
31.06 APPEAL FROM DECISION OF PRESIDING OFFICER
31.07 COUNTING AND RECORDING VOTES
31.08 QUESTION RELATING TO PRIORITY OF BUSINESS
31.09 DUTIES OF CHIEF OF POLICE
31.10 RECORD OF ATTENDANCE
31.11 FACILITIES FOR ATTENDING DUTIES OF COUNCILMEN
31.12 ADJOURNMENT
31.13 CONDUCT OF COUNCILMEN
31.14 MAKING AND ADOPTING MOTIONS
31.15 STANDING COMMITTEES
31.16 TIME OF FILING CLAIMS, PETITIONS, AND SIMILAR PAPERS
31.17 COMPOSITION OF COUNCIL; COUNCILMANIC DISTRICTS
31.18 PAYMENT OF MEMBERSHIP DUES TO ORGANIZATIONS
31.19 RIGHT OF PUBLIC TO PARTICIPATE
31.99 PENALTY
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 31-3
Common Council
CHAPTER 31
31.01 REGULAR DATE FOR MEETINGS
The regular meeting date for the Common Council of the City shall be on the first and third Tuesday of each
month. The meeting time shall be set by the Common Council at its organization meeting in January of each
year.
31.02 ORDER OF BUSINESS
The order of business to be followed at meetings of the Common Council shall be as follows:
Call to order.
Silent meditation or reflection.
Pledge of Allegiance to the Flag of the United States of America.
Roll call.
Approval of minutes previously distributed to Councilpersons.
Recognition of visitors.
Communications.
Clerk-Treasurer: financial reports and claims.
Ordinances and resolutions.
Reports.
a. Mayor
b. Council President
c. Plan Commission
d. Report of Council Committees
Unfinished business.
New business.
The general good and welfare of the community.
Announcements.
Adjournment.
(Amended 2017-02, passed 2-21-2017)
31.03 CONTEMPT AND DISORDER IN THE COUNCIL ROOM
No person shall use violent or contemptuous language, behave in a disorderly manner, or refuse to
obey the orders of the Mayor or Presiding Officer in the council room while the Common Council is
in session.
Any Person who violates this provision shall be fined not more than $50 nor less than $1.
31.04 INTRODUCTION AND ADOPTION OF ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS
All ordinances and resolutions shall be filed with the Clerk-Treasurer by 4:00 P.M. at least seven
days before a regular meeting. The Ordinances may be received by electronic transmittal. The
Clerk-Treasurer shall date-stamp each ordinance and resolution as it is received, assign it a
number, and deliver copies to each member of the Council as soon as possible. Those ordinances
received by electronic transmittal, shall receive a date stamp as of the date received, as long as the
transmittal was received before 4:00 P.M. Ordinances and resolutions shall be numbered in
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 31-4
Common Council
CHAPTER 31
separate sequence. All ordinances and resolutions shall be posted for public inspection immediately
upon filing, both in hard copy format and on the City of Auburn web-site.
By a two-thirds vote of the Council an ordinance or resolution may be received and acted upon at
any regular meeting of the Council by a suspension of the foregoing rule as to previous filing.
Each ordinance and resolution shall have a title and shall bear a brief summary of its contents and
purpose.
All ordinances and resolutions shall be read twice by title and summary only, unless the Council by
a majority vote of members present decides to have a particular ordinance or resolution read either
in whole or in part.
No ordinance shall pass on the day of its first reading unless the Council, after complying with the
requirements of the Indiana Code determines that an emergency exists. Any motion to suspend the
rule shall contain the statement that an emergency exists and expresses the reasons constituting
such emergency.
Copies of ordinances for consideration shall be posted on the City of Auburn Web-Site for public
access. Upon request each ordinance and resolution read by the Council shall be available to
members of the public who are present at Council meetings.
On the passage or adoption of any ordinance or resolution, the yeas and nays shall be taken and
entered in the record, and the ordinance or resolution shall be processed in accordance with the
Indiana Code.
In the order of business, ordinances and resolutions shall be taken up in the order of their number,
unless the Council, by majority vote of those members present, determines to take up one particular
ordinance or resolution out of sequence.
When a majority vote of the Common Council is required to pass an ordinance or resolution, there
must be a majority negative vote to defeat; thus, if there is not a majority for or against such
ordinance or resolution, it shall be considered as "no action taken" and shall be placed on the
agenda for the next appropriate meeting of the Common Council.
When a two-thirds majority vote of the Common Council is required to pass an ordinance or
resolution, a majority negative vote is hereby required to defeat such issue; thus, if there if less than
a two-thirds vote in favor, yet less than a majority opposed to such ordinance or resolution, it shall
be considered as "no action taken" and shall be placed on the agenda for the next appropriate
meeting of the Common Council.
31.05 QUESTIONS OF ORDER
The Mayor or Presiding Officer shall decide all questions of order. He or she shall decide whether any
question submitted to the Council for adoption or rejection is decided in the affirmative or negative. When
two or more members ask to be heard at the same time, the Mayor or Presiding Officer shall decide which
shall speak first. Robert's Rules of Order, Revised, the latest edition, shall be the controlling authority on all
questions of parliamentary law and procedure not covered by statue or ordinance.
31.06 APPEAL FROM DECISION OF PRESIDING OFFICER
From any decision of the Presiding Officer any member may appeal to the Council. The appeal shall be by
motion duly made, seconded, and voted upon.
31.07 COUNTING AND RECORDING VOTES
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 31-5
Common Council
CHAPTER 31
The yeas and nays shall be taken and recorded on any question arising before the Council on request of
any two members except on motion to adjourn. In all cases the question on the adoption of an ordinance or
resolution shall be taken by the yeas and nays, and the names and vote of each member shall be duly
recorded in the minutes of the meeting.
31.08 QUESTION RELATING TO PRIORITY OF BUSINESS
All questions relating to the priority of business shall be decided without debate, and the regular order shall
not be waived without unanimous consent.
31.09 DUTIES OF CHIEF OF POLICE
The Chief of Police shall be sergeant at arms of the Council, and it shall be his duty to maintain order under
the direction of the Presiding Officer. Any person in attendance at a meeting of the Council who refuses to
obey the order of the Presiding Officer, or in any way violates these rules or neglects or refuses to keep
order or proper decorum, shall be removed from the council chamber by the Chief of Police or his Deputy.
31.10 RECORD OF ATTENDANCE
The Clerk-Treasurer shall keep in his minutes a correct record of the attendance of the Councilmen at
meetings of the Council.
31.11 FACILITIES FOR ATTENDING DUTIES OF COUNCILMEN
Every member of the Council shall be provided with pen, paper, and sufficient facilities for writing and
attending to his duties as Councilman with comfort, facility, and dispatch.
31.12 ADJOURNMENT
A majority of the Councilmen elected shall constitute a quorum, but a minority may adjourn from
time to time until a quorum is had.
A motion to adjourn or to lay on the table shall not be debatable.
31.13 CONDUCT OF COUNCILMEN
No member shall impeach the motive of any other member's vote or argument.
If any member in any way transgresses the rules of the Council, any of the other members or the
Presiding Officer may call him to order, in which case the alleged offender shall immediately cease
and desist such activity, unless permitted to explain.
When any member is about to speak or deliver any matter to the Council he shall respectfully
address himself to the Presiding Officer, and when duly recognized by the Chair shall confine
himself to the question under debate.
No member of the Council shall speak more than twice on the same question without leave of the
Council, nor more than once until every other member wishing to speak has spoken. All speeches
shall be limited to three minutes, unless further time is granted by the Council. In addition, each
member shall be allowed one minute to explain her or his vote. Time consumed in answering
questions shall not be considered part of the speaker's time.
When the Presiding Officer is putting a question or addressing the Council, or when any member is
speaking, no member shall engage in any private discourse nor walk across or leave the room
unnecessarily.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 31-6
Common Council
CHAPTER 31
31.14 MAKING AND ADOPTING MOTIONS
When any motion is made and seconded it shall be stated by the Presiding Officer, or if in writing, it
shall be handed to the Clerk-Treasurer and read aloud before debate.
Every motion shall be reduced to writing if the Presiding Officer or any member requires it. After
being stated or read the motion shall be considered in the possession of the Council but it may be
withdrawn at any time before decision or amendment.
Any person who has business to bring before the Council or who wishes to be heard on a matter
being considered by the Council may, when recognized by the Chair, address the Council.
When any question is under debate no other motion shall be received except to lay on the table, for
the previous question, to postpone indefinitely, to postpone to a day certain, or to commit. The
motion shall have preference in the order in which it is here named.
The form for the previous question shall be as follows: "Shall the main question be now put?" It
shall only be admitted when demanded by a majority of the members present, and, until decided,
shall preclude all amendments. If decided in the affirmative, the Chair shall put the question, first
upon the appending amendments in their order, if there are any, and then upon the main
proposition.
Ordinances, resolutions, and reports may be committed and recommitted at the pleasure of the
Council.
When any question has been once decided in the affirmative or negative, any member voting with
the majority may move for a reconsideration of the question at the next meeting of the Council.
No business shall be transacted out of its regular order without unanimous consent.
When any matter is postponed indefinitely it shall not be again voted upon during that or the next
meeting.
31.15 STANDING COMMITTEES
The following standing committees shall be annually appointed by the Mayor at the first regular
meeting in January of the Common Council, of which the first named shall be the Chair: Finance,
Tax Phase-In, and Ordinances and Resolutions, and shall each be composed of three members
from the Common Council.
These committees shall perform the duties required by the Council and report their actions at any
meeting of the Common Council whenever called upon to do so.
31.16 TIME OF FILING CLAIMS, PETITIONS, AND SIMILAR PAPERS
All bills, accounts, or claims against or owed by the city must be filed with the Clerk-Treasurer at least seven
days before a regular meeting of the Council. All bills, accounts and claims must be duly attested and sworn
to according to law and accomplished by the certificate of the proper officers or committee to receive
attention.
31.17 COMPOSITION OF COUNCIL; COUNCILMANIC DISTRICTS
Each voter in the City may vote for two (2) candidates at-large and one (1) candidate for the district
in which she or he resides.
The two (2) at-large candidates receiving the most votes from the entire city and the district
candidates receiving the most votes from their respective districts shall be deemed elected to the
Common Council.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 31-7
Common Council
CHAPTER 31
The Common Council shall be composed of two (2) at-large members and five (5) additional
members elected from districts that are composed of contiguous territory, are reasonably compact,
and contain, as nearly as possible, equal population; said districts being defined as follows:
1. District one shall be composed of the area outlined in gold on the Council Districts Map
maintained by the City of Auburn, Indiana and incorporated into this section by reference.
2. District two shall be composed of the area outlined in purple on the Council Districts Map
maintained by the City of Auburn, Indiana and incorporated into this section by reference.
3. District three shall be composed of the area outlined in green on the Council Districts Map
maintained by the City of Auburn, Indiana and incorporated into this section by reference.
4. District four shall be composed of the area outlined in blue on Council Districts Map maintained
by the City of Auburn, Indiana and incorporated into this section by reference.
5. District five shall be composed of the area outlined in red on Council Districts Map maintained
by the City of Auburn, Indiana and incorporated into this section by reference.
Each voter of the city may vote for two candidates at-large and one candidate from the district from
which he or she resides.
The two at-large candidates receiving the most votes from the whole city and the district candidates
receiving the most votes from their respective districts shall be deemed elected to the Common
Council.
A revised division of the districts shall be made in the year 2022, and every ten years thereafter and
whenever required to assign annexed territory to a district. The annexed territory shall automatically
be assigned within the annexation ordinance to a council district in accordance with Indiana law.
The Council Districts Map of the City of Auburn shall be placed on the City of Auburn’s internet site
for viewing at www.ci.auburn.in.us, in a public place at City Hall, the City Council Chambers, and
other places where the public may have access thereto.
31.18 PAYMENT OF MEMBERSHIP DUES TO ORGANIZATIONS
The Common Council is authorized to budget and appropriate funds from the General Fund or from
other funds to provide membership for the Common Council and the elected and appointed officials
and members of the municipality's boards, council, departments or agencies in local, regional, state
and national associations of a civic, education or governmental nature, which have as their purpose
the betterment and improvement of municipal operations.
The Common Council is further authorized to budget and appropriate funds to pay the expenses of
duly authorized representatives to attend the meetings and functions of organizations to which the
municipality belongs.
Claims under this Section shall be paid as prescribed by law.
31.19 RIGHT OF PUBLIC TO PARTICIPATE
Members of the public shall have a reasonable right to participate in any matter being considered by
the Common Council.
Members of the public shall be provided with the opportunity to participate in Council meetings, and
the Council shall make reasonable efforts to comply with the American with Disabilities Act and
accommodate any other special needs of the public.
Members of the public shall have the right to bring before the Council issues of public concern.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 31-8
Common Council
CHAPTER 31
This section does not apply to executive sessions of the Common Council held under Indiana Code
Sec. 5-14-1.5, the Indiana Open Door Law, as it is from time to time amended.
31.99 PENALTY
Any person who violates the provisions of 31.03 shall be fined not more than $50 nor less than $1.
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Public Service and Safety
CHAPTER 33
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 33-2
Public Service and Safety
CHAPTER 33
Table of Contents
GENERAL PROVISIONS
31.01 [RESERVED]
33.02 RESPONDING TO FIRE CALLS
33.03 CHARGES FOR PERSONS BENEFITTED BY USE OF FIRE EQUIPMENT
33.04 DUTIES OF CHIEF OF POLICE
33.05 [RESERVED.]
33.06 SPRINKLER SYSTEM AND FIRE DRILLS
33.07 POLICE RESERVES
33.08 CHARGE FOR FILLING AIR TANKS
33.09 INOCULATION AGAINST HEPATITIS B
33.10 RESTRICTION ON PART-TIME JOBS FOR OFF-DUTY POLICE OFFICERS
33.11 CLOTHING ALLOWANCE FOR FIRE AND POLICE DEPARTMENTS
33.12 PARTIALLY PAID FIREFIGHTERS ORGANIZATION MEMBERSHIP LIMITED
EMERGENCY SERVICES
33.30 DEFINITIONS
33.31 COST ACCOUNTING, ALLOCATIONS, AND ASSIGNMENT
33.32 PAYMENT OF ASSIGNED COSTS
33.33 MONIES COLLECTED
33.34 TRAINING BY FIRE DEPARTMENT
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AND DISASTER PLAN
33.50 INTENT AND PURPOSE
33.51 DEFINITIONS
33.52 EMERGENCY OPERATIONS BOARD
33.53 EMERGENCY DECLARATION
33.54 SPECIAL EMERGENCY POWERS AND DUTIES OF PRINCIPAL EXECUTIVE OFFICER;
DECLARATION OF LOCAL DISASTER EMERGENCY
33.55 SPECIAL EMERGENCY POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE MAYOR; CONVENTION OF EMERGENCY
MEETING OF EMERGENCY OPERATIONS BOARD; SPECIAL MEETING PROCEDURES
33.56 SPECIAL EMERGENCY POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE EMERGENCY OPERATIONS BOARD
33.57 SPECIAL EMERGENCY POWERS OF THE EMERGENCY OPERATIONS DIRECTOR
33.58 GENERAL DUTIES OF OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES OF THE CITY
33.59 PRIORITY OF EMERGENCY ORDERS, RULES, AND REGULATIONS
33.60 NONCOMPLIANCE WITH EMERGENCY ORDERS, RULES, AND REGULATIONS; OBSTRUCTION OR
IMPERSONATION OF EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
33.61 ANNEXES; AMENDMENTS
33.62 WEATHER EMERGENCY RESPONSE PLAN
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 33-3
Public Service and Safety
CHAPTER 33
33.99 PENALTY
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 33-4
Public Service and Safety
CHAPTER 33
GENERAL PROVISIONS
31.01 [RESERVED]
33.02 RESPONDING TO FIRE CALLS
The Fire Department shall answer all calls coming from residents of property within the city limits.
The Department may answer calls coming from residents of the rural districts outside the city limits,
but shall be under no obligation so to do, and the Department assumes no liability for not answering
such calls. The matter of responding to such calls shall be delegated to the discretion of the Fire
Department subject to the rules and regulations which the Committee may prescribe and as
approved by the Board of Public Works and Safety. Notwithstanding any language to the contrary,
the Fire Department shall answer all calls from residents of property outside the city limits to the
extent that the city has a contract to provide fire protection with the township in which the property
is located.
The City Fire Department may respond, upon request, to emergencies requiring special equipment
and expertise both inside and outside the jurisdiction of the city.
Costs for requested emergency response will be assessed to the causative entity requiring the use
of special equipment, Fire Department personnel, and/or city expertise. Said costs shall be
assessed pursuant to the following terms and conditions:
1. There shall be an hourly assessment against the recipient of the emergency services, as
established by a Board of Public Works and Safety Resolution duly passed, which may from
time to time be amended for the following personnel:
a. Chief of the Fire Department;
b. Captain of the Fire Department;
c. Marshal of the Fire Department;
d. Combat Division Captain;
e. Fire Fighters;
f. Probation Fire Fighters;
g. Volunteers.
2. There shall be an hourly assessment against the recipient of the emergency services, as
established by a Board of Public Works and safety resolution duly passed, which shall from time
to time be amended for the following units:
a. Hazardous Materials Unit;
b. Pumpers;
c. Tankers;
d. Aerial devices;
e. Brush unit;
f. Boat;
g. Medical units;
h. Command units;
i. Support units.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 33-5
Public Service and Safety
CHAPTER 33
3. In no event shall more than one-half of the fire-fighting apparatus of the city, nor more than onehalf
of the regular firemen leave the corporate limits of the city in responding to fire calls outside
the corporate limits.
4. No hourly assessment shall be made against the recipient of the emergency service if the
occurrence is accidental, is not a knowing or intentional violation of federal, state, or local law,
occurs within the city or any township that contracts with the city for fire protection, and the
recipient resides or its business is located within said city or township.
5. Notwithstanding any language to the contrary, the city shall collect from any recipient the
replacement cost for any material, supply, or equipment made non-reusable because of a
hazardous waste occurrence.
6. Notwithstanding any language to the contrary, the city shall collect from any recipient for any bill
or claim made against the city or its departments from other emergency agencies.
33.03 CHARGES FOR PERSONS BENEFITTED BY USE OF FIRE EQUIPMENT
The charge to be assessed against the person, firm, corporation, or township benefitted by the use
of firemen and by the fire-fighting equipment of the city outside the corporate limits of the city shall
be as fixed by Council. Time shall be reckoned from the time of leaving the fire station until the time
of return thereto. The Chief of the Fire Department shall report such charges to the Clerk-Treasurer,
who shall collect the amount due from the person benefitted.
No charge shall at any time be made for reciprocal services of the Fire Department of the city
rendered to neighboring cities and towns.
33.04 DUTIES OF CHIEF OF POLICE
The Chief of Police shall have the duties and powers conferred upon him by the law and shall
execute all orders of the City Council. He shall see that all of the city ordinances are faithfully
enforced and give notice of any nuisance made or allowed in the city. If any person who allows or
occasions any nuisance on his premises does not on notice remove it immediately, the Chief of
Police shall remove it or cause it to be removed or abated, and shall be entitled to receive on behalf
of and for the use of the city from such person double the cost of removing or abating the nuisance.
This cost shall be recoverable by action in the name of the city against such persons as in cases of
fines or forfeiture.
He shall be industrious and vigilant in preventing any infraction of the ordinances of the city and
bringing offenders to justice; in causing the prevention or punishment of offenses against the penal
laws of the state committed within the city; and in sup-pressing disturbances, riots, affrays, and
other breaches of the peace therein.
The Chief of Police shall attend all meetings of the Common Council, at which he shall serve in the
capacity of sergeant at arms for the maintenance of good order and to receive the instructions of
the Council.
He shall keep an accurate account of all money received by him on account of the city and pay it to
the Clerk-Treasurer taking his receipt therefore. He shall make a detailed statement of the money
whenever required by the Council, and at least annually, showing the amount of money received, of
whom received, on what account, and how it is disposed of.
It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police and the Street Commissioner to have concurrent
supervision of sidewalks and streets and to report to the proper committee any dangerous or
defective conditions in either which may come to his knowledge. They or the Building
Commissioner shall at once notify all owners, occupants, or persons liable to remedy the defect, to
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 33-6
Public Service and Safety
CHAPTER 33
repair it, and in case of their failure so to do shall report this failure at once to the Common Council.
In case of the absence of or non-appointment of the Street Commissioner the duties of that office
shall be performed by the Chief of Police.
33.05 [RESERVED.]
33.06 SPRINKLER SYSTEM AND FIRE DRILLS
The Common Council of the city provides that any owners, or the lessee if the property is leased, or
their respective employees or agents, shall notify the City Fire Department ten days prior to the time
that sprinkling protection in any building or any part of a building is to be shut off by the owner or
the lessee for any reason including but not limited to maintenance, remodeling, or change of
occupancy. If the reason for the shutoff is an emergency, the City Fire Department shall be
immediately notified.
The Common Council of the city provides that any owners, or the lessee if the property is leased, or
their respective employees or agents, shall notify the City Fire Department at the time that the
sprinkling protection in any building or any part of a building is turned on for the use of any building
or any part of a building.
The Common Council of the city requires the owner, or the lessee if the premises is leased, to notify
the City Fire Department ten days in advance of any tests of the sprinkler protection devices on any
premises for any fire drills to be conducted on the premises of any property within the city.
33.07 POLICE RESERVES
Pursuant to IC 36-8-3-20 a city Police Reserve unit is hereby established for the city, the unit to be
named the Auburn Police Reserves and to have no more than 25 members.
That the police reserves shall be appointed from time to time by the Chief of Police of the city in
accordance with all pertinent local, state, and federal laws and regulations.
The rules governing the Police Reserves and any subsequent amendments thereto shall be
submitted to the Board of Public Works and Safety by the Police Chief for the Board's approval,
disapproval, or amendment.
33.08 CHARGE FOR FILLING AIR TANKS
The city Fire Department shall make a charge for filling air tanks. This charge will be set by the
Board of Public Works and Safety, which will bill the customers. The schedule of fees will be
reviewed from time to time by the Board of Public Works and Safety.
There will be no charge for tanks filled for a governmental agency, including but not limited to fire
departments from other communities.
The proceeds collected from the filling of air tanks will be set aside for use of the city Fire
Department for the maintenance of the living quarters of the firefighters. Items purchased can be
either disposable or tangible and may include, but not be limited to, condiments, spices, sauces,
potatoes, and paper products.
The proceeds collected from the filling of air tanks shall be non-appropriated funds.
33.09 INOCULATION AGAINST HEPATITIS B
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 33-7
Public Service and Safety
CHAPTER 33
The city, through and by its Board of Public Works and Safety, hereby finds that members of the
Fire Department, Police Department and Water Pollution Control Department are subject to
contracting the Hepatitis B Virus.
Each employee, other than office personnel of the Fire Department, Police Department and Water
Pollution Control Department may receive inoculation at the expense of the city, subject to prior
written authority from the department head as to who may receive the inoculation and where the
vaccine will be administered.
33.10 RESTRICTION ON PART-TIME JOBS FOR OFF-DUTY POLICE OFFICERS
The Board of Public Works and Safety hereby establishes a policy that off-duty police officers may not also
be employed part-time by employers who sell, distribute or otherwise furnish alcohol, except when in uniform
to keep the peace, that is, A-C-D Museum, Elks Tent during A-C-D Festival, and wedding receptions, and
after receiving written approval from the Chief of Police.
33.11 CLOTHING ALLOWANCE FOR FIRE AND POLICE DEPARTMENTS
The establishment of this section governing clothing allowances for the Fire and Police
Departments is required because amounts permitted by the city differ from the statutory amounts.
The following schedule shall be used for clothing allowances for the Fire and Police Departments:
Fire and Police Chiefs $1,000
Firefighters and Police Officers $450
Volunteer Firefighters $150
Reserve Police Officers $250
Police dispatchers and Parking Enforcement
Officers
$300
(Ord. 2000-15, passed 10-17-00)
33.12 PARTIALLY PAID FIREFIGHTERS ORGANIZATION MEMBERSHIP LIMITED
All partially paid firefighters shall not also be a member of another public safety organization which could
necessitate the partially paid firefighter being unavailable to fight fires for the city because this is interpreted
as being unable to fulfill the obligation to the city.
EMERGENCY SERVICES
33.30 DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates
or requires a different meaning.
• BOARD OF PUBLIC WORKS AND SAFETY (BOARD)
That statutorily created body of the city.
• COSTS
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 33-8
Public Service and Safety
CHAPTER 33
Those necessary expenditures of monies, time and materials required to alleviate control or contain an
emergency, including any costs required to collect those costs expended.
• DEPARTMENT
Within the meaning of this subchapter is one or more of the following:
1. City Attorney;
2. City Engineer;
3. Electric;
4. Fire;
5. Hazardous material;
6. Police;
7. Sewage;
8. Street; and
9. Water.
• EMERGENCY
That situation which arises unexpectedly requiring some quick response by a department of the city.
• EXTRA-JURISDICTIONAL
Those areas outside the city and townships not under contract with the city for emergency response.
• HAZARDOUS MATERIAL
A material or waste that has been determined to be hazardous or potentially hazardous to human
health, to property or to the environment by:
1. The United States Environmental Protection Agency, Nuclear Regulatory Commission,
Department of Transportation, or Occupational Safety and Health Administration; or
2. The solid waste management board.
33.31 COST ACCOUNTING, ALLOCATIONS, AND ASSIGNMENT
Whenever a department responds by request or mandate to an emergency, the department head or
his/her designee shall maintain a log of the costs incurred.
When a final tabulation of the costs is completed the department head or his/her designee shall
present the same to the Clerk-Treasurer who in turn shall deliver a statement to the recipient of the
emergency services provided.
33.32 PAYMENT OF ASSIGNED COSTS
Payment of assigned costs shall be made to the Clerk-Treasurer by cash, money order, or certified
check.
Should the billed recipient not make payment to the Clerk-Treasurer within 30 days of the actual
mailing of the statement, the Clerk-Treasurer is hereby authorized to deliver the delinquent account
to the City Attorney for collection.
Upon delivery of the delinquent account(s) to the City Attorney's office, every attempt shall be made
to collect the delinquent account(s) including but not limited to filing suit. All expenses incurred in
enforcing this chapter, including, but not limited to, reasonable attorneys' fees may be added to said
delinquent account(s) and collected from the recipient.
33.33 MONIES COLLECTED
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 33-9
Public Service and Safety
CHAPTER 33
All monies collected from department heads or designees shall be retained by the Clerk-Treasurer
in a non-appropriated fund for budgetary purposes. This fund shall be reimbursable as expenses
occur. This fund shall be known as the "Emergency Clean-up Fund."
Any money expended by departments in response to a request or mandate to an emergency shall
be reimbursed from the non-appropriated "Emergency Clean-up Fund."
If the city is reimbursed for labor expenses through an insurance company because of emergency
services provided, then those reimbursed expenses for labor shall be deposited by the
Clerk-Treasurer directly to the department's line item budget for the payment of said labor.
33.34 TRAINING BY FIRE DEPARTMENT
The Auburn Fire Department shall be allowed to conduct training courses for City of Auburn
employees as well as others.
The training courses shall be at no cost to full- and part-time employees of the city. Students other
than City of Auburn employees shall pay the actual cost of providing each course to that student, or
$10.00 per course whichever is more.
Funds collected pursuant to this section shall be collected by the Auburn Fire Department, turned
over to the Clerk-Treasurer and deposited into the training facility fund.
Unless such course is required by his/her employment with the city, no student shall be enrolled in a
training course without executing a waiver of liability clearly acknowledging that such training may
be inherently dangerous. This is not intended to change current practices concerning Auburn
Firefighters.
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AND DISASTER PLAN
33.50 INTENT AND PURPOSE
The intent and purpose of this subchapter is to establish a disaster plan that will insure all of the
city's facilities are efficiently utilized for disaster preparedness and coordination of response, and
that will serve all geographic areas of the city.
The city, under this plan, will be responsible for all activities in connection with disaster programs in
the city.
33.51 DEFINITIONS
• ATTACK
A direct or indirect assault on armed forces of the United States or against the government or environs
of the city, including but not limited to, bombing, chemical or radiological warfare, sabotage, violence,
and any other action referred to under "Man-Made Disaster" as set forth below.
• COUNCIL
The Common Council of the City of Auburn, Indiana.
• DISASTER
The occurrence or imminent threat of widespread or severe damage, injury, or loss of life or property
resulting from any natural or technological disaster, including but not limited to fire, flood, earthquake,
wind, storm, oil spill, water contamination, or any other incident requiring emergency action to avert
danger, damage, or hazardous materials.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 33-10
Public Service and Safety
CHAPTER 33
• DISASTER PLANNING
A broad term meaning to carry out the basic governmental functions of providing for the common
defense, protecting the public peace, health and safety, and preserving lives and property of the people.
It shall not, however, include any activity that is the primary responsibility of the military forces of the
United States. It does include, without limitation, fire-fighting services, police services, medical and
health services, rescue, engineering, warning services, communications, chemical, biological,
radiological and other special weapons defense, evacuation of persons from stricken areas, emergency
welfare service, emergency transportation, plant protection, temporary restoration of public utility
services, continuance of constituted government, and other services related to civilian protection,
together with all of their activities necessary or incidental to the preparation for and coordination of the
foregoing services.
• EMERGENCY OPERATIONS BOARD
The various department heads and representatives of various utilities serving the city.
• EMERGENCY OPERATIONS DIRECTOR
The individual who will be charged with coordinating the efforts under this subchapter.
• MAN-MADE DISASTER
Any incidents including, but not limited to, riots, insurrection, terrorist act, threats to national security or
other man-made incidents causing imminent danger.
• MAYOR
The Mayor of the City of Auburn, Indiana.
• NATURAL DISASTER
Any incidents affecting or threatening public health, welfare, and safety.
• PERSONNEL
Employees of the City of Auburn, Indiana and volunteers under the guise of the city.
• PRESIDENT
The President for the Common Council of the city.
• PUBLIC INFORMATION OFFICER
The individual assigned by the Mayor or his designee to deal with media outlets.
• REGULATION
Plans, programs, and other emergency procedures deemed essential.
• VOLUNTEER
Contributing a service, equipment, or facilities to the city without remuneration.
33.52 EMERGENCY OPERATIONS BOARD
In accordance with IC 10-4-1-10(c), there is established the City of Auburn Emergency Operations Board
which consists of the following persons or their designees.
The Mayor of Auburn
The Clerk/Treasurer
The City Attorney
A Public Information Officer appointed by the Mayor
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 33-11
Public Service and Safety
CHAPTER 33
The Purchasing Agent for the city
The Chief of the Fire Department
The Police Chief
The Director of the E.M.S. of DeKalb County
The Electric Department Head
The Building Department Head
The Street Commissioner
The Water Department Head
The Water Pollution Control Head
The Gas Company Head
The Telephone Company Head
The City Engineer
The Superintendent of the Parks Department
The DeKalb County Civil Defense Director
City of Auburn MIS/GIS Manager
33.53 EMERGENCY DECLARATION
The Mayor of Auburn or his/her substitute or designee as delineated may declare a local disaster
emergency, which shall be given prompt and general publicity and shall be filed promptly with the Office of
the Clerk of the City of Auburn, The DeKalb County Director of Emergency Management or Civil Defense,
the Auburn City Clerk and the DeKalb County Clerk. The effects of such a declaration are to activate all
necessary aspects of the city's disaster plans and to authorize the furnishing of aid and assistance thereto.
33.54 SPECIAL EMERGENCY POWERS AND DUTIES OF PRINCIPAL EXECUTIVE OFFICER; DECLARATION
OF LOCAL DISASTER EMERGENCY
In the event of actual or threatened enemy attack, disaster or emergency affecting the city, the
Mayor, or the President of the Common Council if the Mayor is unavailable, or the Clerk/Treasurer if
the President of the Council is unavailable, or the At-Large City Council Member if the
Clerk-Treasurer is not available, acting as the Principal Executive Officers of the City of Auburn may
declare a local disaster emergency, pursuant to IC 10-4-1-23(a), for any period, not to exceed
seven days.
The declaration shall:
1. be in writing; indicate the nature of the disaster;
2. indicate the conditions which have brought the disaster, about;
3. indicate the area or areas threatened;
4. indicate the area or areas to which the state of emergency applies; and
5. be announced or disseminated to the general public by the best means available through the
designated public information officer.
The declaration shall be filed in the offices of:
1. the County Clerk;
2. the DeKalb County Director of Emergency Management or Civil Defense; and
3. the Clerk of the city
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 33-12
Public Service and Safety
CHAPTER 33
The declaration shall not be invalidated nor ineffective if any of the filing and dissemination
requirements cannot be complied with due to the prevailing adverse circumstances.
Upon declaration, the city's comprehensive emergency management and disaster control plan shall
be activated and implemented.
Such a declaration shall not be necessary if the Governor, pursuant to IC 10-4-1-7, and/or its
successor, has already proclaimed a statewide or area wide state of emergency including DeKalb
County.
33.55 SPECIAL EMERGENCY POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE MAYOR; CONVENTION OF EMERGENCY
MEETING OF EMERGENCY OPERATIONS BOARD; SPECIAL MEETING PROCEDURES
As soon as possible after a disaster emergency affecting the city is declared, the Emergency
Operations Director shall convene a meeting of the City Emergency Operations Board to perform
their legislative and administrative functions as the situation may demand.
Any such meeting of the Board shall:
1. be deemed an emergency meeting;
2. be subject only to such procedural provisions of law as governed by the State of Indiana;
3. include relaxation of any applicable notice requirements pursuant to IC 5-14-1.5-5(d);
4. be held in the City Council Chambers or any other convenient place;
5. continue without adjournment for the duration of the disaster emergency; and
6. be recessed for reasonable periods of time as necessary and permitted by the circumstances.
33.56 SPECIAL EMERGENCY POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE EMERGENCY OPERATIONS BOARD
The Emergency Board may make, and following approval of the Common Council as provided
below, promulgate such emergency regulations as may be deemed necessary to implement and
carry out the provisions of city and state disaster laws and plans.
In accordance with the plan, the city may request the state or the United States or their agencies
and political subdivisions to send aid if the situation is beyond the control of regular city emergency
forces and resources.
All regulations under this section shall be:
1. adopted by ordinance by the common council;
2. consistent with, and subordinate to, any actions, orders, or regulations made by the Governor or
a state agency implementing the State Emergency Operations Plan.
33.57 SPECIAL EMERGENCY POWERS OF THE EMERGENCY OPERATIONS DIRECTOR
The Emergency Operations Director shall be appointed by the Mayor or an agent of the Mayor as
described in ' 33.54 for the purpose of coordinating disaster relief efforts.
The Emergency Operations Director shall take any actions which he/she deems necessary or
desirable to take in the event of an emergency.
In the event that an emergency clearly exists or is imminent within the city, and a state of
emergency has not been declared by the Governor or any other person having executive power, the
Mayor or the Emergency Operations Director may temporarily presume the existence of a state of
emergency.
When the Emergency Operations Director temporarily presumes; the existence of state of
emergency, that individual shall:
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 33-13
Public Service and Safety
CHAPTER 33
1. put into effect those portions of the Emergency Management and Disaster Plan, as necessary to
cope with the emergency; and
2. protect the public safety and welfare.
33.58 GENERAL DUTIES OF OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES OF THE CITY
During a declared emergency, all officers and employees of the city shall cooperate and give support to the
federal, state, county, and local emergency agencies.
33.59 PRIORITY OF EMERGENCY ORDERS, RULES, AND REGULATIONS
At all times when the orders, rules, and regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this subchapter shall
be in effect, they shall supersede all inconsistent local ordinances, rules and regulations but shall be
superseded by all federal and state laws, rules and regulations which are inconsistent.
33.60 NONCOMPLIANCE WITH EMERGENCY ORDERS, RULES, AND REGULATIONS; OBSTRUCTION OR
IMPERSONATION OF EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
Wherever this chapter applies it shall be unlawful and a penal ordinance violation for any person to:
1. Willfully obstruct, hinder, or delay the City of Auburn and its authorized agents from participating
in emergency services and or carrying out and enforcing emergency plans and procedures;
2. Fail to observe, abide by, and comply with any emergency management duties, orders,
regulations, and procedures as made applicable to such person by the appropriate authorities;
or
3. Falsely wear or carry identification as a member of the City of Auburn Emergency Operations
Board or to otherwise falsely identify or purport to have authority from the city.
33.61 ANNEXES; AMENDMENTS
City of Auburn Emergency Operations Plan
A comprehensive Emergency Operations Plan shall be adopted and maintained by resolution of the
Common Council. In the preparation of this plan as it pertains to citywide organization, it is the intent of
this subchapter that the services, equipment, facilities, and personnel of all existing city departments and
agencies shall be utilized to the fullest extent. When approved, it shall be the duty of all city departments
and agencies to perform the functions assigned by the plan and to maintain their portion of the plan in a
current state of readiness at all times. The plan shall be considered supplementary to this subchapter
and shall have the force and effect of law whenever a "disaster" as defined in this subchapter has been
declared. When a required competency or skill is not available within the city, the plan shall authorize
the coordination of assistance from persons outside of the government prior to, during, and after a
disaster. Such assistance from persons outside of government may be accepted by the city on a
volunteer basis. Such citizens shall be enrolled as volunteers in cooperation with the heads of the city
departments.
Annexes
Each department head assigned responsibilities in the plan shall be responsible for carrying out all
duties and functions assigned therein. Duties will include the organization and training of assigned
employees and volunteers. Each department head shall formulate and be in charge for each
department's section of the operational plan, and when approved, shall be an annex to and a part of the
plan. Each department head shall designate and keep on file with the Mayor a current three-deep list of
names of his or her successors.
Amendments
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 33-14
Public Service and Safety
CHAPTER 33
Proposed amendments to the plan and annexes shall be submitted to the Common Council which shall
give its own recommendation thereon.
33.62 WEATHER EMERGENCY RESPONSE PLAN
A weather emergency shall commence by executive order, determination and proclamation of the
Mayor of the City of Auburn, Indiana or in his/her absence by the President of the City Council, or in
his/her absence the Clerk-Treasurer, or in his/her absence the At-Large City Council Member.
The Mayor or his/her substitute, shall determine and proclaim a weather emergency when, in
his/her sound judgment and discretion, the circumstances warrant the determination of such an
emergency for the public safety and the welfare of the residents of the City of Auburn. Such weather
emergency shall continue in effect until he/she or such substitute determines that an emergency no
longer exists and terminates the emergency order, or until the City Council in session makes such a
determination.
Emergency routes shall be as designated in the emergency order, and such order can include the
closing of some or all City roadways to the public and such order shall exempt all emergency travel
for medical assistance, police, fire and civil defense activities, fuel haulers, public utility employees,
and other entities or individuals so designated by the Mayor or his/her substitute.
After a weather emergency has been declared and during its existence:
1. No vehicle shall travel or be parked on an emergency route;
2. Any person whose vehicle is stalled or incapable of moving under its own power or a person
who leaves such vehicle unattended shall be in violation of this section. The vehicle shall be
towed away at the owner's expense including towing and storage charges.
Publication and broadcast of the proclamation of a weather emergency shall be made through the
office of the Mayor or his/her substitute through all area news media.
Any Auburn Police Officer, Indiana State Police Officer/Trooper or DeKalb County Sheriff or Deputy
Sheriff, upon discovering any vehicle unlawfully traveling, or parked, or stopped in violation of this
section, may impound and remove such vehicle or cause the same to be impounded and removed
to any City owned property, or to a private garage or place where so authorized. Prior to removal,
said officer shall ticket the driver or owner of the unlawfully parked or operated vehicle and the
owner or operator thereof shall be fined for his or her violation of this section. Such vehicle shall be
impounded and retained at such location as the police officer shall determine until the towing and
storage expenses for said vehicle shall be paid to the individual or company performing the towing
service.
33.99 PENALTY
Violation of 33.06 of this Code shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $500.
Any person violating the provisions of 33.05 shall be guilty of the commission of an infraction and
may be fined a sum not to exceed $100.00. Such shall be enforceable in any court of law duly
authorized by Indiana State Law. And in addition to such fine, the Court shall be authorized to direct
the accused to repay the municipality any monetary losses of the expenses incurred in the incident.
Any person who commits an offense as described in 33.60 shall be liable to a fine of $2,000.00;
such fine shall be subject, however, to the discretion of the court of applicable jurisdiction.
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Boards, Commissions,
and Departments
CHAPTER 34
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 34-2
Boards, Commissions, and Departments
CHAPTER 34
Table of Contents
CITY PLAN COMISSION
34.01 CITY PLAN COMISSION ESTABLISHED
34.02 MEMBERS
34.03 TERM OF OFFICE
34.04 POWERS AND DUTIES
DEPARTMENT OF PARKS AND RECREATION
34.10 DEPARTMENT OF PARKS AND RECREATION CREATED
34.11 BOARD OF PARKS AND RECREATION
34.12 OFFICERS OF BOARD
34.13 POWERS OF BOARD
34.14 ANNUAL BUDGET OF BOARD
BOARD OF AVIATION COMMISSIONERS
34.20 POWERS AND DUTIES REPEALED ORD. 2010-03, PASSED 2-16-10
DEPARTMENT OF REDEVELOPMENT
34.25 DEPARTMENT OF REDEVELOPMENT ESTABLISHED
ELECTRIC AND WATER WORKS COMMITTEE
34.30 POWERS AND DUTIES REPEALED ORD. 2010-03, PASSED 2-16-10
DEPARTMENT OF DEVELOPMENT
34.35 DEPARTMENT OF DEVELOPMENT ESTABLISHED
34.36 DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION
PORT AUTHORITY
34.40 ESTABLISHMENT
34.41 BOARD OF DIRECTORS
34.42 PROCEDURE
34.43 COMPENSATION OF BOARD MEMBERS
34.44 LIMITATION ON BONDING AUTHORITY
HOUSING AUTHORITY
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 34-3
Boards, Commissions, and Departments
CHAPTER 34
34.50 ESTABLISHMENT
34.51 POWERS AND DUTIES
34.52 MAYOR TO APPOINT MEMBERS
34.80 CREATION OF CITY TREE COMMISSION
34.81 TERM OF OFFICE
34.82 COMPENSATION OF COMMISSION
34.83 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES
34.84 OPERATION
34.85 REVIEW BY BOARD OF PUBLIC WORKS AND SAFETY
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY TECHNICAL COMMITTEE
34.95 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY TECHNICAL COMMITTEE ESTABLISHED; MEMBERSHIP; POWERS
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 34-4
Boards, Commissions, and Departments
CHAPTER 34
CITY PLAN COMISSION
34.01 CITY PLAN COMISSION ESTABLISHED
There is created a City Plan Commission pursuant to Acts of Indiana General Assembly of 1947, Chapter
174, and all other acts amendatory and supplemental thereto.
34.02 MEMBERS
The City Plan Commission shall consist of nine members to be appointed as follows:
One member selected by the City Council from its members.
One member selected by the Board of Park Commissioners from its members.
Any one member or any designated representative selected by the Board of Public Works and
Safety.
The City Engineer.
Five citizen members, no more than three of whom shall be members of the same political party, to
be appointed by the Mayor of the city.
34.03 TERM OF OFFICE
The terms of the members of the City Plan Commission shall be as follows:
The term of the member appointed by the Common Council shall be coextensive with the terms of a
majority of the Councilmen, except that the Common Council at its first meeting in any year may
replace any member appointed by it.
The term of the member selected by the Board of Park Commissioners shall be coextensive with
that person's appointment as a Park Commissioner, but it shall not exceed four years.
The term of the member designated by the Board of Public Works and Safety shall be coextensive
with the terms of a majority of the members of the Board of Public Works and Safety, but it shall not
exceed four years.
The term of the City Engineer shall be coextensive with his employment as City Engineer.
The terms of the five citizen members shall be for four years, coextensive with the term for which
the Mayor is elected.
34.04 POWERS AND DUTIES
The City Plan Commission shall perform all the duties and shall have all the powers, rights, and privileges
conferred by Acts of the Indiana General Assembly of 1947, Chapter 174, and all acts amendatory and
supplemental thereto.
DEPARTMENT OF PARKS AND RECREATION
34.10 DEPARTMENT OF PARKS AND RECREATION CREATED
Under the provisions of IC 36-10-3, there is created the Department of Parks and Recreation.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 34-5
Boards, Commissions, and Departments
CHAPTER 34
34.11 BOARD OF PARKS AND RECREATION
Park and Recreation Board shall be created, composed of four members appointed by the Mayor on
the basis of their interest in and knowledge of parks and recreation. No more than two members
shall be of the same political party.
Upon establishment of the Board, the terms of the members initially appointed shall be the
following.
1. One for the term of one year.
2. One for the term of two years.
3. One for the term of three years.
4. One for the term of four years.
C) As a term expires, each new appointment shall be made by the Mayor for a term of four years. All
terms expire on the first Monday in January, but a member shall continue in office until a successor
is appointed. If an appointment for a new term is not made by the Mayor by the first Monday in
April, the incumbent shall serve another term. If a vacancy occurs, the Mayor shall appoint a new
member for the remainder of the unexpired term.
34.12 OFFICERS OF BOARD
At its first regular meeting of each year, the Board of Parks and Recreation shall elect a President and a
Vice-President. The Vice President shall have authority to act as the President of the Board during the
absence or disability of the President. The Board may select a Secretary either from within or without its
own membership.
34.13 POWERS OF BOARD
The Board of Parks and Recreation shall have the power to perform all acts necessary to acquire and
develop sites and facilities and to conduct such programs as are generally understood to be park and
recreation functions. In addition, the Board shall have all the powers and duties listed in IC 36-10-3.
34.14 ANNUAL BUDGET OF BOARD
The Board of Parks and Recreation shall prepare and submit an annual budget in the same manner as other
departments of the city as prescribed by the Indiana State Board of Accounts. The Board of Parks and
Recreation may accept gifts, donations, and subsidies for park and recreation purposes.
BOARD OF AVIATION COMMISSIONERS
34.20 POWERS AND DUTIES REPEALED ORD. 2010-03, PASSED 2-16-10
DEPARTMENT OF REDEVELOPMENT
34.25 DEPARTMENT OF REDEVELOPMENT ESTABLISHED
There is hereby established a Department of Redevelopment to be controlled by the Auburn Redevelopment
Commission. The Redevelopment Commission shall be governed by IC 36-7-14 et seq. All of the territory
within the corporate boundaries of the city constitutes a taxing district for the purposes of levying and
collecting special benefit taxes for redevelopment use as provided in IC 36-7-14 et seq.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 34-6
Boards, Commissions, and Departments
CHAPTER 34
ELECTRIC AND WATER WORKS COMMITTEE
34.30 POWERS AND DUTIES REPEALED ORD. 2010-03, PASSED 2-16-10
DEPARTMENT OF DEVELOPMENT
34.35 DEPARTMENT OF DEVELOPMENT ESTABLISHED
Pursuant to authority granted by Public Law 182, IC 36-7-12, as amended, there is created the Department
of Development which shall be in addition to existing executive departments of the city.
34.36 DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION
The Department of Development shall be under the control of three members, to be known as the
Development Commission. The members of the Commission shall be appointed and shall perform the duties
and exercise the powers set forth in Public Law 182, IC 36-7-12, as amended.
PORT AUTHORITY
34.40 ESTABLISHMENT
A port authority to be known as the City of Auburn Port Authority is established and shall have all of the
powers and jurisdiction set forth in IC 8-10-5-1 through 8-10-5-20, as amended and as hereinafter from time
to time amended, except for the limitations set forth herein.
34.41 BOARD OF DIRECTORS
The Port Authority shall be governed by a Board of Directors consisting of five members, who shall be
appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Common Council. Each director shall have been
a qualified elector of the city for a period of at least three years preceding his appointment. The directors of
the authority first appointed shall serve staggered terms. Thereafter each successor shall serve for a term of
four years, except that any person appointed to fill a vacancy shall be appointed to only the unexpired term,
and any director shall be eligible for reappointment. The Mayor may, at any time, remove a director
appointed by him for misfeasance, nonfeasance, or malfeasance in office
34.42 PROCEDURE
The directors shall elect one of their membership as Chairman, and another as Vice-Chairman, and shall
designate their terms of office, and shall appoint the Clerk-Treasurer of the city as its Secretary-Treasurer.
A majority of the Board of Directors shall constitute a quorum, the affirmative vote of which shall be
necessary for any action taken by the Port Authority. No vacancy in the membership of the Board shall
impair the rights of a quorum to exercise all the rights and perform all the duties of the Port Authority.
34.43 COMPENSATION OF BOARD MEMBERS
Each member of the Board of Directors of the Port Authority shall be entitled to receive from the Port
Authority such sum of money as the Board of Directors may determine as compensation for his service as
Director, and reimbursement for his reasonable expenses in the performance of his duties.
34.44 LIMITATION ON BONDING AUTHORITY
The Port Authority shall not issue bonds of any kind or character without the specific consent of the Common
Council by a duly enacted ordinance.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 34-7
Boards, Commissions, and Departments
CHAPTER 34
HOUSING AUTHORITY
34.50 ESTABLISHMENT
The Common Council has found that there is a shortage of safe or sanitary dwelling
accommodations in the city available to persons of low income at rentals they can afford, especially
elderly residents of the city.
In order to assist in the alleviation of the shortage of safe or sanitary dwelling accommodations
available to persons of low income at rentals they can afford, the Common Council, pursuant to IC
36-7-18-1 and 36-7-18-4 declares the necessity for establishing a housing authority in the city to be
known as the Auburn Housing Authority, whose jurisdiction shall include the corporate boundaries
of the city and the area within five miles therefrom in accordance with IC 36-7-18-4, as from
time to time may be amended.
34.51 POWERS AND DUTIES
The Housing Authority shall exercise or have all powers, duties, privileges, and immunities provided by the
laws of the state, including all powers conferred by the Housing Authorities Act (Acts 1937, Ch. 207) as
amended, or as the same may exist from time to time.
34.52 MAYOR TO APPOINT MEMBERS
Notice of the adoption of this subchapter shall be made to the Mayor of the city in order that the Mayor may
appoint five citizens of the city as the initial Board of Commissioners of the Housing Authority, as provided in
IC 36-7-18-5.
CITY TREE COMMISSION
34.80 CREATION OF CITY TREE COMMISSION
There is hereby created and established a City Tree Commission for the city, which shall consist of five
members, three shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the Common Council, one to be
appointed by the Park and Recreation Board and one to be the City Street Superintendent.
34.81 TERM OF OFFICE
The term of the three persons to be appointed by the Mayor shall be three years except that the term of one
of the members appointed to the first Commission shall be for only one year and the term of one member of
the first Commission shall be for two years. The term of the member appointed by the Park and Recreation
Board shall be for three years. In the event that a vacancy shall occur during the term of any member, his
successor shall be appointed for the unexpired portion of the term.
34.82 COMPENSATION OF COMMISSION
Members of the Commission shall serve without compensation.
34.83 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES
It shall be the responsibility of the Commission to study, investigate, counsel and develop and update
annually, and administer a written plan for the care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal or
disposition of trees and shrubs in parks, along streets and in other public areas. This plan will be presented
annually to the Board of Public Works and Safety and upon their acceptance and approval shall constitute
the official comprehensive city tree plan for the city. The Commission, when requested by the Board of
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 34-8
Boards, Commissions, and Departments
CHAPTER 34
Public Works and Safety, shall consider, investigate, make findings, report and recommend upon any
special matter of question coming within the scope of its work.
34.84 OPERATION
The Commission shall choose its own officers, make its own rules and regulations and keep a journal of its
proceedings. A majority of the members shall be a quorum for the transaction of business.
34.85 REVIEW BY BOARD OF PUBLIC WORKS AND SAFETY
The Board of Public Works and Safety shall have the right to review the conduct, acts and decisions of the
City Tree Commission. Any person may appeal any ruling or order of the City Tree Commission to the Board
of Public Works and Safety who may hear the matter and make the final decision.
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY TECHNICAL COMMITTEE
34.95 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY TECHNICAL COMMITTEE ESTABLISHED; MEMBERSHIP; POWERS
An Information Technology Technical Committee of the city is established.
The members of the committee are the following listed positions or their designee:
1. Street Department Superintendent;
2. City Engineer;
3. Chief of Police;
4. Fire Chief;
5. Electric Utility Superintendent;
6. Water Utility Superintendent;
7. Water Pollution Control Utility Superintendent;
8. Park Department Superintendent;
9. Building, Planning and Development Administrator;
10. Mayor;
11. Clerk-Treasurer;
12. A citizen member, appointed by the Mayor;
13. A member of the City Council, appointed by the Mayor; and
14. The city Purchasing Agent.
The committee will have the power to review and approve all purchases of computer equipment,
including but not in limitation of hardware, software, training and miscellaneous equipment.
All other computer committees of the city heretofore established are hereby replaced and have no
further duties or standing.
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Finance
CHAPTER 35
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 35-2
Finance
CHAPTER 35
Table of Contents
35.01 [RESERVED]
35.02 INCURRING DEBT CHARGEABLE TO THE CITY
35.03 GENERAL IMPROVEMENT FUND
35.04 CUMULATIVE CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT FUND
35.05 INVESTMENT OF SURPLUS FUNDS
35.05.01 PURPOSE
35.05.02 SCOPE
35.05.03 GENERAL OBJECTIVES
35.05.04 STANDARDS OF CARE
35.05.05 AUTHORIZED FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS AND BROKER/DEALERS
35.05.06 SUITABLE AND AUTHORIZED INVESTMENTS
35.05.07 INVESTMENT PARAMETERS
35.05.08 POLICY CONSIDERATIONS
35.06 CAPITAL EXPENDITURE PROGRAM
35.07 PROMOTIONAL ACCOUNT
35.08 ALARM MAINTENANCE FUND
35.09 CUMULATIVE CAPITAL DEVELOPMENT FUND
35.10 VEHICLE INSPECTION FUND
35.11 ENFORCEMENT AID FUND
35.12 ISSUANCE AND USE OF CITY CREDIT CARDS
35.13 RECYCLING CENTER FUND REPEALED, ORD. 2010-03, PASSED 2-16-10
35.14 DARE PROGRAM CONTRIBUTION FUNDS REPEALED, ORD. 2010-03, PASSED 2-16-10
35.15 CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PLAN
35.16 UNCLAIMED UTILITY DEPOSITS
35.17 OPERATING FUND FOR PARKS AND RECREATION DEPARTMENT
35.18 CONTRIBUTION FUND FOR THE POLICE DEPARTMENT BIKE PATROL
35.19 POLICE DEPARTMENT LOCAL GRANTS FUND
35.20 EMERGENCY RESPONSE TEAM CONTRIBUTION FUND
35.21 CONTRIBUTION FUND FOR COURTYARD PARK
35.22 RAINY DAY FUND
35.23 CONTRIBUTION FUND FOR THE COMMUNITY POLICING AND EDUCATION
35.24 COBRA ADMINISTRATION FUND
35.25 BROWNFIELDS PROJECTS FUND
35.26 ANNUAL POLICE GOLF OUTING CONTRIBUTION FUND
35.27 AUBURN POLICE DEPARTMENT FEES FOR REPRODUCTION OF DOCUMENTS
35.28 COMMUNITY PROMOTIONS
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 35-3
Finance
CHAPTER 35
35.01 [RESERVED]
35.02 INCURRING DEBT CHARGEABLE TO THE CITY
All contracts made or indebtedness incurred by any officer or employee of the city in violation of law shall be
null and void unless they are thereafter expressly ratified or approved by the appropriate city body.
35.03 GENERAL IMPROVEMENT FUND
There is established a fund to be known as the General Improvement Fund to pay for the construction,
repair, or improvement of streets, alleys, sidewalks, curbs, gutters, and sewers. The fund shall consist of
moneys realized from the collection of all special assessments for benefits to property from the construction,
repair, or improvement of streets, alleys, sidewalks, curbs, gutters, and sewers which may lawfully be
deposited in the fund, together with any appropriation made from the general fund of the city or from taxes
levied by the Common Council for such purposes.
35.04 CUMULATIVE CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT FUND
There is created a fund known as Cumulative Capital Improvement Fund to be used solely for
capital improvements of the city.
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT
Means that construction or improvement of any city-owned property including but not limited to streets,
thoroughfares, and sewers, but this term shall not include salaries of any public officials or employees
except those directly chargeable to such improvements.
Within the definition set out in (B) above payment made to retire any general obligation bonds of the
city for the purpose of construction or improvement which could be qualified under the definition
contained therein shall also be permitted from this fund.
In the future, sums may be expended from the Cumulative Capital Improvement Fund as may be
permitted by the statutes of the state or by regulations promulgated by the Indiana State Board of
Accounts.
35.05 INVESTMENT OF SURPLUS FUNDS
35.05.01PURPOSE
The purpose of this investment policy (the “Policy”) is to set forth the investment objectives and parameters
for the management of public funds of the City of Auburn (the “City”). This investment policy is designed to
safeguard funds on behalf of the City, to assure the availability of funds when needed, and provide a
competitive investment return.
35.05.02SCOPE
This policy applies to the investment of all funds of the City including but not limited to, the general fund,
special revenue funds, debt service funds, project funds and trust and agency funds.
The City may consolidate fund balances to increase investment earnings and to increase efficiencies with
regard to investment pricing, banking fees and administration. Investment income will be allocated to the
various funds based on their respective participation and in accordance with generally accepted accounting
principles.
35.05.03GENERAL OBJECTIVES
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 35-4
Finance
CHAPTER 35
The primary objectives, in priority order, of investment activities shall be safety, liquidity, and return:
Safety
Safety of principal is the foremost objective of the investment program. Investments shall be undertaken
in a manner that seeks to ensure the preservation of capital. The objective will be to minimize credit risk
and interest rate risk.
1. Credit Risk - The City will minimize credit risk, which is the risk of loss due to the failure of the
security issuer or backer, by limiting investments to the types of securities listed in Section VI of
this Investment Policy.
2. Interest Rate Risk - The City will minimize interest rate risk, which is the risk that the market
value of securities in the portfolio will fall due to changes in market interest rates, by structuring
the investment portfolio so that securities mature to meet cash requirements for ongoing
operations, thereby avoiding the need to sell securities prior to maturity.
Liquidity
The investment portfolio shall remain sufficiently liquid to meet all operating requirements that may be
reasonably anticipated. This is accomplished by structuring the portfolio so that securities mature
concurrent with cash needs to meet anticipated demands. Furthermore, since all possible cash
demands cannot be anticipated, a portion of the portfolio may be placed in money market mutual funds
or government investment pools which offer same day liquidity for short-term funds.
Yield
The investment portfolio shall be designed with the objective of attaining a market rate of return
throughout budgetary and economic cycles, taking into account the investment risk constraints and
liquidity needs. Return on investment is of secondary importance compared to the safety and liquidity
objectives described above. The core of investments are limited to relatively low risk securities in
anticipation of earning a fair return relative to the risk being assumed.
35.05.04STANDARDS OF CARE
Delegation of Authority
The Clerk-Treasurer, hereinafter referred to as the Investment Officer, shall be responsible to oversee
the day-to-day management of the City’s investments pursuant to Indiana Code 36-4-10-4.5. Should the
City elect to select an outside investment advisor, such advisor or firm must be registered under the
Investment Advisor’s Act of 1940.
Prudence
The standard of prudence to be used by the Investment Officer shall be the "prudent person" standard
and shall be applied in the context of managing all funds of the City. The "prudent person" standard
states that, "Investments shall be made with judgment and care, under circumstances then prevailing,
which persons of prudence, discretion and intelligence exercise in the management of their own affairs,
not for speculation, but for investment, considering the probable safety of their capital as well as the
probable income to be derived."
Ethics and Conflicts of Interest
The Investment Officer and employees involved in the investment process shall refrain from personal
business activity that could conflict with the proper execution and management of the investment
program, or that could impair their ability to make impartial decisions. The Investment Officer and
employees shall disclose any material interests in financial institutions with which they conduct business.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 35-5
Finance
CHAPTER 35
They shall further disclose any personal financial/investment positions that could be related to the
performance of the investment portfolio.
35.05.05AUTHORIZED FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS AND BROKER/DEALERS
Authorized Financial Institutions and Broker/Dealers
A list will be maintained of local financial institutions that are approved depositories for the receipt of
public funds according to the State Board for Depositories. The City may pass a resolution pursuant to
IC 5-13-9-5 expanding the list of approved financial institutions to include all Indiana depositories
approved for the receipt of public funds according to the Indiana State Board for Depositories.
In addition, the City will only use broker/dealers that meet the following requirements:
• Primary dealers or regional dealers that qualify under Securities and Exchange Commission
(SEC) Rule 15C3-1 (uniform net capital rule);
• Capital of no less than $10,000,000;
• Registered as a dealer under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934;
• A member of the National Association of Securities Dealers (NASD);
• Proof of state registration
35.05.06SUITABLE AND AUTHORIZED INVESTMENTS
Consistent with Indiana Code 5-13-9, the following investments will be permitted by this Policy:
Securities backed by the full faith and credit of the United States Treasury or fully guaranteed by the
United States and issued by any of the following:
1. The United States Treasury
a. A federal agency.
b. A federal instrumentality.
c. A federal government sponsored enterprise.
Securities fully guaranteed and issued by any of the following:
1. A federal agency.
2. A federal instrumentality.
3. A federal government sponsored enterprise.
Municipal securities issued by an Indiana local governmental entity, a quasi-governmental entity
related to the state, or a unit of government, municipal corporation, or special taxing district in
Indiana, if the issuer has not defaulted on any of the issuer's obligations within the twenty (20) years
preceding the date of the purchase in accordance with IC 5-13-9.2.
Money market mutual funds rated AAAm, or its equivalent, by Standard and Poor’s Corporation or
Aaa, or its equivalent, by Moody’s Investors Service, Inc. in accordance with IC 5-13-9-2.5.
Repurchase agreements in accordance with IC 5-13-9-3
Transaction accounts, certificates of deposit and deposit accounts issued or offered by a
designated depository of the City’s political subdivision. The investing officer making a deposit in a
certificate of deposit shall obtain quotes from each designated depository in accordance with IC 5-
13-9-4.
Certificates of deposit authorized by a resolution of the City in accordance with IC 5-13-9-5 and 5-
13-9-5.3.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 35-6
Finance
CHAPTER 35
Local government investment pools in accordance with IC 5-13-9-11.
Consistent with Indiana Code 36-1-7, the City may pass a resolution to enter into interlocal cooperation
agreements for the joint exercise of powers, including the investment of public funds.
35.05.07 INVESTMENT PARAMETERS
Maximum Maturities
The City’s investments must have a stated final maturity of not more than two years pursuant to IC 5-13-
9-5.6. Because of inherent difficulties in accurately forecasting cash flow requirements, a portion of the
portfolio should be continuously invested in readily available funds such as local government investment
pools, money market funds, or overnight repurchase agreements to ensure that appropriate liquidity is
maintained to meet ongoing obligations.
The City may adopt an ordinance, pursuant to IC 5-13-9-5.7, authorizing its Investment Officer to make
investments having a stated final maturity that is more than two (2) years but not more than five (5)
years after the date of purchase. The total investments of the City with maturities of two (2) to five (5)
years outstanding at the time of purchase may not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of its total portfolio
of public funds invested, including balances in transaction accounts. Such ordinance expires on the
date on which this Policy expires, which may not exceed four (4) years.
Competitive Bids
The Investment Officer or its designee shall obtain competitive bids for investment with financial
institutions in accordance with IC 5-13-9-4. The Investment Officer or its designee shall obtain bids from
at least two brokers or financial institutions on all purchases of investment instruments on the secondary
market. Overnight sweep investment instruments shall not be subject to this section.
35.05.08POLICY CONSIDERATIONS
Adoption and Expiration
This Policy shall be adopted by the City at a public meeting and shall expire four (4) years from the date
of adoption in accordance with IC 5-13-9-5.7.
Exemption
Any investment currently held that does not meet the guidelines of this policy shall be exempted from
the requirements of this policy. At maturity or liquidation, such monies shall be reinvested only as
provided by this policy.
Amendments
This policy shall be reviewed periodically. Any changes must be approved by the Investment Officer and
any other appropriate authority.
Ordinance 2018-21 Passed 10/16/2018
35.06 CAPITAL EXPENDITURE PROGRAM
The Board of Public Works and Safety shall prepare a long-range capital expenditure program
which shall include all proposed purchases, rentals, condemnations, and other proposed
expenditures in connection with real estate or personal property needed by the city for any public
use, for the following fiscal year.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 35-7
Finance
CHAPTER 35
The long-range capital expenditure program shall be prepared by the Board of Public Works and
Safety and submitted to the Common Council no later than the second regular meeting in June of
the year prior to the fiscal year covered by the long-range capital expenditure program.
The long-range capital expenditure program shall be updated by the Board of Public Works and
Safety semi-annually and resubmitted to the Common Council; however, in the discretion of the
Common Council, it may require that the program be updated and submitted to the Common
Council for its review quarterly.
The Common Council shall, upon receipt of the long-range capital expenditure program from the
Board of Public Works and Safety, approve, amend, or disapprove both the content of the longrange
capital expenditure program and the amount of proposed annual expenditures, in whole or in
part, during the time of adoption of the municipal budget, the Common Council's discretion. In
addition, all updates of the program as required herein, shall be submitted to the Common Council
to be approved, amended, or disapproved in the same manner as provided for the annual program.
All estimates of capital program expenditures for the fiscal year shall be itemized by the Board of
Public Works and Safety in a manner that will fully disclose the purpose and use of each
expenditure.
35.07 PROMOTIONAL ACCOUNT
A promotional account has been created for the promotional activities of the Common Council for
use solely at the discretion of the Council for all activities as it may deem appropriate for the
promotion and interests of the city.
Expenditures from the account shall be the responsibility of the fiscal officer of the city at the
request of at least three members of the Council, but in no case shall expenditures violate the
policies of city and state law.
Common Council shall provide monies for funding through the budgeting process and those
appropriations necessary and required by state law.
35.08 ALARM MAINTENANCE FUND
There is hereby created a fund entitled the Alarm Maintenance Fund.
Monies paid by businesses or residences to be included in the intrusion and fire alarm system shall
be paid into the Alarm Maintenance Fund.
The amount charged to a business or residence to be included in the intrusion or fire alarm system
shall be determined from time to time by the Board of Public Works and Safety, but in no instance
shall the amount be less than $260.
Monies from the Fund shall be spent on maintenance, repairs, additions, and alterations of the
intrusion and fire alarm system, and that the Board shall be granted the authority to determine
specifically how the funds shall be spent given the guidelines of this section.
Rules and regulations for the intrusion and fire alarm system shall be determined from time to time
by the Board.
35.09 CUMULATIVE CAPITAL DEVELOPMENT FUND
There is established a Cumulative Capital Development Fund.
An ad valorem property tax levy will be imposed and the revenues from the levy will be retained in
the Cumulative Capital Development Fund.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 35-8
Finance
CHAPTER 35
The maximum rate of levy under division (B) above will not exceed:
2. $0.05 per $100 assessed valuation for 2010 payable 2011, and thereafter, continuing until
reduced or rescinded, subject to existing maximum levy limits pursuant to IC 6-1.1-18.5-3.
Any levy previously established for this purpose is hereby rescinded.
The funds accumulated in the Cumulative Capital Development Fund will be used for capital
improvements, firefighting building, and equipment, and police radio, as described in IC 36-8-14 and
acquisition of rights-of-way for public ways or sidewalks, as described in IC 36-9-16.5, and for any
other use if the purpose is to protect the public health, welfare, or safety in an emergency situation
which demands immediate action.
This Fund takes effect upon approval of the Department of Local Government Finance.
(Ord.2010-08 passed 07/20/10)
35.10 VEHICLE INSPECTION FUND
The Police Department, pursuant to IC 9-29-4-2, is hereby authorized to charge the sum of $5 per
vehicle check.
All fees collected under division (A) above shall be placed in the Vehicle Inspection Fund and shall
be appropriated before being disbursed, as pursuant to IC 9-29-4-2.
Any funds remaining in the Police Training Fund shall be transferred to the Vehicle Inspection Fund.
35.11 ENFORCEMENT AID FUND
The Enforcement Aid Fund is hereby created for the exclusive use of the Police Department
The Enforcement Aid Fund shall be used:
1. To assist in enforcement of the federal, state, county, and city laws,
2. To the ends of the proper and just administration of justice in and around the city, and
3. In any manner deemed proper by the Chief of Police.
The Enforcement Aid Fund shall be in the form of an appropriation to be approved by the Common
Council.
Funding for the Enforcement Aid Fund shall be authorized from the General Fund of the city. This
funding shall be reviewed by the State Board of Accounts.
The expenditure of funds from the Enforcement Aid Fund shall follow the guidelines as established
by the rules in Appendix A, as set forth in Ordinance No. 88-6, passed 1-19-88, which is adopted by
reference herein.
1. Expenditures specifically designated for the purchase of evidence shall follow the rules
established in Appendix B, as set forth in Ordinance No. 88-6, passed 1-19-88, which is
adopted by reference herein.
2. Expenditures specifically designated for use in paying an informant shall follow the rules
established in Appendix B and C, as set forth in Ordinance No. 88-6, passed 1-19-88, which is
adopted by reference herein.
It shall be the responsibility of the Clerk-Treasurer to create those forms necessary for the proper
documentation and accounting of funds requested, expended and returned.
Ultimate approval for monies to fund the Enforcement Aid Fund shall be to the Common Council in
an appropriate form.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 35-9
Finance
CHAPTER 35
Monies may be received from outside agencies and programs and deposited in the enforcement aid
fund. Monies may be withdrawn from this fund for the purpose of reimbursement and/or providing
for expenditures of the Auburn Police Department for undercover drug and illegal narcotic law
enforcement operations on a monthly basis. The Clerk-Treasurer, once per month, shall reimburse
or distribute said funds from the enforcement aid fund in an amount not to exceed $10,000.00. The
Auburn Police Department, Auburn Police Narcotics Enforcement Team (APNET), and other
cooperating agencies shall provide receipts and written documentation to support all requests for
expenditures and/or reimbursement.
The Auburn Police Department shall operate the Auburn Police Narcotics Enforcement Team
(APNET), whose mission shall be to eradicate illegal drug and narcotic usage and possession in
Auburn, Indiana, and in other surrounding areas. In addition, APNET shall operate undercover
programs to enforce the illegal drug and narcotic laws in the State of Indiana. The APNET
operation shall be under the control of the Auburn Police Department and shall operate with Auburn
police personnel. Any other agency involved in the operation must agree to operate under the
direction and command of the Auburn Police Department to enjoy any of the benefits under this
Section of the Auburn Municipal Code. (Ordinance 2016-13 passed 10/18/2016)
35.12 ISSUANCE AND USE OF CITY CREDIT CARDS
Business Credit Card for Travel Expenses
1. The Clerk-Treasurer is hereby authorized to make application for and maintain business credit
cards for the use by city department heads and employees designated by the department head
for travel and permitted expenses related thereto as defined below. The credit card for travel
expenses shall have a credit limit of $5,000.00 per card. Credit cards shall be issued to the
department heads of the following departments:
• Mayor
• Clerk-Treasurer
• Purchasing
• Information Technology
• Human Resources
• Building, Planning, and Development
• Engineering
• Parks and Recreation
• Waste Water Treatment
• Water
• Electric
• Essential Services
• Police
• Fire
• Street
2. The department head shall provide a written accounting of all charges and receipts for each
purchase made. The department head shall be responsible for the card and its use.
3. City officials and employees shall use the credit card exclusively for the purpose of city travel
expenses limited to the following:
a. Hotel or motel room reservations;
b. Hotel or motel room charges for telephone calls pertaining to city business;
c. Meals, including a maximum 15% gratuity before tax;
d. Fees associated with attending schools, conferences, seminars and the like;
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 35-10
Finance
CHAPTER 35
e. Gasoline, if using a city-owned vehicle.
4. City credit cards shall not be used for alcoholic beverages, room service, non-city business
telephone calls, in-room movies, cash advances, or any personal expenses.
5. Accounts payable vouchers (claims) filed in connection with the use of credit cards shall be
submitted to the Clerk-Treasurer for processing within two (2) business days of the official or
employee’s return from their travel. All credit card usage shall be properly itemized and
documented with a summary of items purchased with said credit card. The charge card will be
paid in full every billing cycle. Improperly itemized and documented items as well as interest,
carrying charges or penalties caused by improperly submitting items shall be the responsibility
of the individual user who causes the expense to the city.
6. Payment for any personal or disallowed charges shall be the responsibility of the official or
employee making the charge. An official or employee who abuses the credit card will be
restricted from future credit card use and subject to disciplinary up to, and including termination.
7. Before being issued a credit card, all individuals, officials, department heads, and or employees
who are expected to use said card, must sign a form provided by the Clerk-Treasurer’s Office
that indicates the individual has read and understands the policy regarding permitted uses of
the City Credit Card
Commercial Charge Card for Public Purchases of Supplies, Materials, and Small Equipment
1. The policy of the City of Auburn is to use purchase orders and claim forms for transactions by
each department. However, the Clerk-Treasurer shall also make available the city credit card
for commercial charging. Use of the credit card requires the submission of a purchase order
(p.o.).
2. Commercial charge card receipts shall be properly itemized and documented as provided in I.C.
5-11-10 et seq. The charge card will be paid in full every billing cycle. Improperly itemized and
documented items, as well as interest, carrying charges, sales tax or penalties caused by
improperly submitting items shall be the responsibility of the individual user who causes the
expense to the city.
3. Any department head who abuses the commercial charge card will be restricted from future
credit card use and subject to disciplinary action up to, and including termination.
(Ordinance 2016-16 passed 12-6-2016)
35.13 RECYCLING CENTER FUND REPEALED, ORD. 2010-03, PASSED 2-16-10
35.14 DARE PROGRAM CONTRIBUTION FUNDS REPEALED, ORD. 2010-03, PASSED 2-16-10
35.15 CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PLAN
The Capital Improvement Plan of the city is hereby adopted by reference, and such plan is attached
as Exhibit A to Resolution 04-2006, passed April 4, 2006. The Capital Improvement Plan identifies
the projects for which EDIT (economic development income tax) revenues will be used.
The construction of the projects will:
1. Promote significant opportunities for the gainful employment of citizens of the city;
2. Attract major new business enterprises to the city; and
3. Retain or expand a significant business enterprise within the city.
The construction of the projects involves expenditures for the acquisition of land, interest in land,
site improvements, infrastructure improvements, buildings, structures, rehabilitation, renovation,
and enlargement of buildings and structures, machinery, equipment furnishings, or facilities.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 35-11
Finance
CHAPTER 35
35.16 UNCLAIMED UTILITY DEPOSITS
Unclaimed utility deposits held by the Clerk-Treasurer which remain unclaimed for seven years shall be
considered abandoned and deposited into the operating fund of that utility.
35.17 OPERATING FUND FOR PARKS AND RECREATION DEPARTMENT
There is hereby established a special non-reverting fund, whereby expenditures can be made
without appropriations for the use of the Auburn Park and Recreation Department and the Auburn
Park and Recreation Board. The monies of this fund shall be dispersed only on approved claims.
The monies for this fund shall be obtained from fees collected for various activities provided by the
Park and Recreation Department and gifts to the Auburn Park and Recreation Department and/or
Auburn Park and Recreation Board except swimming pool receipts and pavilion rental fees which
shall continue to be deposited into the general fund of the city.
Expenditures from this fund shall be for continual capital improvements and upgrading of
recreational programs, facilities, and equipment as well as payment for special instructors utilized
for various programs sponsored by the Park and Recreation Department.
The following existing funds are hereby all merged into the non-reverting operating fund:
1. Park Summer Camp Fund;
2. Miscellaneous Park Fund;
3. Miscellaneous Pool Fund;
4. Memorial Tennis Court Fund;
5. Carr Field Fund;
6. Thomas Park Fund;
7. Willennar Park Fund;
8. Volleyball Court Fund;
9. Jaycee Park Ball Diamonds Fund; and,
10. Downtown Tree Project Fund.
35.18 CONTRIBUTION FUND FOR THE POLICE DEPARTMENT BIKE PATROL
Establishment
The Clerk-Treasurer hereby establishes a Police Department Bike Patrol Contribution Fund. This fund
shall be a non-appropriated fund.
Purpose
The purpose of the contribution fund shall be for receipt of private, business, organization donations,
fundraisers, income from training seminars and grants acquired by the program supervisor and other
possible sources and these monies shall be used for the Police Department Bike Patrol.
Expenditures
Expenditures from this contribution fund shall be used for clothing, equipment, maintenance, repair, and
upkeep of equipment, training, educational supplies, and programs for schools and the community. The
city shall not use the contribution funds for any other purpose than those stated.
35.19 POLICE DEPARTMENT LOCAL GRANTS FUND
Establishment
The Clerk-Treasurer hereby establishes a Police Department Local Grants Fund. This fund shall be a
non-appropriated fund.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 35-12
Finance
CHAPTER 35
Purpose
The purpose of this fund shall be for the receipt of local grant monies (local meaning not federal or state
funded grants) and disbursement of local grant monies from local coordinating council, foundation,
companies or organization and for said monies to be used for community policing programs and K-9
programs, materials and supplies, training and equipment for these projects.
Expenditures
Expenditures from this contribution fund shall be used for materials, supplies, training and equipment for
the Emergency Response Team, to include lodging, meals and transportation. The city shall not use the
funds for any other purpose than those stated.
35.20 EMERGENCY RESPONSE TEAM CONTRIBUTION FUND
Establishment
The Clerk-Treasurer hereby establishes an Emergency Response Team Contribution Fund. This fund
shall be a non-reverting fund.
Purpose
The purpose of the contribution fund shall be for the receipt of money from contributions and said
monies shall be used for the Emergency Response Team of the Police Department.
Expenditures
Expenditures from this contribution fund shall be used for materials, supplies, training and equipment for
the Emergency Response Team, to include lodging, meals and transportation. The city shall not use the
contribution funds for any other purposes than those stated.
35.21 CONTRIBUTION FUND FOR COURTYARD PARK
Establishment
The Clerk-Treasurer hereby establishes a contribution fund for the Courtyard Park, located at the
southwest corner of Seventh and Cedar Streets. This fund shall be a non-reverting fund.
Purpose
The purpose of the Courtyard Park Contribution Fund shall be for receipt of money from contributions
and these monies shall be used for the construction and maintenance of the park.
Expenditures
Expenditures from this contribution fund shall be used for materials, supplies, and equipment for the
park. The city shall not use the contribution funds for any other purposes than those stated.
35.22 RAINY DAY FUND
The City of Auburn “Rainy Day Fund” is hereby reestablished under the same terms and conditions
as previously set forth by the City of Auburn, Indiana. The “Fund” shall be maintained by the office
of the Clerk-Treasurer in accordance with Indiana Code provisions. The “Fund” shall receive
transfers of unused and unencumbered funds raised by general or special tax levy on taxable
property within the City of Auburn, Indiana whenever the purpose of such tax levy has been fulfilled
and any unused and unencumbered balance remains.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 35-13
Finance
CHAPTER 35
The funds on deposit in the Rainy Day Fund may be used for the operation of the City of Auburn
and its various departments, when the City is in need of funds to pay such costs, including, but not
limited to, salaries and wages, costs of services, supplies, equipment, capital improvements,
repairs, and other similar expenditures.
At any time on or before December 31, of each year, the Auburn, Indiana Common Council may
determine the amount, if any of unused and unencumbered funds available to be transferred to the
Rainy Day Fund, which transfer may not exceed more than ten percent (10%) of the City of
Auburn’s total budget for that fiscal year.
In accordance with I.C. 35-1-8-5.1 as amended from time to time and as authorized previously by
the City of Auburn, Indiana, the City will deposit and or continue to deposit any special or
supplemental distributions received from transfers of unused and unencumbered funds in its “Rainy
Day Fund” which was previously established under Ordinance 2001-21. Said fund shall continue to
operate as it has in the past except that funds may now be deposited at any time on or before
December 31, 2009 of each year.
The Common Council of the City of Auburn, Indiana may authorize the expenditure of funds from
the Rainy Day Fund by appropriations made in the same manner as other funds are appropriated
that receive tax monies, upon making a finding that the proposed use of the funds is consistent with
the intent of the fund.
35.23 CONTRIBUTION FUND FOR THE COMMUNITY POLICING AND EDUCATION
Establishment
The Clerk-Treasurer hereby establishes a Community Policing and Education Contribution Fund. This
fund shall be a non-reverting fund.
Purpose
The purpose of this contribution fund shall be for receipt of money from contributions and these monies
shall be used for the Community Policing and Education.
Expenditures
Expenditures from this contribution fund shall be used for education to the public, including promotional,
educational and training supplies for community events and community policing based training for
Auburn police officers to include lodging, meals, and transportation. The city shall not use the
contribution fund for any other purposes than those stated.
35.24 COBRA ADMINISTRATION FUND
The Clerk-Treasurer of the city shall establish a COBRA Administration Fund.
The purpose of the COBRA Administration Fund shall be for the receipt and deposit of payment
collections and said monies shall be disbursed for COBRA Administration fees, TPA fees, and selffunding
deposits for the city.
The city shall not use the COBRA Administration Funds for any other purposes than those stated.
35.25 BROWNFIELDS PROJECTS FUND
The Clerk-Treasurer of the city shall establish a Brownfields Projects Fund.
The fund shall be a non-appropriated fund.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 35-14
Finance
CHAPTER 35
The purpose of the fund shall be for receipt of money from the state and related federal programs
and said monies shall be used for the various Brownfields Projects within the city.
35.26 ANNUAL POLICE GOLF OUTING CONTRIBUTION FUND
The Clerk-Treasurer of the city shall establish an Annual Police Golf Outing Contribution Fund.
The fund shall be a non-appropriated fund.
The purpose of the Contribution Fund shall be for receipt of money from private, business,
organization donations, fundraisers, other possible sources and said monies shall be used for the
Annual Police Golf Outing and the Police Department.
35.27 AUBURN POLICE DEPARTMENT FEES FOR REPRODUCTION OF DOCUMENTS
The Auburn Police Department shall charge a $15.00 fee for each criminal background search
performed for the individuals of the general public. The Department may also charge $2.00 per
page for each copy of said check produced for the general public. A page equals one side of
printed material
The Auburn Police Department shall charge $2.00 per page for each reproduction of documents
provided to the general public, unless otherwise controlled by state statute fee schedule.
The Auburn Police Department shall charge $2.00 per page for producing copies of accident reports
to the general public.
All fees collected from reproduction of documents shall be placed in the Auburn Police Department
Training Fund.
35.28 COMMUNITY PROMOTIONS
It is desired and deemed necessary to budget and appropriate funds to pay the expenses of, or to reimburse
authorized city employees and officials as the case may be, for expenses incurred in promoting “the best
interests of the city”.
The Common Council of the City of Auburn, Indiana authorizes appropriate funds to be to provide and pay
for “Community Promotions”. Funds may include but not be limited to rental of meeting places, meals,
decorations, memorabilia, awards, expenses incurred in interviewing applicants, expenses incurred in
promoting industrial, commercial and residential development, expenses incurred in developing relations
with other units of government and any other expenses of a civic or governmental nature deemed
appropriate to be in the best interests of the City.
The following departments and bodies shall be authorized to incur promotional expenditures, provided that
the expenditures are reasonably intended to benefit the community and the City’s constituency: Fire
Department, Police Department, Building Planning and Development Department, Water Department, Water
Pollution Control Department, Electric Department, Auburn Essential Services, the Office of the Mayor, the
Office of the Clerk-Treasurer, the Redevelopment Commission, the Auburn Common Council, the Auburn
Board of Works and Public Safety, the Auburn Parks Department, the City Engineer Department, the Street
Department and Human Resources.
(Ord. 2017-07 Passed 6/20/2017)
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Executive, Judicial, and
Administrative Officials
CHAPTER 30
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 30-2
Executive, Judicial, and Administrative Officials
CHAPTER 30
Table of Contents
30.01 MAYOR
30.02 CLERK-TREASURER
30.03 CITY ATTORNEY
30.04 ASSISTANT CITY ATTORNEY
30.05 CITY CIVIL ENGINEER
30.06 STREET COMMISSIONER
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 30-3
Executive, Judicial, and Administrative Officials
CHAPTER 30
30.01 MAYOR
The Mayor shall perform the duties and have the powers conferred upon him or her by law, and shall
faithfully and impartially discharge his or her duties in his or her several stations to the best of his ability and
in the best interests of the city.
30.02 CLERK-TREASURER
The Clerk-Treasurer shall attend all meetings of the Common Council, record their proceedings,
and perform all the duties pertaining to his or her office as prescribed by law. To this end he or she
shall procure from time to time at the expense of the city such necessary and appropriate books,
blanks, and supplies which are required for the efficient and expeditious performance of his or her
duties.
The Clerk-Treasurer shall have custody of all books and papers belonging to the city, and shall
preserve and file them in a neat and orderly manner in his or her office. Upon termination of office
he shall deliver these books and papers to his successor or to the Presiding Officer of the Common
Council. It shall also be his duty to countersign and register all licenses and permits, ordinances
and resolutions, and other official papers of the Common Council which direct acts to be done or
duties to be performed.
The Clerk-Treasurer shall draw all orders upon the treasury of the city, but no order shall be drawn
upon the treasury without an allowance made by the Common Council unless the order is fixed by
law.
The Clerk-Treasurer shall receive all moneys, notes, bonds, and orders belonging to the city, keep
an accurate account of the amounts received, and issue his receipt for all moneys paid to him on
account of the city. A record shall also be kept showing the amounts received and credited to the
various funds, and the amounts disbursed from these funds and remaining on hand.
The Clerk-Treasurer shall report to the Common Council, at the first meeting in each month, the
money transactions of the previous month and the status of the city's finances.
He shall keep all notes and bonds of the city, and these notes and bonds shall at all times be
subject to the order of the Council.
The Clerk-Treasurer shall be in attendance at his office at all business hours except Sundays and
legal holidays, and in his or her absence a qualified Deputy may be appointed by the Clerk-
Treasurer to fill his or her place and if the Clerk-Treasurer is not available, by vote of the Common
Council.
There is created the position of Deputy Clerk-Treasurer.
30.03 CITY ATTORNEY
The City Attorney shall be the legal advisor to all the officers of the city in relation to their official acts, and
shall advise the Council upon all matters of law which may be submitted to him or her in reference to the
action of the Council. He or she shall draw all legal documents which may be required by the Common
Council, and perform all other acts pertaining to the duties of the office. He or she shall prosecute all actions
in favor of the city and defend all actions brought against the city.
30.04 ASSISTANT CITY ATTORNEY
The office of Assistant City Attorney is created.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 30-4
Executive, Judicial, and Administrative Officials
CHAPTER 30
30.05 CITY CIVIL ENGINEER
There is created the position of City Civil Engineer. The duties of said City Civil Engineer shall be to provide
assistance to the various departments of the city, including the utilities owned and operated by the city, as
may be requested and required and as are permitted by other duties.
30.06 STREET COMMISSIONER
There is created the office of Street Commissioner. His or her duties shall be to supervise the streets.
BLANK PAGE - THIS SECTION REPLACED BY CHAPTER 40
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Ordinance Violations
Bureau
CHAPTER 36
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 36-2
Ordinance Violations Bureau
CHAPTER 36
Table of Contents
36.01 ESTABLISHMENT
36.02 VIOLATIONS CLERK
36.03 PENALTY PAYMENTS
36.04 SCHEDULE OF CITY ORDINANCES
36.05 PROCEEDS PLACED INTO GENERAL FUND
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 36-3
Ordinance Violations Bureau
CHAPTER 36
36.01 ESTABLISHMENT
There shall be created an Ordinance Violations Bureau for the city.
36.02 VIOLATIONS CLERK
The Clerk-Treasurer, or his/her appointee, shall serve as the Violations Clerk of the Ordinance Violations
Bureau.
36.03 PENALTY PAYMENTS
The Violations Clerk shall accept written appearances, waivers of trial, admissions of violations, and
payment of penalties of not more than $100 for ordinance violations and up to a total of $2,500.00 maximum
per occurrence for violations of Section 130.011 (REPEALED).
36.04 SCHEDULE OF CITY ORDINANCES
The following schedule of city ordinances shall be subject to admission of violations before the Violations
Clerk:
Ordinance No. 41 passed 8-17-03 Acts Injurious to Streets
Ordinance No. 516 passed 8-5-35 Obstruction of Sidewalks
Ordinance No. 571 passed 9-5-38 Gambling, Pool Halls, etc.
Ordinance No. 1016 passed 4-16-68 Damage to Street Signs
Ordinance No. 75-6 passed 5-6-75 Sprinkler System/Fire Drills
Ordinance No. 79-25 passed 9-25-79 Outdoor Open Fires
Ordinance No. 84-28 passed 11-6-84
(Amended by Ordinance No. 85-48 passed 12-17-85)
Bicycles and Parking Tickets
Ordinance No. 88-1 passed 1-19-88
(Amended by Ordinance No. 88-41 passed 10-18-88)
Smoke Detectors
Ordinance No. 87-37 passed 12-22-87 Fire Safety Regulations
Ordinance No. 88-37 passed 10-18-88 Minimum Housing
Ordinance No. 93-29 passed 11-16-93 Weeds and Rank Vegetation
Ordinance No. 95-05 passed 11-21-95 Park Use Regulations
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 36-4
Ordinance Violations Bureau
CHAPTER 36
Ordinance No. 95-16 passed 5-16-95 Garbage Regulations
Ordinance No. 95-17 passed 7-12-95 Recyclable Regulations
Ordinance No. 2006-18 passed 11-6-06 Smoking Ban; City Owned
Ordinance No. 2010-13 passed 10-19-10 Synthetic Cannabinoids (REPEALED)
36.05 PROCEEDS PLACED INTO GENERAL FUND
Proceeds from the Ordinance Violations Bureau shall be placed into the General Fund of the city, unless
otherwise designated within the specific ordinance subject to this chapter.
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
City Policies
CHAPTER 37
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 37-2
City Policies
CHAPTER 37
Table of Contents
SECTION GROUP HEADER
37.01 IDENTIFICATION ON ALL CITY VEHICLES REQUIRED
37.02 ENCROACHMENT UPON CITY PROPERTY; LICENSE TO BE OBTAINED
37.03 FILING AND ACCEPTANCE PROCEDURES FOR CONFLICT OF INTEREST
37.04 CITY INTERNET WEB SITE
37.05 PICK-UP OF ADDITIONAL EMPLOYEE CONTRIBUTIONS
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 37-3
City Policies
CHAPTER 37
SECTION GROUP HEADER
37.01 IDENTIFICATION ON ALL CITY VEHICLES REQUIRED
Identification markings shall, for the purposes of this chapter, consist of the standard logo for the
city with a department name and sequential numbering by department underneath the logo.
Vehicles
1. Vehicles are those pieces of motorized equipment owned or leased by the city for use by city
employees and officials including, but not limited to, police, fire, parks, street, engineering,
water, electric, sewage, building and administrative.
2. Undercover or designated unmarked police units are exempt for purposes of this chapter.
Requirements for identification
1. All city vehicles shall be marked as designated in division (A) on the front doors or a location
close thereto. The numbers shall be five inches tall. The identifications shall be completed
within 30 days from passage of this chapter.
2. All identification markings shall be maintained so as to be easily recognizable.
3. Failure to either adequately mark the vehicle or maintain the markings may result in loss of use
as determined by the Common Council.
37.02 ENCROACHMENT UPON CITY PROPERTY; LICENSE TO BE OBTAINED
For the purposes of this section an "ENCROACHMENT" means a fixture or structure placed after
the effective date of this section which encroaches upon city owned property or city easements or
rights-of-way.
The Board of Public Works and Safety shall have the authority and duty to review and act upon
requests for licenses to encroach upon the property of the city.
The applicant shall pay a fee of $100 to the Clerk-Treasurer at the time of the request.
The Board of Public Works and Safety may act upon the application for license to encroach only
after the application has been submitted to a routing procedure of the department heads of the city
and input is received from that routing procedure.
Any license to encroach that is approved shall be subject to the following conditions:
1. The approved encroachment shall not be altered or enlarged during the period of the license;
2. The construction, erection, and maintenance of the encroachment shall not damage or destroy
any city property;
3. The encroachment shall not in any fashion interfere with or obstruct any access to the property
by the city and/or its utilities and/or any other utility company, nor shall the encroachment in any
way encroach or impair or interfere with the used streets or sidewalks or with the free and save
flow of foot or vehicular traffic. It is understood that the Board shall have the right, as shall any
other utility, to remove the encroachment in the event access is required by the city, its utilities,
or any other utility company, and that the applicant shall not be entitled to any reimbursement
for such removal;
4. The applicant shall agree to indemnify and hold harmless the city or any other utility company
from and against all liability and claims of any kind or character, including but not limited to
possible damage, death, or personal injury resulting from construction, erection, maintenance,
and existence and placement of any encroachment. If required, the applicant shall provide to
the Board proof of insurance in amounts deemed appropriate by the Board and so insuring the
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 37-4
City Policies
CHAPTER 37
city and all of its boards, utilities, commissions, agents, and employees from and against any
liability;
5. The granting of a license hereunder does not relieve the applicant or any other person from
obtaining any other relevant permits, permissions, and the like with respect to the placement of
the encroachment and the construction and placement shall be subject to all appropriate
federal, state, and local laws, ordinances, or rules and regulations. The grant of license
hereunder is specifically subject to compliance with all sign codes and ordinances as now
hereafter enforced;
6. While the license is in effect the encroachment shall be maintained by the applicant in a neat
and orderly fashion and the license shall not in any prejudice or preclude the city with respect to
the future use of the city's property or right-of-way including that portion upon which the
encroachment is located. The license approved hereunder may be terminated at any time by
the Board upon such termination the applicant shall immediately remove or cause to be
removed from the city's property, the encroachment at the applicant's sole cost, repairing any
damage done to the city property as occasioned by such removal. The license granted
hereunder in no way confers upon the applicant any right or title to the city's property and the
rights of the applicant are limited to the terms and conditions contained herein. The license and
its accompanying agreement shall be binding upon
7. The license granted herein allows only the encroachment and thus does not take the place of
any permits to do work in the right-of-way, which still must be obtained.
37.03 FILING AND ACCEPTANCE PROCEDURES FOR CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURES
The disclosures required to be filed and accepted by IC 35-44-1-3 shall be as follows: Those of the Mayor,
Common Council members and all other public servants of the city, whether elected or appointed, or
employees, shall be filed with and accepted by the Board of Public Works and Safety.
37.04 CITY INTERNET WEB SITE
The following policies are adopted for the operation of the internet web site of the city:
The site should include the following items:
1. The city code;
2. The minutes of the Common Council, Board of Public Works and Safety, Plan Commission,
Park Board, and Board of Zoning Appeals;
3. The upcoming agendas of the Common Council, Board of Works and Safety, Plan Commission,
Park Board, and Board of Zoning Appeals;
4. Meeting notices (including public hearing notices), significant, current non-codified ordinances,
for example salary and budget;
5. All resolutions passed by the Common Council;
6. All pending ordinances and resolutions of the Common Council;
7. Other information that communicates the business of the city and/or would be valuable
information to the citizens of the city or other interested persons;
It is a specific policy of the Council that items placed on the city's internet web site represent the
best interests of the citizens of Auburn.
The Management Information System Manager of the city has the authority and duty to edit
information on the city internet web site to ensure these policies are followed.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 37-5
City Policies
CHAPTER 37
37.05 PICK-UP OF ADDITIONAL EMPLOYEE CONTRIBUTIONS
IC 5-10.2-3-2 authorizes employers, pursuant to Section 414(h)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code, to
pick-up and pay employee contributions to an employee’s annuity savings account which are made
in addition to the mandatory employee’s annuity savings account which are made in addition to the
mandatory employee contribution. This section allows such additional employee contributions for
the city employees. Due to a recent IRS ruling such contributions may be made on a pre-tax basis.
Effective as of September 2003, the employer desires to pick up all of the additional employee
contributions made by employees through a binding irrevocable payroll deduction authorization. No
additional employee contributions prior to the employer’s adoption of this section shall be picked up.
Additional employee contributions for state law purposes, are being paid by the employer in lieu of
said contributions by the employee.
The employer shall comply with all of the terms and provisions of the pick-up regulation and
applicable provisions of the Internal Revenue Code.
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
General Personnel Policy
CHAPTER 40
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 40-2
General Personnel Policy
CHAPTER 40
Table of Contents
PREFACE
ARTICLE 1 - PERSONNEL ADMINISTRATION
40.01 MISSION STATEMENT
40.02 PREPARATION
40.03 POLICY ADMINISTRATION
40.04 NON-DISCRIMINATION
CITY SERVICE POLICY
40.05 EMPLOYEE ANTI-HARASSMENT
40.06 NON-DISCRIMINATORY SERVICE POLICY
40.0 SAFETY
40.08 EMPLOYEE ACCIDENTS/WORKERS' COMPENSATION
40.09 WORKPLACE VIOLENCE
ARTICLE 2 - GENERAL INFORMATION
40.11 ELECTRONIC INFORMATION SYSTEMS POLICY
40.12 COOPERATION WITH INVESTIGATIONS
40.13 PERSONAL APPEARANCE
40.14 SMOKING
40.15 ATTENDANCE/PUNCTUALITY
40.16 CELLULAR PHONE POLICY
ARTICLE 3 - DEPARTMENTS, UTILITIES & ADMINISTRATIVE DIVISIONS
40.21 DEPARTMENTS
40.22 GENERAL DUTIES OF DEPARTMENT HEADS
40.23 ADMINISTRATIVE DIVISIONS
ARTICLE 4 - EMPLOYEES
40.31 GENERAL RESPONSIBILITIES TO CITY
40.32 EMPLOYEE CLASSIFICATIONS
40.33 COMPENSATION POLICY
40.34 WORKING HOURS
40.35 COMPENSATION
40.36 LEAVES
40.37 BENEFITS
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 40-3
General Personnel Policy
CHAPTER 40
40.38 DRIVING AND USE OF CITY VEHICLES
40.39 DRUG AND ALCOHOL POLICY
40.40 EVALUATION OF WORK
40.41 PERSONNEL CONDUCT / RULES
40.411 NEPOTISM
40.42 APPEAL PROCEDURE
ARTICLE 5 - COMMUNITY PUBLIC RELATIONS
40.51 PUBLIC RELATIONS RESPONSIBILITIES
40.52 SOCIAL NETWORKING / INTERNET USAGE
ARTICLE 6 - AMENDMENT PROCEDURE
40.61 CHANGES IN POLICY
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 40-4
General Personnel Policy
CHAPTER 40
PREFACE
This policy for the employees of the City of Auburn was adopted by the Auburn City Common Council on December
3, 2003, December 7, 2005 and amended on September 20, 2011. All or any part of this policy is subject to change
by the City Common Council in accordance with Article 6 of this document.
Any provision in this policy which conflicts with State and/or Federal statutes is controlled by the State and/or Federal
statutes. This policy supersedes all other policies prior to its adoption.
These policies and procedures do not create any form of contract of employment between the City of Auburn and any
employee. These policies apply to all employees of the City of Auburn and employees of the City Utilities. Additional
policy provisions are set forth in Code Sections 41.00, 42 .00 and 43.00 to cover specific Civilian, Fire Protection, and
Law Enforcement employee policy.
It is the desire of the City Council that the policies be so expressed that they will not be misunderstood and at the
same time will provide the flexibility under which the department heads, management and the city elected
administration may implement and execute these policies for the betterment of the citizens of the City of Auburn and
the employees of the City of Auburn.
Each individual employed by the City must comply, as a condition of employment, with the provisions of this Policy
and any related procedures and work rules and must perform his/her assigned duties in a responsible manner
creditable to the City. As such, all City employees are expected to become knowledgeable about the contents and
abide by the policies set forth in this Policy. Any questions, concerns, or lack of understanding about a particular
provision of this Policy should be promptly discussed with your Department Head or Supervisor or Human Resources
Director.
ARTICLE 1 - PERSONNEL ADMINISTRATION
40.01 MISSION STATEMENT
The mission of Auburn City Government is to enhance the quality of life for the citizens of Auburn by
providing services of the highest quality that are both efficient and cost effective.
40.02 PREPARATION
City policy has been developed through discussions with and suggestions by the City of Auburn Employees;
the City of Auburn Department Heads; the Human Resources Director; the Clerk-Treasurer; and the Mayor
of the City of Auburn. This policy will serve as a guide to the rules, regulations, and procedures as they may
relate to your employment.
Each employee shall read this policy in order to promote good working relationships within the department of
their employment and between the various departments of the City.
40.03 POLICY ADMINISTRATION
In order to effectively implement the policies and procedures in this Policy and to oversee its administration
on a day-to-day basis, the following procedures will be taken:
A copy of this Policy shall be given to all current employees of the City and to all new employees.
All employees who receive a copy of this Policy must, as a condition of employment, sign a
document acknowledging that they received a copy of the Policy.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 40-5
General Personnel Policy
CHAPTER 40
The policies and procedures in this Policy may be revised as the City deems necessary. Only the
Common Council of the City of Auburn has the authority to revise these policies and procedures.
See Article 6.
Employees are encouraged to make suggestions for improvements in personnel policies and practices.
Suggestions should be given in writing to a supervisor, department head, or human resources which should
include an explanation of how such a change could benefit the City, department, employees and/or the
public.
Note: The title of “Supervisor” and “Department Head” may be interchanged throughout the document.
There may be a distinction in some departments, whereas in other departments the supervisor and
department head may be the same person. The department's SOP (Standard Operating Procedure) shall
clarify the reporting structure.
40.04 NON-DISCRIMINATION
The City of Auburn endorses the basic national policy on equal employment opportunities and affirmative
action and all provisions of the Americans with Disabilities Act Amendments Act (ADAAA). The policies and
law state that all citizens (employees or applicants for employment) are entitled to equal opportunities
regardless of race, religion, color, age, gender, sex, disability (as defined in the Americans with Disabilities
Act Amendments Act), genetics, national origin, ancestry, marital status, sexual orientation or any other
legally protected status, in employment, compensation, promotion, upgrading, training and development,
demotion, transfer, lay-off, termination, or hiring of personnel.
The City will make reasonable accommodations, upon request, wherever it does not cause undue hardship
on the operation of the City of Auburn, to allow qualified individuals with disabilities to perform work for which
they are otherwise qualified.
The City will abide by the rules of the Department of Homeland Security in the employment eligibility
verification process.
CITY SERVICE POLICY
The City is committed to ensuring that policies and the law for all citizens, visitors, contractors, suppliers, or other
individuals who are served by the City of provide products or services to the City are treated with the highest regard
irrespective of their race, sex, age, color, religion, national origin, ancestry, disability, or any other category protected
by law. It is the responsibility of all managers and employees to treat all persons equally in providing a service to
them.
All individuals will be provided the same rights, privileges, and a service, unless an individual poses a direct threat to
the health and safety of themselves, employees, or the public, or disrupts the orderly flow the City’s business.
40.05 EMPLOYEE ANTI-HARASSMENT
The City of Auburn is committed to providing a workplace free of harassment of any employee because of
the employee's race, sex, religion, age, national origin, disability, citizenship status, or any other category
protected under federal, state or local law.
Harassing conduct may include, among other things,
1. epithets, slurs, stereotyping, or threatening, intimidating, or hostile acts that relate to race, sex,
age, religion, national origin, disability, or sexual orientation; and (2) written or graphic material
that denigrates or shows hostility or aversion toward an individual or group because of race,
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 40-6
General Personnel Policy
CHAPTER 40
sex, age, religion, national origin, or disability. The City is committed to protecting employees
from such harassment whether from other employees or non-employees such as vendors,
contractors, visitors, citizens, or officials.
Specifically included in this policy is a commitment to provide a workplace free of sexual
harassment. Sexual harassment may include but is not limited to:
Unsolicited and unwelcome comments or conduct of a sexual nature or that are demeaning to
women or men as a group (for example, offensive or vulgar jokes, name-calling, comments about
one's body or sex life, stereotyping based on a person's sex, touching, leering, ogling, patting,
pinching, indecent exposure, physical gestures, or displaying sexually explicit photographs or
objects that might interfere with a reasonable person's work);
Unsolicited and unwelcome demands or requests for sexual favors or social or sexual encounters;
An explicit or implicit promise of preferential treatment with regard to a person's employment in
exchange for sexual favors or sexual activity; and
The use of an employee's or applicant's submission to or rejection of sexual conduct as the basis
for making, influencing, or affecting an employment decision that has an impact upon the terms and
conditions of the individual's employment (for example, hiring, firing, promotion, demotion,
compensation, benefits, or working conditions).
Given the nature of this type of conduct and the serious effects such conduct can have on the
person harassed and the accused, the City treats alleged violations of this policy seriously and, to
the extent possible, confidentially. The City expects all individuals to treat alleged violations in the
same responsible manner.
If you believe you or any other employee is being subjected to conduct or comments that are
harassing on the basis of your race, sex, sexual orientation, religion, national origin, color, disability,
age, or any other legally protected status, you are encouraged to and have a responsibility to
immediately report these matters to your supervisor, Department Head or the Human Resources
Director or designee. If for any reason you do not feel comfortable reporting your concerns to your
supervisor, the Department Head or Human Resources Director or designee, you may report the
matter to the Clerk-Treasurer.
All complaints will be handled in a timely and confidential manner. In no event should the complaint,
or information related to the complaint, be disclosed by the City of Auburn to any people or
organizations not directly involved in the investigation. Of course, management personnel needed
for participation in the investigation of your complaint, the alleged harasser, and possible witnesses
may be contacted and will learn of the complaint. If a later appeal to the Board of Works occurs, the
members of the Board shall also be informed of the complaint and the facts surrounding the
complaint. However, no person will be permitted to discuss the complaint, the identity of the person
complaining, or any other facts, except where necessary for investigating the complaint or deciding
a dispute.
Confidentiality is preserved to the degree possible in order to encourage the filing of valid
complaints by protecting the privacy of the complaining employee and to protect the reputation of
any employee who might wrongfully be accused of harassment.
Upon filing the complaint, and throughout the investigation process the complaining employee
should be assured that the City of Auburn policy and the law prohibit any retaliation for making a
good-faith complaint of harassment, even if it is later determined that harassment did not occur. The
Human Resource Director or designee shall promptly investigate the complaint by:
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 40-7
General Personnel Policy
CHAPTER 40
1. Confidentially informing the alleged harasser of the nature and substance of the complaint, and
obtaining the alleged harasser's side of the story or explanation.
2. Obtaining additional evidence or facts by interviewing any possible witnesses, other alleged
victims, and co-workers, while disclosing as little about the case as is feasible in order to
preserve confidentiality.
3. Determining the validity of the complaint ordinarily within five working days of receiving the
complaint. Exceptions to the five working days requirement shall apply only if the complainant,
alleged harasser, or witnesses are unavailable for interview, and then only to the extent
absolutely necessary to make a fair determination of the facts.
If the Human Resources Director or designee finds a lack of harassment, all parties shall be
promptly notified of that fact. The parties to be notified include the complainant, the alleged
harasser and each person known to have learned of the identity of the alleged harasser during
the investigation of the complaint.
If the Human Resources Director or designee finds the complaint to be true, the Human
Resources Director, Department Head, and/or other appropriate personnel as deemed
appropriate shall determine the penalty to be imposed against the harasser, and any remedies
to be given to the victim in order to cure the discrimination that occurred. The Human
Resources Director, Department Head, or designee shall promptly notify all parties involved of
the decision, penalty, and remedy.
Either the complaining employee or the alleged harasser has the right to appeal the decision of
the Human Resources Director or designee by filing an appeal with the Board of Works within
five days of receiving the decision of the Human Resources Director or designee. The City of
Auburn Employee Complaint and Appeal Procedures will apply, including the right to an appeal
hearing before the Board of Works.
Department Heads and Supervisors who become aware of any potential violation of this policy
must report the potential violation to the Human Resources Director, Clerk-Treasurer, or their
designee. Failure to report potential violations will result in appropriate discipline, up to and
including discharge.
No action will be taken against any employee because he or she reports behavior, in good faith,
believed to violate this policy. All employees are assured that action will be taken to investigate
and resolve complaints and that the City is firm in its commitment to maintaining an environment
free of discrimination and harassment.
If an employee believes there may be a conflict of interest in the investigation and/or the
decision making process, an alternative process, agreeable to all parties, will attempt to be
reached.
Violations of this policy will not be tolerated and will result in appropriate disciplinary action, up
to and including termination.
40.06 NON-DISCRIMINATORY SERVICE POLICY
The City is committed to ensuring that all citizens, visitors, contractors, suppliers, or other individuals who
are served by the City or provide products or services to the City are treated with the highest regard
irrespective of their race, sex, age, color, religion, national origin, ancestry, disability, or any other category
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 40-8
General Personnel Policy
CHAPTER 40
protected by law. It is the responsibility of all managers and employees to treat all persons equally in
providing service to them.
All individuals will be provided the same rights, privileges, and services, unless an individual's medical
condition poses a direct threat to the health and safety of the individual, employees, or the public, or disrupts
the orderly flow of the City's business.
40.0 SAFETY
The City of Auburn is dedicated to providing a safe and healthy work environment for all of our employees
and citizens. The City will follow operating practices that will safeguard employees, the general public, and
City operations.
While the City of Auburn will maintain its safety policy in fact and in force, each City department shall have
on file a comprehensive and complete specific safety manual.
Each department shall originate its safety manual specific to their individual operation and shall appoint one
person as the department “Safety Representative” to facilitate the procedures for safety in the workplace.
Each department shall enforce its safety policies and maintain accurate records of all safety activities.
City Management (Mayor, Clerk-Treasurer, and Department Heads)
1. Provide staffing, funds, time, and equipment so that employees can work safely and efficiently.
2. Demand safe performance from each employee and express this demand periodically and
whenever the opportunity presents itself.
3. Delegate the responsibility for a safe performance to the Safety Committee, Supervisors, and
Employees, as appropriate.
4. Hold every employee accountable for safety and evaluate performance
accordingly.
5. Advise management, supervisors and employees on safety policies and
procedures.
6. Coordinate with Human Resources to assure enforcement of the City's
drug/alcohol testing program.
7. Assist Human Resources in the review of job specifications and job analysis to determine
physical factors for specified job classifications and job descriptions.
8. Seek out alternative work so that injured employees can return to work in a
modified duty job.
9. Post signs, notices, and instructions as needed or required.
10. Periodically review Safety Program effectiveness and results.
Safety Committee / Department Representative
1. Provide resources, direction, and audits to integrate safety into the management system.
2. Establish and maintain a safety education and training program.
3. Periodically conduct safety surveys, meetings, and inspections.
4. Assure that all newly hired employees have been given a thorough orientation concerning
his/her department and the City's overall Safety Program in coordination with Human
Resources.
5. Prepare and maintain safety records, analysis, evaluations, and reports to improve the City's
safety performance and comply with all insurance regulations and internal procedures.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 40-9
General Personnel Policy
CHAPTER 40
6. Work with management, supervisors, and employees to maintain & implement new and ongoing
safety programs and comply with recommendations provided by outside consultants and
insurance companies.
7. Review all accidents with management, supervisors, and/or employees and ensure that
corrective action is taken immediately.
Supervisors
1. Establish and maintain safe-working conditions, practices, and processes.
2. Observe work activities to detect and correct unsafe actions.
3. Ensure that all injuries are reported promptly and cared for properly.
4. Ensure proper completion of “First Report of Injury” and process as indicated
in Code Section 40.08 Section 1.8.
5. Review all accidents with the Safety Committee Representative and the employee to correct the
causes immediately.
6. Investigate all accidents promptly using the prescribed investigation form.
7. Consistently enforce safety rules/regulations, programs, and protective
measures (i.e. use of personal protective equipment, machine guarding,
proper clothing, etc.)
8. Brief employees of any new hazards before they start work and host periodic brief safety
meetings to discuss safety practices related to job hazards and safe work behavior specific to
your department.
9. Work with management, safety committee and employees to maintain & implement new and
ongoing safety programs and comply with IOSHA regulations and recommendations provided by
outside consultants.
Employees
1. Comply with all City of Auburn safety programs, rules, regulations, procedures, and instructions
that are applicable to his/her own actions and conduct.
2. Refrain from any unsafe act that might endanger him/herself or fellow workers.
3. Use all safety devices and personal protective equipment provided for his/her protection.
4. Report all hazards, incidents, and near-miss occurrences to their immediate supervisor and/or
Safety Committee Representative, regardless of whether or not injury or property damage was
involved.
5. Promptly report all injuries and suspected work related illnesses, however slight, to his/her
immediate supervisor.
6. Participate in safety committee meetings, training sessions, investigations, and surveys as
requested and provide input into how to improve safety.
7. Notify your Supervisor, Department Head or Safety Committee representative immediately of
any change in physical or mental condition or use of prescription drugs that would affect your
job performance or the safety of yourself or others.
8. Notify the Department Head and/or Human Resource Director or designee within five days of
any serious driving, drug/alcohol, or criminal convictions.
9. Be a safe worker on (and off) the job. Help coworkers do their job safely. Come to work every
day with a safe attitude.
Everyone is accountable for safety. Management, Supervisors and the Safety Committee will establish
safety objectives and develop accident prevention activities. All employees should strive to reach those
objectives.
Safety suggestions from employees are welcomed and encouraged. To make a safety suggestion, obtain a
suggestion form from your Safety Committee Representative or the City's Intranet, complete the form, and
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 40-10
General Personnel Policy
CHAPTER 40
return it to your Safety Committee Representative. The suggestion will be reviewed by the Safety Committee
at their next meeting. Responses to suggestions will be discussed with the employee and documented by
the Safety Committee and maintained on file.
Personal Protective Equipment:
1. In accordance with the Occupational Safety and Health Administrator rules, the City of Auburn
is responsible for providing all necessary personal protective equipment (PPE).
2. The department head shall determine what personal protective equipment is necessary and
provide the proper fit and training.
40.08 EMPLOYEE ACCIDENTS/WORKERS' COMPENSATION
All accidents, which include any event that is not expected, foreseen, or intended, must be reported
immediately to your supervisor. The accident must be reported whether or not there is personal or physical
damage involved. A near miss, where the potential for injury or damage exists, is to be reported as well.
Accidents and near misses are investigated to eliminate unsafe conditions and unsafe acts,: If your
supervisor is not available, report the accident or near miss to the Department safety representative, your
Department Head, or Human Resources. The employee then must provide a written statement as to the
facts and circumstances surrounding the accident or injury.
Any injury that happens on the job or on City property or while conducting City business, no matter how
slight, must be, reported immediately to your department head, assistant superintendent, or their designee,
so you may receive prompt and proper medical attention. The supervisor must promptly report the accident
to the Department safety representative, your Department Head, or Human Resources. You may be
required to go to a City-chosen physician for initial treatment and any City-required follow-up examination. If
supervision determines that medical attention is needed, you must comply with the supervisor's decision.
Refusal to have medical attention will result in possible discharge.
If an injury requires you to be absent from work or to incur medical costs, you must contact your department
head or designated safety representative for the appropriate forms to be completed and processed for
worker's compensation. The Indiana Worker's Compensation First Report of Employee Injury/Illness (State
Form No. 34401) must be completed on the same day as the injury. Updated forms are kept on the city
networking system and/or in a department location designated by the department head i.e., break room,
front office, etc.
This form must be completed in its entirety and must be detailed as to the place (including address), time,
date, and circumstances surrounding how the injury occurred. This form must be submitted to the
Department Head or Assistant Superintendent or person designated by the department head, such as the
department safety representative.
The form must be faxed, hand delivered or a delivery method that ensures receipt by Human Resources
within 24 hours or less. This report must be completed immediately if the injury results in death of an
employee on the job if this means phoning or paging management at home. The Department Head will
make sure the form is forwarded to the proper persons.
All non-life-threatening injuries that you feel need medical attention need to be treated at the City's
designated medical facility. In case of a medical emergency i.e. life threatening injury; you are to go to the
DeKalb Memorial Hospital Emergency Room, or other appropriate facility.
Please understand that it is very important that you fill out a workman's compensation claim any time you
think you have been injured or have become ill and it was caused by a circumstance of your work. Even if
you do not seek immediate medical attention you must still fill out a report. It is better to fill out a worker's
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 40-11
General Personnel Policy
CHAPTER 40
comp form and not need to use it than it is not to fill one out and then find out that you in fact have been
injured.
Failure to fill out a report in a timely manner or filling out a claim several days after you realize that you in
fact injured yourself and now need medical attention could cause a denial of the worker’s compensation
claim. Also failure to follow policy and procedures could result in denial of the worker’s compensation claim
and/or disciplinary action, up to and including termination.
(Please see Code Section 40.07 (Section 1.7) Safety and your department’s Safety Standards and
Procedures Manual)
Any deliberate, misleading and/or false reporting of a work related injury could result in immediate
termination from employment with the City of Auburn.
40.09 WORKPLACE VIOLENCE
The City of Auburn has a policy of zero tolerance for violence. If you engage in any violence in the
workplace, or threaten violence in the workplace, your employment can be terminated immediately for
cause. No talk of violence or joking about violence will be tolerated.
“Violence” includes physically harming another, shoving, pushing, harassing, intimidating, coercing,
brandishing weapons, and threatening or talking of engaging in those activities. It is the intent of this policy
to ensure that everyone associated with the city, including employees, vendors, visitors and citizens, never
feels threatened by any employee's actions or conduct.
The purpose of this policy is to minimize the potential risk of personal injuries to employees or to others and
to reduce the possibility of damage to City property in the event someone, for whatever reason, may be
unhappy with a City decision or action by an employee or member of management.
The City will initiate a decisive and appropriate response to inappropriate behavior. This response may
include, but is not limited to, suspension and/or termination of a business relationship, reassignment of job
duties, suspension or termination of employment, and/or criminal prosecution of the person(s) involved.
All employees are responsible for notifying their Department Head, Supervisor or Human Resources of any
possible violations of this policy. Possible violations include threatening, intimidating, malicious, or violent
behavior of which an employee has been the target, has witnessed, or has heard about from another
individual if the behavior is job-related or has been or might be carried out on City property. Employees are
responsible for making this report regardless of the relationship between the individual who initiated the
inappropriate behavior and the person who was the target of the behavior.
If you receive or overhear any threatening communications from an employee or outside third party, report it
to your supervisor at once. Do not engage in either physical or verbal confrontation with a potentially violent
individual. If you encounter an individual who is threatening immediate harm to an employee or anyone else
on our premises, contact an emergency agency (such as 911) immediately.
All reports of work-related threats will be kept confidential to the extent possible, investigated, responded to,
and documented. Employees are expected to report and participate in an investigation of any suspected or
actual cases of workplace violence.
The City expects all employees to help create a safe and secure work environment and reduce the risk of
threatening, intimidating, malicious, or violent behavior that may affect the City's employees and those who
interact with its employees by complying with the letter and spirit of this policy.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 40-12
General Personnel Policy
CHAPTER 40
Workplace security measures
In an effort to fulfill this commitment to a safe work environment for employees, citizens, vendors and
visitors, all. visitors and visitor vehicles must register with the office of the department or city facility and
display identification while on the property.
All weapons banned
The City of Auburn specifically prohibits the possession of weapons on the person of any employee
while on the work premises with only exception being job-related requirements. Employees are also
prohibited from carrying a weapon while performing services off the city business premises
Weapons include guns, knives, explosives, and other items with the potential to inflict bodily harm.
Employees who are required to carry common or reasonable pocket knives, cutting tools, etc., in
furtherance of their job duties shall not be in violation of this policy.
This policy shall comply with and be applied consistently with Indiana Code provisions regulating the
possession of firearms in accordance with Indiana Code 34-28-7 et al. as from time to time amended.
Training programs
As part of its commitment to preventing workplace violence, the City has established training programs
for all employees. Training will be included as part of your orientation. Thereafter, you will be scheduled
for periodic refresher training.
Please be advised that training is mandatory and attendance will be taken. If you fail to attend training or
make-up sessions, you will be subject to suspension without pay until training is completed.
Education offerings
In order to promote a peaceful working environment, we encourage supervisors and employees to enroll
in courses/seminars to learn more about working with each other. Courses covering communication,
problem solving, building effective working relationships, stress management, and related or similar
course topics may be offered in house through IPTV or outside seminars where appropriate.
Violence prevention
If you have suggestions for ways to improve the safety and security at work, please complete an
employee suggestion form and send to Human Resources for processing. The Department Head or
Safety representative will work with Human Resources to address suggestions and/or concerns.
ARTICLE 2 - GENERAL INFORMATION
40.11 ELECTRONIC INFORMATION SYSTEMS POLICY
E-mail, computer, and voice mail systems are City property and are intended for business, not
personal, use. The systems are not to be used for personal use unless specifically authorized.
Employees have no right of privacy as to any information or file maintained in or on City's property
or transmitted or stored through City's electronic information systems or other technical resources.
The City strives to maintain a workplace free of harassment and is sensitive to the diversity of its
employees and customers. Therefore, the City prohibits the use of its electronic information
systems in ways that are unlawful, disruptive, offensive to others, or harmful to morale. For
example, the display or transmission of images, messages, and cartoons that may offend others
because of their sex, race, age, national origin, disability, or religion is prohibited. Such misuse
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 40-13
General Personnel Policy
CHAPTER 40
includes, but is not limited to, ethnic or racial slurs, racial or sexual comments or jokes, or any other
communication that shows disrespect for others on the basis of sex, race, national origin, disability,
religion, or age.
Employees should remember that when they are using the City's electronic information systems,
they are creating City documents by using City property. These documents are not private and may
be read by others at the City and, under some circumstances, by others outside the City.
Employees should also be aware that even though a message may be deleted from the system, a
record of it may remain either on the daily backups of all data or in other ways. It is possible to recreate
a “deleted” message. Therefore, ultimate privacy of messages is not assured to anyone.
Violations of this policy may result in disciplinary action up to and including termination. Employees
learning of any misuse of the City's electronic information systems or a violation of this policy must
notify the City of such misuse or violation immediately.
For related and additional information, please see the City's Network Policies and Procedures.
40.12 COOPERATION WITH INVESTIGATIONS
From time to time when problems such as theft, dishonesty, violence, safety violations and accidents,
destruction of property, or alcohol or drug use, or other matters of concern arise, the City may require your
full cooperation in an investigation. All employees requested to cooperate in such an investigation are
expected, as a condition of employment, to cooperate fully. Such cooperation may include but not limited to
submitting to searches for cause of your personal property while at work such as a personal vehicle. Note
there is no reasonable expectation of privacy regarding city property. This rule is for the protection of
employees, the City, and the Citizens of Auburn.
40.13 PERSONAL APPEARANCE
The City believes that appropriate dress and personal grooming create a favorable image for the City. You
are expected to maintain high standards of personal cleanliness and attire. Personal cleanliness includes
regular bathing, dental hygiene, and freshly laundered clothing. The City reserves the right to determine that
particular attire is inappropriate for its business and to inform you of this and ask that your attire be changed
if it is not appropriate.
Those employees working in departments or areas with a prescribed uniform must wear such uniforms at all
times while on-duty unless specifically excused by the Department Head.
40.14 SMOKING
In order to provide a smoke-free workplace in all City of Auburn buildings and city owned vehicles, smoking
will not be allowed except in designated outdoor areas. There shall be no smoking in the city buildings, city
vehicles, or any indoor areas.
40.15 ATTENDANCE/PUNCTUALITY
The City requires employees to report for work punctually as scheduled by their supervisor and to work all
scheduled hours and any required overtime. Excessive or habitual tardiness and poor attendance will not be
tolerated.
Employees should not clock in prior to the scheduled work period. Employees who clock in after the
scheduled work time will be considered tardy.
1. Excused Absence
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 40-14
General Personnel Policy
CHAPTER 40
For any absence to be considered “excused,” you must notify your supervisor PRIOR to the starting
time of your regular shift or at a time established by the supervisor. Exceptions will be made only in
unusual or extenuating circumstances. If your immediate supervisor is not available, another
member of management must be contacted.
Excused absences require prior supervisor approval except in unusual or extenuating
circumstances. Excused absences include generally:
a. Family and Medical Leave
b. Military service
c. Jury service
d. Sick leave
e. Bereavement leave
f. Personal leave
g. Vacation
h. Approved Unpaid Leave
i. Any absence excused by a particular State or Federal law
2. Unexcused Absence
An unexcused absence occurs when you fail to notify your supervisor you will be unable to work or
your absence is unapproved. You will not be paid for unexcused absences.
If you are absent from work for three consecutive days with an unexcused absence and without
notification, you will be considered as having voluntarily quit. At that time, the City will advise the
employee of the termination of the employment relationship by certified mail.
40.16 CELLULAR PHONE POLICY
This policy outlines the use of personal cell phones at work, the personal use of business cell phones and
the safe use of cell phones by employees while driving.
Personal Cellular Phones
1. While at work employees are expected to exercise the same discretion in using personal cellular
phones as is expected for the use of other City of Auburn phones. Excessive personal calls, text
messaging, and mobile web use during the workday, regardless of the phone used, can
interfere with employee productivity and be distracting to others. A reasonable standard the City
of Auburn encourages is to limit personal calls during work time. Employees are therefore asked
to make any other personal calls to non-work time where possible and to ensure that friends
and family members are aware of the City's policy. Flexibility will be provided in circumstances
demanding immediate attention.
2. The City of Auburn will not be liable for the loss of personal cellular phones brought into the
workplace.
Personal Use of City of Auburn-Provided Cellular Phones
1. Where job or business needs demand immediate access to an employee the
City may issue a business cell phone to an employee for work-related communications. In order
to protect the employee from incurring a tax liability for the personal use of this equipment, such
phones are to be used for business reasons only. Phone logs will be audited regularly to ensure
no unauthorized use has occurred. The department head is responsible for monitoring usage of
department cellular phones.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 40-15
General Personnel Policy
CHAPTER 40
2. Employees in possession of City of Auburn equipment such as cellular phones are expected to
protect the equipment from loss, damage or theft. Upon resignation or termination of
employment, or at any time upon request, the employee may be asked to produce the phone for
return or inspection. Employees unable to present the phone in good working condition within
the time period requested (i.e. 24 hours) may be expected to bear the cost of a
replacement.
3. Employees who separate from employment with outstanding debts for equipment loss or
unauthorized charges will agree to reimburse the city or authorize a payroll deduction from
his/her last paycheck for the loss. Otherwise the employee will be considered to have left
employment on unsatisfactory terms and may be subject to legal action for recovery of the loss.
Safety Issues for Cellular Phone Use
1. Employees whose job responsibilities include regular or occasional driving and who are issued
a cell phone for business use are expected to refrain from using their phone while driving.
Safety must come before all other concerns. Regardless of the circumstances, including slow or
stopped traffic, employees are strongly encouraged to pull off to the side of the road and safely
stop the vehicle before placing or accepting a call. If acceptance of a call is unavoidable and
pulling over is not an option, employees are expected to keep the call short, use hands-free
options if available, refrain from discussion of complicated or emotional discussions and keep
their eyes on the road. Special care should be taken in situations where there is traffic;
inclement weather or the employee is driving in an unfamiliar area.
2. Employees whose job responsibilities do not specifically include driving as an essential function,
but who are issued a cell phone for business use or use of a personal cell phone while on city
work time, are also expected to abide by the provisions above. Under no circumstances are
employees allowed to place themselves at risk to fulfill business needs.
3. Employees who are charged with traffic violations resulting from the use of their phone while
driving will be solely responsible for all liabilities that result from such actions.
4. Violations of this policy will be subject to discipline up to and including termination.
Special Responsibilities for Managerial Staff
As with any policy, management staff is expected to serve as role models for proper compliance with the
provisions above and are encouraged to regularly remind employees of their responsibilities in
complying with this policy.
ARTICLE 3 - DEPARTMENTS, UTILITIES & ADMINISTRATIVE DIVISIONS
40.21 DEPARTMENTS
The departments in the City of Auburn include;
1. Engineering;
2. Legal;
3. Police;
4. Fire;
5. Building, Planning and Development;
6. Parks & Recreation Superintendent;
7. Street/Recycling;
The City of Auburn operates the following utilities;
1. Electric;
2. Water;
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 40-16
General Personnel Policy
CHAPTER 40
3. Water Pollution Control.
40.22 GENERAL DUTIES OF DEPARTMENT HEADS
The department head serves as the chief administrator of that particular department. Supervisors and
Administrative staff may assist the department head. Some of the general duties of all department heads
include:
To become informed or aware of Federal, State, and local laws, and/or regulations affecting their
department;
To assume control of their department and its activities;
To function as a team with Human Resources to interview, recommend, and/or hire, as the case
may be, candidates for employment to fill any vacancies that exist within their department;
To serve as an instructional leader in training employees in the department;
To work with the supervisory staff in performing their duties;
To maintain all records requested by law, rule, regulations, or request of Human Resources, the
Mayor and Clerk-Treasurer,
To maintain good working relationships with the employees in the department in order to promote
good morale and incentives for good workmanship;
To attend all meetings and activities as required by law or request of the Mayor and Clerk-
Treasurer;
To provide information needed for the purpose of purchasing necessary equipment and supplies for
their department and to promote bulk purchasing to save city funds when possible by working with
other departments as a team effort.
To supervise office personnel in their department;
To keep all personnel informed on City matters;
To submit budget needs to the Mayor and Clerk-Treasurer;
To maintain the department within the fiscal bounds of the annual adopted budget for their
department;
To cooperate with all City of Auburn departments, administrative division, and assist other
department heads in performing the duties necessary;
To promote positive public relations between the City of Auburn and the citizens of Auburn;
To see that all City policies are followed;
To promote all safety measures to insure the health and welfare of the employees in the
department;
To evaluate the performance of all employees in the department and make recommendations to
Human Resources concerning promotion, classification, suspensions, demotions, and/or dismissals;
To promote the philosophy of the “Management Team Concept.”
40.23 ADMINISTRATIVE DIVISIONS
PURCHASING
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 40-17
General Personnel Policy
CHAPTER 40
As set forth by I.C. 5-22. The purchasing agency ensures that the City of Auburn follows
requirements set forth by I.C. 5-22. The agency provides for the protection of offers, status of
documents as public records, allows for unobstructed evaluation of offers, provides public records
status of bids, and prepares a register of proposals.
HUMAN RESOURCES
The purpose is to provide effective Human Resource Management by developing and implementing
policies and procedures, programs and services which contribute to the attainment of City of Auburn
Government and employee goals by:
1. Properly balancing the needs of the employees and the needs of the City.
2. Ensuring a diverse workforce in a safe and discrimination/harassment free environment by:
maintaining compliance with all local, state and federal employment laws and government
regulations; providing management and employee training;
3. Providing training and development in areas of: effective leadership and career development of
employees, employment law and government regulation.
4. Facilitate the process of hiring the most qualified employees by: preplanning staffing needs;
ensuring an effective internal interview process; increasing city visibility in the employment
marketplace; identifying the best and most cost effective recruitment sources; and conducting
thorough reference checks.
5. Retaining our valued employees by: assuring effective leadership qualities in our managers;
providing competitive wages and benefits; furnishing technical, interpersonal and career
development training and coaching; conducting exit interviews and supplying relevant feedback
to management; and enhancing two-way communication between employees and management.
6. Ensure an active safety and loss prevention program is in place.
INFORMATION SYSTEMS (IS)
Information Systems exists to identify, design, implement, support and maintain the technology and
systems used in the delivery of city services. The primary systems include:
1. Voice/Video/Data Network Infrastructure;
2. Geographic Information Systems;
3. Computing;
4. Internet/Intranet Websites;
5. Telephony and Messaging; and
6. Electronic Security Systems
IS provides technical support and training for users of City systems. IS also works with departments to
evaluate and redesign processes that can benefit from properly applied technology.
ARTICLE 4 - EMPLOYEES
40.31 GENERAL RESPONSIBILITIES TO CITY
Some of the Responsibilities City employees have is:
Be polite and courteous in their professional contacts with the public;
Understand the job for which they have been hired;
Be punctual in their working hours;
Have respect for their Supervisors, Department Heads, and fellow employees;
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 40-18
General Personnel Policy
CHAPTER 40
Fulfill their duties to the best of their ability;
Be reliable and on the job every day if able;
Be honest and trustworthy;
Treat confidential information appropriately;
Abide by all of the City's applicable policies and procedures.
40.32 EMPLOYEE CLASSIFICATIONS
It is the policy of the City of Auburn to classify employees as full-time, part-time, or temporary/seasonal and
as exempt (salary) or nonexempt (hourly) for the purposes of compensation administration. In addition, the
City of Auburn may supplement the regular workforce, as needed, with other forms of flexible staffing.
Human Resource Director is responsible for classifying employees.
Employees generally may be categorized as follows:
1. A full-time employee is an individual who works a normal 40-hour workweek. A full-time
employee may be classified as either exempt (salary)or nonexempt (hourly).
2. A part-time employee is an individual who is regularly scheduled to work less than a normal
workweek. A part-time employee may be classified as either exempt (salary) or nonexempt
(hourly).
3. A temporary employee generally is an individual who is hired either part-time or full-time for a
specified, limited period of time, such as seasonal or occasional. A temporary employee may
be classified as either exempt (salary) or nonexempt (hourly).
4. A nonexempt employee generally is subject to the minimum wage and overtime provisions of
the Fair Labor Standards Act (“FLSA”) and is typically paid either on an hourly or salary basis.
5. An exempt (salary) employee is exempt from the provisions of the FLSA and is not entitled to
overtime pay. Exempt employees typically are paid on a salary basis and include
administrative, executive, and professional employees, and certain highly skilled computer
professionals.
6. Other flexible staffing classifications or arrangements may be added as needed.
All employees, regardless of classification, and unless otherwise required by governing authority, are
generally considered to be employed “at-will” and may quit or may be terminated at any time and for any
lawful reason.
Employees are further assigned to pay classifications as follows:
1. Exempt Salary Employees:
There four (4) classifications of exempt salary employees: Executive, Administrative, and
Professional, and Learned Professional. These employees are exempt from the overtime
requirements of the Fair Labor Standards Act. Other employees may be classified as exempt
salaried employees on a case-by-case basis. Exempt salary employees are expected to work a
regular schedule of five workdays, without regard to the number of hours per day or per week. As an
exempt employee, hours of service to the City of Auburn will fluctuate depending upon service
demands.
a. Executive:
Those employees who have as their primary duty the management of the city itself or a
particular department within the city. Exempt employees regularly direct the work of two or more
full-time employees which may include: interviewing, selecting, training and evaluating, handling
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 40-19
General Personnel Policy
CHAPTER 40
complaints, and imposing discipline; planning and assigning work; and determining the
techniques to be used.
b. Administrative:
Those employees who have as their primary duty the performance of office or non-manual work
directly related to management policy or general city operations; and customarily and regularly
have the day-to-day authority to make independent choices from immediate direction of
supervision with respect to matters of significance.
c. Professional:
Those employees who have as their primary duty work requiring advanced knowledge of a type
required through specialized study; and their work requires the consistent exercise of discretion
and judgment.
d. Learned Professional:
Those employees who have as their primary duty work requiring knowledge of an advanced
type in a field of science or learning customarily acquired by a prolonged course of specialized
intellectual instruction.
2. Administrative Non-Exempt Employees:
Those employees whose positions are part time or full time administrative, clerical, or support staff
in nature and who are paid based on an established per hour basis. These employees are not
exempt from the Fair Labor Standards Act, and do receive overtime pay at the rate of time and onehalf
for all hours worked in excess of 40 per week.
3. Hourly Employees:
Those employees who are part time or full time and paid based on an established per hour basis.
These employees are not exempt from the Fair Labor Standards Act, and do receive overtime pay at
the rate of time and one-half for all hours worked in excess of 40 per week.
4. Law Enforcement & Fire Protection Employees:
Those employees who are paid according to special rules under the Fair Labor Standards Act and
defined as Public Safety and Emergency Personnel.
5. Others: Those individuals who are not full-time, but are paid a nominal payment. These
individuals may include, but are not limited to Volunteer Firefighters, Police Reserves, and
Board Members.
40.33 COMPENSATION POLICY
Establishment of Pay System
City of Auburn compensates employees in accordance with decisions by the City of Auburn
Common Council, as budgets are set. Pay for any given position is subject to the annual budgetary
process and, as such, may be subject to increase, reduction, or status quo maintenance for any
time period. The department head or administrator may make suggestions about salary
compensation and other pay system concerns. The Common Council, pursuant to Indiana Law,
shall adopt a salary ordinance annually.
Compensation ranges fixed under this law may not be increased during the budget year to which it
is fixed.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 40-20
General Personnel Policy
CHAPTER 40
City of Auburn reserves the right to change compensation for any reason deemed appropriate by
the City of Auburn Common Council. Compensation may also be adjusted based upon job
performance and the availability of funds to maintain a solvent City of Auburn budget.
The Clerk-Treasurer may, pursuant to the Salary Ordinance, fix the salaries of
deputies and employees appointed by the Clerk; and
The Mayor may, pursuant to the Salary Ordinance, fix the salaries of Department Heads and
employees appointed by the Mayor.
40.34 WORKING HOURS
EMERGENCIES:
All employees are subject to be called to duty and must respond to emergency calls, in a reasonable
time, unless physically unable to do so.
STAND-BY
1. Scheduling of stand-by employees shall be established by the Department Head.
2. The rate of pay is established by the City Common Council.
BREAKS
Workplace Accommodations for Nursing Mothers
The City of Auburn will make a reasonable effort to provide employees who are nursing mothers a
private place to express breast milk, as well as, an appropriate place to store expressed milk.
The City of Auburn shall:
1. Provide a reasonable paid break to an employee who needs to express breast milk for her infant
child; the break time must, if possible, run concurrently with any break time already provided by
city policy;
2. Make a reasonable effort to provide a private space, other than a toilet stall, in close proximity
to the work area, for nursing mothers to express breast milk; and
3. Make reasonable efforts to provide a refrigerator or other cold storage space for expressed
breast milk.
40.35 COMPENSATION
PAY PERIOD
The pay period is every two-weeks as established by the Clerk-Treasurer. Employees will be paid on
Thursday for the two-week period ending on the previous Saturday. Honesty in the use of reporting time
is absolutely essential. Falsification of reported time will result in discipline up to and including
termination.
PAY SCHEDULE
Paychecks are issued by the office of the Clerk-Treasurer.
REPORTING HOURS WORKED
1. Employees will use the prescribed time keeping system to properly record the time that he/she
has worked during a payroll period and any lunch period as prescribed by the State Board of
Accounts.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 40-21
General Personnel Policy
CHAPTER 40
2. No employee shall record time in or out at any time for another employee without the approval
of the department head.
3. At the end of each pay period, the employee will review and approve his or her time report and
verify as accurate.
4. The department head or designated supervisor will also verify and approve the time reports
indicating that the hours claimed were actually worked. Reports may also be verified by
electronic technology.
5. Employee shall be ready for work at the regular scheduled work time.
COMPENSATORY TIME
Wherever compensatory time is referred to in this policy the following procedure will be used.
1. The section is in accordance with 29 USC 207(0).
2. The City of Auburn may provide compensatory time in lieu of monetary compensation at the rate
of one and one-half times the overtime hours worked.
3. Compensatory time shall be taken within a reasonable time, generally not to exceed three
months, so long as it will not be disruptive to the orderly administration of the City.
4. All compensatory time earned and used shall be recorded and reported to the Clerk-Treasurer
5. Unused compensatory time will be compensated upon resignation, termination, and retirement.
PAYROLL DEDUCTIONS
No payroll deduction will be made from an employee paycheck unless authorized by the employee or
required by law. Employees are required to report changes in family status, address or other information
that could affect the amount of deductions withheld. These include Social Security and income taxes,
retirement system contributions, court-ordered child support and any other deductions required by law.
Additionally, deductions may be authorized for employee contribution to benefit plans if applicable such
as supplemental health insurance, supplemental insurance and deferred compensation plans requested
by the employee.
Exempt (Salary) Pay Policy
In accordance with the Fair Labor Standards Act regulations, exempt (salary) employees who are
required to be paid on a salary basis may not have their pay reduced for variations in the quantity or
quality of work performed. Employees who feel their pay has been improperly reduced should report
this immediately following the procedures specified below.
1. Exempt (salary) employees normally must receive their full salary for any work in which they
perform any work, without regard to the number of days or hours worked. However, exempt
(salary) employees need not be paid for any work week in which they perform no work at all for
the city.
2. Deductions from pay cannot be made as a result of absences due to the circumstances listed
below.
a. Jury duty.
b. Attendance as a witness.
c. Temporary military leave.
d. Absences caused by the city operating requirements.
e. Partial day amounts.
3. Deductions from pay may occur as a result of the following, as long as the deductions are
consistent with other city policies and practices
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 40-22
General Personnel Policy
CHAPTER 40
a. Absences of one or more full days for personal reasons other than sickness or disability
when all vacation and personal time has been exhausted.
b. Fees received by the employee for jury or witness duty or military leave may be applied to
offset the pay otherwise due to the employee for the week.
c. Penalties imposed by infractions of safety rules of major significance.
d. Unpaid disciplinary suspensions of one or more full days in accordance with the city
disciplinary policy (Does not apply to discipline for performance or attendance issues).
e. Deductions for the first and last week of employment, when only part of the week is worked
by the employee, as long as this practice is consistently applied to all exempt (salary)
employees in the same circumstances.
f. Deductions for unpaid leave taken in accordance with a legitimate absence under the
Family and Medical Leave Act (See Code Section 40.36 – Leaves – F. Family Medical
Leave Act.)
VACATION PAY
1. Vacation pay is money paid for a day of vacation used in place of a regular workday. These
days are granted according to the vacation leave schedule found in Sections 41.00, 42.00 and
43.00 of this policy.
2. All vacation pay is calculated from work time reported by each employee pursuant to the
prescribed time keeping system. When an employee takes vacation leave in place of “clocking
in” the time report should reflect this.
3. Vacation pay is not calculated separate from nor in advance of the regular pay dates, except
when an employee is terminated.
HOLIDAY PAY
1. The City of Auburn designates certain days to be observed as paid holidays. Temporary,
seasonal, occasional part-time or full time employees do not qualify for paid holidays. However,
regularly scheduled part-time employees will receive holiday pay calculated by the average
hours per day worked.
2. The following days shall constitute paid holidays:
a. New Years' Day;
b. Memorial Day;
c. Independence Day;
d. Labor Day;
e. Thanksgiving Day;
f. Day following Thanksgiving;
g. Christmas Day; and
h. Floating Holiday to be determined by the Mayor at the beginning of each calendar year.
3. To be eligible to receive holiday pay, the employee must be present on their scheduled working
day preceding the paid holiday and on their first scheduled working day following the paid
holiday. All categories of benefit days will count as being present the day before and/or after a
holiday.
4. If any holidays fall on a Saturday, the preceding Friday shall be the observed holiday. If any
holiday falls on a Sunday the following Monday shall be the observed holiday. This practice may
be altered if designated different by the Mayor prior to the holiday.
EMPLOYEE TRAVEL AND/OR BUSINESS EXPENSE REIMBURSEMENT
The Department Head is authorized to evaluate requests from employees (other than the Department
Head) to attend conferences or educational training sessions, and/or meetings, and will approve or
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 40-23
General Personnel Policy
CHAPTER 40
reject said requests. Requests shall be in writing and approval/denial shall be in writing. Approval or
denial shall be made on the basis of:
1. The Department Head's opinion as to the value of the request to the City of
Auburn.
2. Adequate funds being available in the current budget appropriation to cover said expenses.
Expenses covered by said approval shall be as follows:
a. The employees of the City shall be reimbursed for mileage traveled on business on behalf of
the City or its several departments in a sum equal to that allowed by the Internal Revenue
Service for business travel purposes as from time to time amended. Any change in mileage
allowance rates shall become effective at such time as they are published as regulation of
the Internal Revenue Service, or the actual costs of public transportation whichever is less if
public transportation is used. (This section does not apply when a City owned vehicle is
used).
b. Actual cost of lodging at the rate of a single person for that particular lodging;
c. Registration/conference fees charged for the conference or meeting;
d. Actual cost of meals charged by the conference;
e. Per diem for meals shall be actual costs as per receipts not to exceed
$50.00 per person, per day, including tips and gratuities. This per diem are subject to any
further restrictions placed by department heads.
f. Miscellaneous expenses which would include, but not limited to:
i. Toll costs;
ii. Communication costs;
iii. Parking costs;
iv. Other;
g. Alcoholic beverages shall not be submitted for reimbursement.
3. Proper receipts must be filed with the Clerk-Treasurer's Office together with a properly signed
claim; and
4. All requests for trip reimbursement must have prior approval of the Department Head.
5. Requests for reimbursement by Department Heads must be submitted to, and approved by the
Mayor.
40.36 LEAVES
GENERAL INFORMATION
1. The Clerk-Treasurer will be responsible for maintaining permanent records available for public
inspection for all leaves within this policy that has been earned or accumulated and the leave
time requests granted or denials of leave days and absences due to use of leave.
2. If an employee has accrued paid time off under this policy at the time he or she requests a
leave under the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993 (“FMLA”), and if the requested leave
would otherwise qualify for paid time off under this policy, the employee will receive paid time
off accrued under this policy at the same time as FMLA leave. In that event, the employee's
available time off under this policy, as well as the employee's FMLA leave entitlement, will be
reduced by the period of the leave. After an employee requests an FMLA leave, the Employer
will notify the employee that paid time off under this policy will be provided during the
employee's FMLA leave. For a further explanation of this coordination, see Code Section 40.36
(Section 4.6.F.7) “Substitution of Paid Leave” in the FMLA policy.
VACATION
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 40-24
General Personnel Policy
CHAPTER 40
1. The official vacation period is calculated on date of hire.
2. During subsequent years of continuous full time employment, the employee receive paid
vacation under the guideline set forth in Sections 41.00, 42.00 and 43.00.
3. Vacation time must be taken in the year when the employee is eligible. Except for special
circumstances approved by the Board of Public Works and Safety, vacations must be actually
taken. Vacation time does not accumulate from year to year, and unused time is lost at
anniversary year's end. Any special requests to the Board of Works and Safety to carry over
vacation into a new anniversary year must be before the year ends in which it was earned. City
employees receive no vacation time during the first year of employment. The first year that
vacation is available to employees is in year two (2) of employment.
4. Vacation leave will be granted at a time, which is mutually acceptable to the employee, and the
Department Head, consistent with the nature of the service provided by the department in which
the employee is employed.
5. An employee's vacation time shall be considered as hours worked for the purpose of
determining vacation leave eligibility.
6. An employee who has vacation benefits and has not received them because of resignation,
termination, death, or other reason shall receive benefits upon separation. In case of death,
benefits shall be paid to the estate of the employee as may be appropriate by the statutes of the
State of Indiana.
SICK LEAVE
1. Sick leave is a benefit granted to an employee as a protection in the event of
personal illness or family illness.
2. The employee or someone on their behalf shall notify the department head of the absence of
the employee prior to the scheduled start time of the employee's shift.
3. Upon separation from the employment of the City for any reason, Employees will not be
compensated for accumulated sick leave.
PERSONAL LEAVE
1. At the end of the calendar year, for non-exempt (hourly) employees, up to 16 hours maximum of
accumulated personal leave time will be carried over to the next year's personal leave time. Any
hours remaining greater than 16 shall be converted to sick leave time and accumulated as per
the policy on sick leave time. If an employee already has 180 days of sick leave accumulated,
or if the conversion of personal leave causes an employee to reach 180 days, any excess
personal time is lost.
2. Employees who resign or are terminated in any way will not be compensated for personal leave
not used.
BEREAVEMENT LEAVE
1. In the event of a death in the immediate family, the full time non-exempt employee will receive
up to three (3) working days leave with their regular pay rate and hours. Salary exempt
employees will receive up to three days leave toward the week worked.
2. Immediate family shall be defined as:
a. Spouse;
b. Son/Daughter or stepson/stepdaughter;
c. Mother/Father or stepmother/stepfather;
d. Any family member residing in the same household;
e. Grandparents of the employee;
f. Mother-in-law or Father-in-law;
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 40-25
General Personnel Policy
CHAPTER 40
g. Son-in-law or Daughter-in-law;
h. Brother or Sister;
i. Grandchildren;
j. Anyone who has stood in loco parentis to the employee or to whom the employee stands or
has stood in loco parentis.
3. In the event of a death of any other relative or close friend, a personal or vacation day privilege
should be utilized.
4. Additional time without pay may be granted after all benefit days have been used upon request
to the Department Head. (See Code Section 40.36 “Leave Without Pay”.
5. Bereavement Leave time off will be considered as workdays in calculating hours worked, the
same as other benefit days.
FAMILY MEDICAL LEAVE
1. Policy
The City of Auburn complies with all applicable federal and state labor laws, including the Family
and Medical Leave Act (FMLA) of 1993. Under the FMLA, eligible employees are entitled to certain
rights, and have certain obligations, with respect to leave for certain family and medical reasons.
This policy covers all eligible employees of the City of Auburn.
2. FMLA Leave Eligibility
To be eligible, under the FMLA must meet all of the following conditions:
a. The employee must have worked for the City of Auburn for 12 months, or 52 weeks. The 12
months, or 52 weeks, need not have been consecutive.
b. The employee must have worked at least 1,250 hours during the twelve-month period
immediately before the date when the leave is requested to commence. The principles
established under the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) determine the number of hours
worked by an employee. The FLSA does not include time spent on paid or unpaid leave as
hours worked. However, the City of Auburn does count vacation, personal and sick paid
time toward hours worked for overtime under the FLSA. These hours will be counted in
determining the 1,250 hours eligibility test for an employee under FMLA.
3. Reasons for FMLA Leave
To qualify as FMLA leave under this policy; an employee must be taking leave for one of the
following reasons:
a. Parenting Leave: for the birth of a child and to care for the newborn child; or a child newly
placed in the employee's custody through adoption or foster care, for a period of up to one
year after such birth or adoption;
b. Family Medical Leave: to care for the employee's spouse, child, or parent who has a
serious health condition; or
c. Employee Medical Leave: due to the employee's own serious health condition, if that
condition renders the employee unable to perform his/her job functions. This would include
conditions covered by both Worker's Compensation and Sickness and Accident leaves.
Any leave taken by an eligible employee for one or more of these reasons will be counted against
that employee's annual FMLA leave entitlement.
4. Serious Health Condition
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 40-26
General Personnel Policy
CHAPTER 40
For the purpose of determining whether an eligible employee or his or her spouse, child, or parent
has a serious health condition, such a condition includes any illness, injury, or physical or mental
condition that requires either in-patient care in a medical facility, i.e., hospital, hospice, or residential
medical care facility, or any subsequent treatment in connection with such inpatient care or a
condition, which requires continuing care or treatment by a licensed health-care provider.
This policy covers illnesses of a serious and long-term nature, resulting in recurring or lengthy absences.
Generally, a chronic or long-term health condition, which, if left untreated, would result in a period of
incapacity of more than three days, would be considered a serious health condition.
5. Continuing treatment by a health care provider is defined as:
a. Any period of incapacity that is more than three consecutive days in duration and requires
two or more treatments by a health care provider or one treatment by a health care provider
followed by a regimen of continuing treatment.
b. Any period of incapacity due to pregnancy, or for prenatal care.
c. Any period of incapacity or treatment for such incapacity due to a chronic serious health
condition. (A chronic serious health condition involves periodic visits to a health care
provider for treatments, continues over an extended period of time and may cause episodic
periods of incapacity such as occurring with diabetes, asthma, and epilepsy.)
d. A period of incapacity, which is permanent or long-term due to a condition for which
treatment may not be effective (i.e., Alzheimer's disease).
e. Any period of absence necessary to receive multiple treatments by a health care services
provider under orders of, or on referral by, a health care providers, either for restorative
surgery after an accident or other injury, or for a condition that would likely result in a period
of incapacity of more than three consecutive calendar days in the absence of medical
intervention or treatment.
Employees with questions about what illnesses are covered under this FMLA policy are encouraged to
consult with the Human Resource Director or designee.
6. Duration of Leave
An eligible employee is entitled to take a total of 12 weeks of leave (based on the employee's
normal hours per week) during a 12-month period.
If an employee takes paid sick leave for a condition that progresses into a serious health condition
and the employee requests unpaid leave as provided under this policy, the City of Auburn may
designate all or some portion of related leave taken as leave under this policy, to the extent that the
earlier leave meets the necessary qualifications.
The City of Auburn will measure the twelve-month period as a rolling 12-month period measured
backward from the date an employee uses any leave for reasons set forth under this policy. An
employee may only take Parenting Leave during the 12-month period that begins on the date of the
birth, adoption or placement, and the leave must be continuous. Each time an employee takes
leave, the City of Auburn will compute the amount of leave the employee has taken under this policy
and subtract it from the 12 weeks of available leave, and the balance remaining is the amount the
employee is entitled to take at that time.
If two parents of a child both work for the City of Auburn, and each wishes to take either parenting or
Family Medical Leave, the parents of the child may only take a combined total of 12 weeks of leave.
7. Use of Unpaid or Substitution of Paid Leave
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 40-27
General Personnel Policy
CHAPTER 40
Generally, FMLA leave is not paid. If however, an eligible employee also has accrued or earned paid
leave of other types from the City, and if the employee's leave request meets the requirements of
that paid leave program, the employee will receive paid leave benefits at the same time as he/she is
receiving FMLA leave benefits. Generally, an employee will use sick, personal and vacation time in
that order. Similarly, if an employee properly requests leave available under a paid leave program
for a purpose that is also covered by FMLA leave, the employee will receive FMLA leave benefits at
the same time as paid leave benefits. The City will “substitute” paid leave for FMLA leave by
counting the paid leave toward FMLA leave entitlement.
If FMLA leave lasts only as long as an employee's substituted paid leave, then the employee needs
only to meet the notice and certification requirements of that leave plan. If the paid leave is followed
by an unpaid FMLA leave, however, the employee must fulfill all the requirements for taking FMLA
leave.
An employee who is taking leave because of the employee's own serious health condition or the
serious health condition of a family member must use all paid vacation, personal or sick leave prior
to being eligible for unpaid leave. Sick leave may be substituted for unpaid FMLA leave if the reason
for the FMLA leave is covered by the established sick leave policy.
Parenting leave and leave for an employee's serious health condition, including workers'
compensation leave (to the extent that it qualifies), will be designated as FMLA leave and will run
concurrently with FMLA leave. For example, if an employer provides six weeks of parenting leave,
the six weeks can be designated as FMLA leave and counted toward the employee's 12-week
entitlement. The employee may then be required to substitute accrued (or earned) paid leave as
appropriate before being eligible for unpaid leave for what remains of the 12-week entitlement.
An employee who is taking leave for the adoption or foster care of a child must use all paid vacation,
personal or sick leave prior to being eligible for unpaid leave.
Any paid time must be used concurrent with FMLA until exhausted, except, FMLA prohibits the
substitution of paid leave for leave covered by temporary disability plans or workers' compensation.
However, leave time will be counted toward the FMLA 12-week entitlement.
8. Intermittent or Reduced Schedule Leave
An employee, under certain circumstances, may take intermittent or reduced schedule leave in
increments of no less than one hour. If an employee takes a Parenting Leave, the employee is not
entitled to take leave intermittently or on a reduced schedule. For Family Medical or Employee
Medical Leave, the employee may take an intermittent or reduced schedule leave if it is medically
necessary. An employee must provide to the City certification (forms available from Human
Resources) that a medical need for leave exists and that the medical need can best be
accommodated through an intermittent or reduced schedule leave. Employees needing intermittent
FMLA leave or leave on a reduced leave schedule must attempt to schedule their leave so as not to
disrupt the City's operations. In addition, if an employee requests intermittent or a reduced schedule
leave, the City may require the employee to transfer temporarily to an available alternate position,
with equivalent pay and benefits, for which the employee is qualified and which better
accommodates intermittent or reduced schedule leaves.
9. Procedure for Requesting Leave and Notification Requirements
An employee must notify the City of his/her desire to take FMLA leave at least 30 days before the
date FMLA leave is to begin by requesting and completing a Request for Leave form (except in
cases of medical emergency or unexpected changed circumstances, in which case the employee
must give notice as soon as practicable after the employee is aware that he or she needs to take
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 40-28
General Personnel Policy
CHAPTER 40
FMLA leave). Request for Leave forms can be obtained from the Human Resources Department. At
the time an employee obtains a Request for Leave form, the City will provide the employee with
notification explaining certain rights and responsibilities of the employee regarding FMLA leave.
If an employee request Family Medical or Employee Medical Leave, the employee must submit a
medical certification from the employee's or family member's health care provider within 15 days
after employee receives notification and the proper certification form from the City, or provide a
reasonable explanation for the delay.
Certification of the serious health condition shall include: the date when the condition began, its
expected duration, and a brief statement of treatment. For medical leave for the employee's own
medical condition, the certification must also include a statement that the employee is unable to
perform work of any kind or a statement that the employee is unable to perform the essential
functions of the employee's position. For a family member who is seriously ill, the certification must
include a statement that the patient, the family member, requires assistance and that the employee's
presence would be beneficial or desirable.
If an employee requests to take intermittent leave or work a reduced schedule, the certification must
also include dates, the duration, and schedule of treatment, as well as a statement of medical
necessity for taking intermittent leave or working a reduced schedule.
If an employee fails to give 30 days' notice for a foreseeable leave with no reasonable excuse for
the delay, the City may deny FMLA leave until at least 30 days after the date the employee provides
notice of the need for FMLA leave. After an employee submits a medical certification, the City may
require an employee to obtain a second opinion from a provider of the City's choice and at its
expense. In some cases, the City may require a third opinion from a provider selected jointly by the
employee and the City. The third opinion will be considered final. The employee will be provisionally
entitled to leave and benefits under the FMLA pending the second and/or third opinion.
The City of Auburn has the right to contact the employee's health care provider, with the employee's
permission, to clarify or authenticate the medical certificate, but will not request additional
information.
During FMLA leave, an employee will be required to report periodically on his or her status and
intent to return to work. Medical re-certification may be required under certain specific
circumstances, for example, when an Employee requests an extension for a leave, when
circumstances under an initial certification have significantly changed, or when an employee is
unable to return to work after FMLA leave.
Upon the conclusion of an Employee Medical Leave, the employee must present certification to the
City from his or her health care provider that he or she is able to return to work. Unless and until an
employee provides this fitness-for-duty certification, the employee will not be able to return to work.
10. Continuation of Benefits
As a general rule, FMLA leave is unpaid leave. The City will maintain an employee's coverage under
the City of Auburn Health Plan on the same conditions during FMLA leave as if the employee had
been employed continuously during the FMLA leave period. An employee may choose not to
continue coverage. Even if an employee does not continue health coverage during FMLA, the City
will restore regular coverage if the employee returns to work.
11. Right to Job Restoration
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 40-29
General Personnel Policy
CHAPTER 40
Upon return from FMLA leave, employees will generally be restored to the same or an equivalent
position with equivalent pay, benefits, and other terms and conditions of employment. Certain
salaried, key employees of the City may be denied restoration if their reinstatement would cause
substantial and grievous economic injury to the City. If, during FMLA leave, a layoff or other event
occurs that would have changed, or even eliminated the employee's job had he or she not taken
leave, the returning employee will have no greater rights, than if the employee had been
continuously employed during FMLA leave. The City will determine whether an employee will be
restored to the same position or to an equivalent position.
If an employee chooses not to return to work after his/her FMLA leave expires, the City may recover
its share of health insurance premiums paid on the employee's behalf during the period of FMLA
leave. The City will seek to recover those premiums unless the employee fails to return because of
(1) the continuation, recurrence, or onset of a serious health condition that would otherwise entitle
the employee to FMLA leave; or (2) other circumstances beyond the employee's control. If an
employee fails to return to work because of the continuation, recurrence, or onset of a serious health
condition, the employee must provide a medical certification of his or her serious health condition.
The employee must provide the certification within 30 days from the date the City requests it. If the
employee does not provide the certification in a timely manner, the City may recover its share of the
health insurance premiums paid for the employee during the entire period of FMLA leave.
12. Other Employment
An employee is not permitted to hold other full-time employment while on FMLA leave. If it is
determined that an employee has other full-time employment while on FMLA leave, they will be
considered to have voluntarily terminated their employment with City of Auburn.
13. Armed Forces Medical Leave
The employee will be permitted to take up to 26 work weeks (or 14 weeks beyond the traditional 12
weeks of FMLA) of leave to care for a spouse, son, daughter, parent, or next of kin that is a member
of the Armed Forces, including the National Guard or Reserves, who is undergoing medical
treatment, recuperation, or therapy, is otherwise in outpatient status, or is otherwise on the
temporary disability retired list for a serious injury or illness.
14. Active Duty
Employee will be permitted to take leave for “any qualifying exigency” arising from the employee’s
spouse, son, daughter, or parent on active duty, or has been notified of an impending call or order to
active duty in the Armed Forces in support of a contingency operation.
15. Any qualifying exigency as defined by the Secretary of the Department of Labor.
MILITARY LEAVE
1. The City encourages employees to serve their country by participating in the uniformed
services. If you are called upon to perform military service, whether it involves active duty or
annual training requirements for the National Guard or U.S. Military Reserves, you may be
entitled to reinstatement/reemployment and other rights under the Uniform Services
Employment and Reemployment Rights Act of 1994 (“USERRA”). To qualify for benefits under
USERRA, your separation from military service must be under honorable conditions and you
must comply with the following requirements:
a. Eligibility
This policy applies to any employee who must be absent from employment to perform a duty,
either voluntary or involuntary, in the uniformed services. To qualify under the City's military
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 40-30
General Personnel Policy
CHAPTER 40
leave policy, an employee requesting leave must provide advance written notice to the
department head as soon as possible, and furnish a copy of his/her military orders which
identifies as specifically as possible the time period for the leave.
b. Reinstatement
To be eligible for USERRA benefits upon returning from a military leave lasting fewer than 31
days, an employee must report back to work at the beginning of the first full regularly scheduled
work day following the completion of the military service.
c. Reemployment
To be eligible for USERRA benefits following a military leave lasting:
i. more than thirty (30) days, but less than 181 days, an employee must submit an
application for reemployment before the expiration of fourteen (14) days after the
completion of the military service.
ii. longer than 181 days must submit an application for reemployment before the expiration
of ninety (90) days after the completion of the service.
iii. more than thirty (30) days must provide official military documentation identifying the
period of military service to establish that the application for reemployment was timely
and the character of discharge was honorable.
d. Benefits
Upon reemployment, an employee will be restored to the level of benefits attained had he/she
provided continuous service to the City. As a result, rights and benefits determined by length of
service such as paid time off and longevity pay will reflect continuous employment. In addition,
an employee on military leave will continue to be eligible for health benefits for up to 18 months,
so long as he/she continues to pay a monthly premium according to the following schedule:
i. For leaves of less than 31 days, an employee will be required to pay the normal
employee share of the premium.
ii. For leaves of more than 31 days, an employee will be required to pay the full premium
under the plan.
e. The health insurance premiums will be billed to the employee on a monthly basis. An
employee will have ten days from the date of mailing within which to submit payment of the
amount owed. Failure to make the monthly premium payment in a timely manner shall result
in the cancellation of benefits. Upon reemployment, benefits will be restored.
f. If you have any questions regarding your rights surrounding military leave, please contact
human resources.
2. Military Training Leave
a. An Employee who is a member of the Reserves or the National Guard will receive fifteen
(15) working days per calendar year with no deduction of pay or vacation leave, so as to
enable him/her to fulfill military training obligations.
b. Leave not consumed during the two (2) week training assembly may be applied to weekend
exercises in the same calendar year up to the total of fifteen (15) working days. If more
time is needed, it can be obtained through vacation leave.
c. Written leave requests by the employee are to be made to the Department Head. Upon
return from training, certification from the employee’s commanding officer of performance of
duty in accordance with the terms of the orders must also be filed.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 40-31
General Personnel Policy
CHAPTER 40
In the event that an employee receives official military orders for full-time active duty, the employee will
be entitled to the difference between their military pay and their civilian pay through the City of Auburn
for a period of up to twelve months. Appropriate documentation must be submitted by the employee to
verify active duty status and compensation rate by the military prior to compensation from the City of
Auburn.
If an employee elects to join one of the armed services divisions after their date of hire with the City of
Auburn, the time required for basic/initial training will be treated the same as established in Code
Section 40.36 (Section 4.6) Leaves I. Leave without Pay.
COURT APPEARANCE / WITNESSES
Any employee who is required to appear in court because of a matter involving City business will be
given time to appear without a loss of pay.
LEAVE WITHOUT PAY
1. Leave without pay may be granted as a protection for City employees should
a need arise for extended time off work.
2. Leaves without pay may be granted for any reason. However, the employee should understand
that such leaves will be granted rarely.
3. Employees may be granted leave without pay only if they have exhausted all FMLA leave, or
otherwise have no leave available pursuant to the City's policies.
4. Written notification of requested leave must be made by the requesting employee to the
Department Head prior to the leave, stating:
a. The reasons for the leave, and
b. The anticipated duration with approximate beginning and ending dates.
5. The maximum time an employee may be on leave is six (6) months.
6. Leaves without pay pursuant to this section shall only be granted at the discretion of the
Department Head.
7. An employees' return to work to the same job level, job, or salary level cannot be guaranteed,
but the department which grants the leave has the responsibility of trying to reinstate the
employee to a position as near to the one vacated for the leave, to the extent possible.
8. An employee on leave may be required to give progress reports to the status of their condition
throughout the duration of leave.
9. Leave without pay will not count toward the accumulation of vacation days, sick days, paid
holidays, nor will insurance benefits continue.
40.37 BENEFITS
HEALTH INSURANCE
1. The City of Auburn will provide a health insurance plan for all full-time employees, subject to the
terms and conditions of the plan. Said plan may change from time to time.
2. The level, extent, cost of benefits, and allocation of cost sharing between the city and employee
shall be determined by the Common Council and applicable to all including retirees.
3. Cost sharing schedule applies to all covered employees and retirees based on projected
utilization charges, which are established by the Auburn Common Council.
Retirees hired after January 1, 2004 will share 50% of the cost*.
* Percentage based on projected utilization charges, which is a percentage of overall plan
charges.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 40-32
General Personnel Policy
CHAPTER 40
4. The City hereby appoints the Clerk-Treasurer as Administrator of the Plan, and authorizes
him/her to make deductions from the pay of employees, who voluntarily participate, and to
make any other arrangements necessary to implement the Plan.
5. The City of Auburn adheres to all state and federal guidelines regarding the privacy of
employees' health with protection of health information with limited access.
LIFE INSURANCE
The City of Auburn will provide a term life policy for each full-time employee, subject to the terms and
conditions of the plan. Said policy may change from time to time.
WORKERS' COMPENSATION INSURANCE
The City of Auburn will provide Workers Compensation as prescribed by law. All accidents, on-the-job
injuries, or near misses must be reported and complete prescribed forms accurately and promptly filed
according to guidelines set forth in Code Section 40.08 (Section 1.8). Refer to applicable Code Sections
41.00, 42.00 and 43.00.
DEFERRED COMPENSATION PLAN
The City has a Deferred Compensation Plan as allowed by Indiana Code. Compensation Plan is
repeated here for information purposes only.
1. The Common Council hereby established the City of Auburn Deferred
Compensation Plan (hereafter referred to as the Plan) for the voluntary participation of all
eligible employees and elected officials.
2. The City will operate the Deferred Compensation Plan(s) service providers approved and
accepted by the city of Auburn Board and public Safety to perform service, management, and
enrolment functions.
3. The City appoints the Clerk-Treasurer as Administrator of the Plan, and authorizes him/her to
make deductions from the pay of employees and elected officials who voluntarily participate,
and to make any other arrangements necessary to implement the Plan(s). It is understood that,
other than the incidental expenses of collecting the employees' deferrals and other minor
administrative matters, there is to be no cost or contribution by the City to this Plan.
JOB-RELATED EDUCATION
1. The City may provide education costs reimbursement for job related education.
2. A request in writing for education costs reimbursement shall be made to the Department Head.
3. The Department Head, after consulting with Human Resources and with the approval of the
Mayor, shall decide:
a. If the education relates to the job.
b. If the education will be beneficial to the City.
c. If the education cost can be paid for within the adopted budget for that department.
• Post-Secondary
Upon approval the employee may pay for the tuition cost and complete the education requested.
Upon successful completion of said education with a final grade of “C” or better the employee may
submit a claim for reimbursement. The cost shall be itemized or a statement from the educational
entity can be used.
Other educational programs offered from time to time will be reviewed by the city administration to
determine which program will be endorsed. Programs available and utilized by employees for higher
education will be considered first.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 40-33
General Personnel Policy
CHAPTER 40
• Seminars & Conferences
Registration, books and/or materials and mileage may be reimbursable if the City requests the
employee to attend or with prior approval.
• Professional / Vocational Certifications
Upon approval the employee's job related certifications may be paid for by the city to include
registration program, books and/or materials and mileage will be reimbursable for work related
certifications.
40.38 DRIVING AND USE OF CITY VEHICLES
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1. It is the policy of the City of Auburn to permit certain vehicles to be used for commuting between
personal residence and place of employment, as well as to allow certain employees the use of
vehicles in furtherance of their employment with the City.
2. Each employee of the City of Auburn who is authorized to operate a City vehicle is expected to
utilize that vehicle for official City business exclusively, except when the employee is on call.
3. Except for emergency vehicles on an emergency call, speed limit and motor vehicles statutes
and ordinances shall be followed at all times and places.
4. Each employee who is authorized the use of a City vehicle is required to report any criminal or
non criminal conviction(s) of a traffic violation to Human Resources upon returning to work at
the beginning of the next work shift.
DEFINITIONS
• “REGULATED DRIVER”
Federally regulated as a protection against the potential for catastrophic harm to the public's safety
by “The Federal Motor Carrier Safety Regulations” for Commercial Drivers Licensed Drivers (often
referred to as “CDL drivers”) as regulated by the United States Department of Transportation
(USDOT) and administered by the Federal Motor Carriers Safety Administration (FMCSA) an
agency within the DOT.
• “NON-REGULATED DRIVER”
Licensed driver of a motor vehicle who must drive a city vehicle as part of carrying out the duties of
their job functions or a driver who is authorized or otherwise permitted the use of a city vehicle
during the course of their employment, or while operating City and/or personal equipment in pursuit
of City business.
DRIVER QUALIFICATIONS & STANDARDS FOR DRIVING CONSIDERATIONS
1. A proper valid driver's license must be in the employee's possession at all times.
2. No employee shall drive a city vehicle before a motor vehicle record (MVR) check or any other
local, state, or federal mandate has been reviewed and approved by Human Resources. Motor
Vehicle Records shall be audited on occasion for compliance.
3. Any employee considered or authorized for driving privileges shall meet the standards set forth,
as provided for insurance coverage.
4. When a job description states a person will operate a city vehicle or equipment requiring a
license or certification, the driver must not:
a. have more than three moving violations in the last three years; or
b. have more than one moving violation in the past year; or
c. have a moving violation suspension or revocation of his/her license in the last five years.
d. have any substance or alcohol-related traffic convictions in the last five years.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 40-34
General Personnel Policy
CHAPTER 40
e. have habitual traffic convictions within the last five years.
DISQUALIFICATION OF A DRIVER: SERIOUS “TRAFFIC” VIOLATIONS
1. In the event a driver becomes disqualified and the employee's job description requires a valid
driver licenses to carry out the duties of the primary job hired for [non-regulated or regulated
CDL license] the employee may be terminated from his/her employment with the City of Auburn
according to policies herein and any federal or state regulations governing the use of motor
vehicles. [Examples: FMCSA, DOT, IOSHA, BMV]
2. Serious Traffic Violations that shall disqualify an employee from driving a city
vehicle include: [DOT REGS: Person lose license]
a. Driving any commercial or non-commercial motor vehicle while intoxicated or under the
influence of an illegal, non-prescribed, mind altering substance or refuses to be tested;
b. Driving any commercial or non-commercial motor vehicle with a driver's license that is
suspended or revoked;
c. Causing a fatality through the negligent or criminal operation of any commercial or noncommercial
motor vehicle;
d. Other serious traffic violations while driving a city vehicle:
i. Excessive speeding.
ii. Reckless driving.
iii. Traffic offenses committed in connection with fatal traffic accidents.
3. Other violations that shall subject the driver to disciplinary action up to and
including termination of employment with the City include:
a. Driving a commercial or non commercial motor vehicle without having obtained the proper
license, classification and endorsements.
b. Driving a commercial motor vehicle without a CDL in his/her possession;
c. Any unauthorized use of a City vehicle.
4. Unauthorized use of vehicles may be construed as a misappropriation of City
property subjecting the violator to criminal sanctions.
COMMERCIAL DRIVER RECORDS REQUIREMENTS / INFORMATION
PROCESSING
1. Human Resources will maintain files/records of Commercial Driver's Licensed (CDL) drivers as
determined by rules and regulations of DOT's Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration.
2. The driver shall be responsible for providing the state and Human Resources any necessary
and required forms or CDL related records to include a current Medical Examination Report for
Commercial Driver Fitness Determination (CDL-PHY State Form No. 469867).
3. Any work related physicals, such as Medical Examination Report for Commercial Driver's fitness
can be processed according to the current insurance plan document or method prescribed. CDL
Medical Certification documents are CONFIDENTIAL and shall be treated as any other medical
information with limited access.
4. Commercial Driver's License renewals may be paid for by the City of Auburn Department for
which the employee works when the license is required of the job the employee is currently
holding at the time and is a listed requirement in the job description, or is otherwise indicated in
part of cross-training and job sharing efforts. Prior approval of department and reviewed by the
Human Resource Director or designee is required for cross-training and job sharing.
5. Complete valid medical certification w/card shall be carried at all times along
with the valid Commercial Driver's License while driving a city vehicle.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 40-35
General Personnel Policy
CHAPTER 40
6. It is the driver's responsibility to maintain the qualifications required by USDOT and shall not
operate a City owned vehicle that requires a Commercial Driver's License without the proper
license and valid Medical Certification.
40.39 DRUG AND ALCOHOL POLICY
DRUG FREE WORKPLACE GENERAL INFORMATION
1. The City recognizes that the use and abuse of drugs and alcohol can seriously impair an
employee's ability to perform his/her duties safely and efficiently. Drug and alcohol use and
abuse not only jeopardize the public's and co-workers’ safety, they undermine the public's
confidence in the City, our services, and its people. Because a drug or alcohol impaired
employee can pose a significant threat to the safety of the public and coworkers, as well
as the employee’s own safety, the City has established this policy as part of its ongoing efforts
to maintain a drug- and alcohol-free workplace.
2. The provisions of this policy are established to address the use and possession of alcohol,
controlled substances, physician-prescribed medications and over-the-counter medications by
employees in positions that have been classified as regulated and non-regulated safetysensitive.
However, all employees are expected to report to work free from the influence of
alcohol and illegal drugs and not to sell, distribute, dispense, possess, or use or conspire to sell,
distribute, dispense, possess, or use an illegal drug or alcohol on the City’s premises or during
working time. Likewise, all employees are expected not to misuse or abuse any prescription or
nonprescription medications.
3. Employees using a prescription drug which may impair mental or motor functions so as to affect
the employee's ability to safely perform his/her duties must report the use of that prescription
drug to a Supervisor prior to reporting to work after its use. For the safety of all employees, the
City may place persons using such prescription drugs in a less hazardous job assignment,
provided such assignment is available, or place them on temporary medical leave until released
as fit for duty by the prescribing physician. The City reserves the right to have a physician of its
choice determine if a prescription drug produces hazardous effects or to restrict the
quantity the employee is allowed to bring to the workplace.
4. The City looks to all its employees to support this policy to better the overall safety, health,
productivity, and welfare of all employees. Employees are asked to discourage co-workers from
violating this policy and are expected to cooperate in the City's efforts to enforce this policy and
in any investigation of its violation.
5. The City of Auburn is committed to providing a healthy, safe, efficient, and productive work
environment for all employees and safety of the public. Employees carrying out lawful duties are
exempt from this policy.
DRUG AND ALCOHOL TESTING
This Policy Section shall apply to all employees of the city with specific noted areas of those employees
required to hold and maintain a commercial driver's license (CDL) in order to operate a vehicle or
equipment as part of his/her employment with the City and for those employees occupying safety
sensitive positions.\
In keeping with this commitment, employees and job applicants will be requested to provide body
substance samples (e.g., blood, urine, hair or other body substances) to determine the prohibited use of
marijuana, cocaine, opiates, amphetamines, alcohol, barbiturates, and phencyclidine (PCP).
Results of any drug testing shall remain in the employee's confidential medical or legally designated file.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 40-36
General Personnel Policy
CHAPTER 40
1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
a. CDL (Safety Sensitive)
i. In accordance with DOT/FHWA regulations, included in this classification of safetysensitive
positions are all positions that require an employee to operate a commercial
motor vehicle and/or hold a commercial driver's license.
ii. It is the policy of the City of Auburn to comply with and abide by all laws and regulations
for driver's holding the Commercial Driver's License (CDL) established by PART 382 -
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES AND ALCOHOL USE AND TESTING of the Federal
Motor Carrier Safety Regulations (FMCS) administer-ed by Federal Highway
Administration (FHWA), an agency under the U.S. Department of Transportation (DOT).
iii. In complying with these regulations, the City hereby institutes a comprehensive
controlled substance and alcohol testing, training and record keeping program for
employees in positions that have been classified as CDL/safety sensitive employees
and super-visors as indicated in the requirements of the Federal Motor Carrier Safety
Regulations 382.601.
b. OTHER CITY SAFETY SENSITIVE POSITIONS
i. Law Enforcement, Fire Protection, Public Safety Dispatch Personnel, Meter Readers,
Heavy Machinery or Equipment Operators, Chemical Handling, Park Maintenance, Life
Guards, Building Inspectors, or those who drive on behalf of the City as part of carrying
out their job duties and responsibilities and those employees with take home city
vehicles.
ii. “Safety sensitive” duties are such that even a momentary lapse of attention could have
disastrous consequences (results or risk) to themselves, a co-worker, or the general
public.
c. NON-REGULATED JOB POSITIONS
Those employees not listed in a. and b. sections above are covered within except the random
selection for testing.
TRAINING
1. City shall ensure supervisors designated to determine whether reasonable suspicion exists to
require a employee to undergo testing receive at least 60 minutes of training on alcohol misuse
and receive at least an additional 60 minutes of training on controlled substances use. The
training shall cover the physical, behavioral, speech, and performance indicators of probable
alcohol misuse and use of controlled substances.
2. The materials supplied to employees may include information on additional employer policies
with respect to the use or possession of alcohol or controlled substances, for example, the
consequences for an employee found to have a specified alcohol or controlled substances level
based on the policy herein.
3. City shall ensure that each employee is required to sign a statement certifying that he/she has
received a copy of these materials.
GENERAL PROHIBITED CONDUCT
The following shall be considered “prohibited conduct” for purposes of this policy:
1. REFUSAL TO TEST
A refusal to test is defined to be conduct, which would obstruct the proper administration of a test. A
delay in providing a urine or breath sample could be considered a refusal. If an employee cannot
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 40-37
General Personnel Policy
CHAPTER 40
provide a sufficient urine specimen or adequate breath sample he/she will be evaluated by a
physician of the City's choice. If the physician cannot find a legitimate medical explanation for the
inability to provide a specimen, either urine or breath test, it will be considered a refusal to test. In
that circumstance, the employee has violated the policy.
2. Substitution, adulteration, or refusal to submit to the types of drug and alcohol tests employed
by the City will be grounds for refusal to hire employee/applicants and to terminate employment
of existing employees.
3. ALCOHOL PROHIBITIONS
a. No person subject to this policy shall report to duty or remain on duty while having a blood
alcohol concentration of 0.0200 to 0.0399.
b. No person subject to this policy shall be on duty performing safety sensitive functions or
operate a motor vehicle while using alcohol.
c. No person subject to this policy shall operate a vehicle or perform a safety sensitive function
within eight hours after using alcohol.
d. No person subject to this policy and involved in an accident during working hours shall use
alcohol within eight (8) hours after the accident or until tested.
4. No employee shall refuse to submit to a post-accident, a random, a reasonable suspicion,
return-to-duty, follow-up, or post-injury breath alcohol or urine drug test.
5. GENERAL DRUG PROHIBITIONS
a. No use of illegal controlled substances (and prescription drugs specifically designated by
any federal or state agency) shall occur at any time during or outside of working hours.
b. No employee shall report for duty or remain on duty when the employee uses any controlled
substance, except when use is pursuant to the instructions of a physician who has advised
the employee that the substance does not adversely affect the employee's ability to operate
a commercial motor vehicle or perform a safety sensitive function.
TYPES OF TESTS
The City has implemented six circumstances for drug and alcohol tests: (1) pre-employment testing, (2)
reasonable suspicion, (3) random testing, (4) post-accident testing, (5) return-to-duty testing, and (6)
follow-up testing.
1. PRE-EMPLOYMENT TESTING
a. Each individual who is offered and accepts employment must successfully pass a drug
and/or alcohol test as a condition of employment.
b. CDL additional information
i. Within 14 days of performing a safety- sensitive function, federal regulations require that
the City obtain certain drug and alcohol testing records from employee's previous
employers for the previous two years of employment.
ii. As a condition to employment, the employee shall provide the City with a written
authorization for all previous employers within the past two years to release such drug
and alcohol testing records as are required under federal regulation.
2. REASONABLE SUSPICION TESTING
Reasonable suspicion is when a trained supervisor observes behavior or appearance that is
characteristic of alcohol or substance abuse and therefore a test shall be performed.
a. Reasonable suspicion for requiring an employee to submit to drug and/or alcohol testing
shall be deemed to exist when an employee manifests physical or behavioral symptoms or
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 40-38
General Personnel Policy
CHAPTER 40
reactions commonly attributed to the use of controlled substances or alcohol. Such
employee conduct must be witnessed by at least one supervisor who has been formally
trained in Reasonable Suspicion.
b. All employees of the city shall be requested to submit to a drug or alcohol test when either
the department head or other trained supervisor has reasonable suspicion that the
employee has used alcohol or drugs or is impaired from the use of alcohol or drugs during
his/her employment with the City.
c. In the event that an employee is requested to submit to a drug test, the elected official,
department head, or trained supervisor shall complete the appropriate form provided by
Human Resources setting forth the observations leading to the determination of reasonable
suspicion including the following:
i. Observation of drug or alcohol use;
ii. Observation of drugs, alcohol, or containers traditionally used for drugs or alcohol;
iii. Observations of behavior of the employee, including balance, speech, reactions, and
other characteristics supporting reasonable suspicion of use of drugs or alcohol or
impairment by drugs and alcohol;
iv. A pattern of abnormal or erratic behavior by the employee; or,
v. Information provided by reliable or credible sources of the above.
3. RANDOM TESTING
Tests shall be performed on a random unannounced basis just before, during or just after driving or
performing duties of employment. Employees shall be selected from a pool, dates unannounced,
and tests performed with unpredictable frequency and the number of tests performed.
a. CDL-REGULATED
i. The City will random drug test, at a minimum, 50 percent of the average number of
safety sensitive/mandated positions in each calendar year. The City will select, at a
minimum, 25 percent of the average number of safety sensitive/mandated positions for
random alcohol testing. The random selection, by its very nature, provides an equal
chance for each employee to be selected each time random selection occurs in a
calendar year. Alternatively, some employees may not be selected in a calendar year.
Random selections will be reasonably spread throughout the year.
ii. Alternatively, some employees may not be selected in a calendar year. Random
selections will be reasonably spread throughout the year.
iii. If an employee is selected at random, for either drug or alcohol testing, human
resources, a member of management, or other official of the City official will notify the
employee. Once notified, every action the employee takes must lead to a collection. If
the employee engages in conduct that does not lead to a collection as soon as possible
after notification on, such conduct may be considered a refusal to test.
b. NON-CDL REGULATED
i. Non-regulated employee random testing will occur in “safety sensitive occupations,”
including Law Enforcement, Fire Protection, Public Safety Dispatch Personnel, Meter
Readers, Heavy Machinery or Equipment Operators, Chemical Handling, Park
Maintenance, Life Guards, Building Inspectors, or those who drive on behalf of the City
as part of carrying out their job duties and responsibilities and those employees with
take home city vehicles.
ii. The random selection, by its very nature, provides an equal chance for each safety
sensitive employee to be selected each time random selection occurs in a calendar
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 40-39
General Personnel Policy
CHAPTER 40
year. Alternatively, some employees may not be selected in a calendar year. Random
selections will be reasonably spread throughout the year. Unlike CDL regulated, non
CDL regulated testing percentages may vary dependent upon testing results and overall
city drug free work environment.
4. POST-ACCIDENT / INJURY TESTING
Post-accident tests shall be conducted after accidents on employees whose performance could
have contributed to the accident and other criteria.
a. Post-accident or injury alcohol and drug testing shall be required when any city employee is
involved in an accident or injury on City property, during the course of their employment, or
while operating City and/or personal equipment or vehicles in pursuit of City business which
results in:
i. Accident results in a fatality; or
ii. Injuries requiring medical treatment other than minor first aid or
iii. damages to vehicle or equipment that require the city to pay for repairs;
iv. A driver is involved in a recordable accident and receives a citation for a moving
violation arising from the accident; or
v. Accident results in one or more vehicles being disabled to the extent that it must be
towed from the scene.
vi. Post-accident tests may include screens for both drugs and alcohol.
b. Following any accident, the employee must contact the department head and/or human
resources immediately or as soon as able as testing will be required as soon as possible
following the accident.
c. If no alcohol collection can be made within eight (8) hours, attempts to collect a sample
shall cease and human resources or designee will document reasons and consequences, if
applicable.
d. If no urine collection can be obtained for purposes of post-accident drug testing within
thirty-two (32) hours, attempts to make such a collection shall cease and human resources
or designee will document reasons and consequences, if applicable. All attempts
documented shall be reviewed by human resources for the appropriate action or non-action
as applicable.
e. In the event an employee is so seriously injured that the employee cannot provide a urine
specimen or breath sample at the time of the accident, the employee must provide
necessary authorization for the City to obtain hospital records or other documents that
would indicate whether there were controlled substances or alcohol in the employee system
at the tune of the accident.
f. In the event that federal, state, or local officials conduct breath or blood tests for the use of
alcohol and/or urine tests for the use of controlled substances following an accident, these
tests shall be considered to meet the requirements of this section, provided the tests
conform to a applicable federal, state, or local requirements. The employee will sign a
release allowing the City to obtain the test results from federal, state, or local officials.
5. RETURN TO DUTY TESTING
Following evaluation and treatment, if any, an employee cannot be returned to duty until he/she has
been evaluated by a substance abuse professional, has complied with recommended rehabilitation
and has a negative result on a return to work test.
MANDATORY SANCTIONS BASED ON POSITIVE TEST RESULTS
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 40-40
General Personnel Policy
CHAPTER 40
1. If the employee subject to this policy tests positive, that person must be removed from duty. A
0.04 blood alcohol content or greater is considered positive and subject to disciplinary action
and up to termination. The employee will be provided the opportunity to seek a substance abuse
evaluation.
2. If the employee has an alcohol test result between 0.200 and 0.399, the employee shall be
removed from safety-sensitive functions for 24 hours without pay.
SUBSTANCE ABUSE EVALUATION
1. Any employee who engages in prohibited conduct shall be provided with names, addresses,
and telephone numbers of qualified substance abuse professionals. If the employee desires to
become re-qualified, the employee must be evaluated by a Substance Abuse Professional
(SAP) and submit to any treatment prescribed by the SAP. Following evaluation and treatment,
if any, in order to become re-qualified the employee must submit to and successfully complete a
return-to-duty drug and/or alcohol test.
2. Such an employee is also subject to follow-up testing.
FOLLOW-UP TESTING
1. Follow-up testing is separate from and in addition to the City's reasonable suspicion, postaccident,
post-injury, property damage and random testing procedures.
2. CDL - Follow-up testing shall be on a random basis and be in accordance with the instructions
of the Substance Abuse Professional. Follow-up testing may continue for a period of up to 60
months following the employee's return to duty. No fewer than six tests shall be performed in
the first 12 months of follow-up testing, i.e., CDL regulations.
3. Other Safety Sensitive positions. Follow-up testing shall be on a random basis and be in
accordance with the instructions of the Substance Abuse Professional. Follow-up testing may
continue for a period of up to 60 months following the employee's return to duty.
4. The costs of any SAP evaluation or prescribed treatment and follow up testing shall be borne by
the employee.
HOW TEST CONDUCTED
1. ALCOHOL TESTS
The City will perform alcohol tests using an evidential breath-testing device. The City may provide
use of an evidential breath-testing device through a vendor or agent. The employee shall report to
the site as notified by human resources, a member of management, or other official of the City. A
breath alcohol technician will operate the evidential breath-testing device. The employee shall follow
all instructions given by the breath alcohol technician.
2. DRUG URINALYSIS
Drug testing will be performed through urinalysis. Urinalysis will test for the presence of drugs and/or
metabolites of the following controlled substances: (1) marijuana, (2) cocaine, (3) opiates, (4)
amphetamines, (5) phencyclidine (PCP).
The Urinalysis procedure starts with the collection of a urine specimen. Urine specimens will be
submitted to a SAMHSA-certified laboratory for testing. As part of the collection process, the
specimen provided will be split into two vials: a primary vial and a secondary vial. The SAMHSAcertified
laboratory will perform initial screenings on all primary vials. In the event that the primary
specimen tests positive, a confirmation test of that specimen will be performed before being reported
by the laboratory to the MRO as a positive.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 40-41
General Personnel Policy
CHAPTER 40
All laboratory results will be reported by the laboratory to a Medical Review Officer (MRO)
designated by the City. Negative test results shall be reported by the MRO to the human resources
director or designated management personnel indicated in advance by the human resource director.
Before reporting a positive test result to the human resources director, the MRO will attempt to
contact the employee to discuss the test result.
If the MRO is unable to contact the employee directly, the MRO will contact the human resources
director or designated management personnel indicated in advance by the human resources
director, who shall in turn contact the employee and direct the employee to contact the MRO.
Upon being so directed, the employee shall contact the MRO immediately or, if after the MRO's
business hours and the MRO is unavailable, at the start of the MRO's next business day. In the
MRO's sole discretion, a determination will be made as to whether a result is positive or negative.
Pursuant to FMCSA/DOT regulations, individual test results for applicants and employees will be
released to the human resources director or designee and will be kept strictly confidential unless
consent for the release of the test results has been obtained. Any individual who has submitted to
drug testing in compliance with this policy is entitled to receive the results of such testing upon
timely written request.
An individual testing positive may make a request of the MRO to have the secondary vial tested. A
different SAMHSA-certified laboratory will test the secondary vial than tested the primary specimen.
The individual making the request for a test of the second specimen must pre-pay all costs
associated with the test. The request for testing of a second specimen must be made to the MRO
within 72 hours of the individual being notified by the MRO of a positive test result.
a. A laboratory certified by the Department of Health and Human Services must perform
analysis.
b. Split Specimen must be taken for each test.
c. If the first sample shows drugs, the employee can demand analysis of the second sample
by an independent laboratory of the specimen within 72 hours.
d. All results must be reviewed and interpreted by a Certified MRO before being reported to
the human resources director or designee.
e. If there is a positive result, the physician must contact the employee to
determine if there is an alternative medical explanation for the result before reporting a
“positive” result.
f. The test may be conducted during any time of employment, not just immediately before,
during or after driving or performance of duties of employment.
CONSEQUENCES OF POLICY VIOLATION
Any employee who becomes unqualified or engages in prohibited conduct as set forth herein will be
subject to discipline and/or up to termination of employment depending upon the employee’s eligibility
for employee assistance program for alcohol and controlled substance program; and complies with all
policies herein to include, but not be limited to, follow-up testing.
EMPLOYEE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM - ALCOHOL & CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES PROGRAM.
1. City of Auburn recognizes the policy:
a. To establish and maintain a safe, healthy, working environment for all employees;
b. To insure the reputation of the City of Auburn and its employees as good, responsible
citizens worthy of public trust;
c. To reduce the incidents of accidental injury to person or property;
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 40-42
General Personnel Policy
CHAPTER 40
d. To reduce absenteeism, tardiness, and indifferent job performance;
e. To provide assistance toward rehabilitation for any employee who seeks the City's help in
overcoming any addiction to, dependence upon, or problem with alcohol or drugs.
2. DEFINITIONS
a. Designated Employee Representative (DER) is the Human Resource Director or designee
who administers the Employee Drug & Alcohol program and is the city's primary contact
regarding the program, policy, training & education, etc.
b. Employee Assistance Program means Employee Assistance Program provided by the Board
of Public Works and Safety of the City of Auburn.
3. Entrance into the Assistance Program can occur by self referral, independent recommendation,
or referral by a Department Head.
4. Request for assistance through “recommendation” or “Department Head referral” will be treated
as confidential. “Self referral” confidentiality will be maintained between the individual seeking
help and employee assistance personnel.
5. Employee progress will be monitored by the Designated Employee Representative, in
accordance with all applicable state and federal legislation and ADA confidentiality regulations
6. Rehabilitation itself is the responsibility of the employee. For employees enrolled in a formal
treatment program coverage is provided as set forth in the prescribed Health Plan Document.
7. To be eligible for continuation of employment, the employee must have been employed at least
one year; must maintain regular contact with the Designated Employee Representative; and
must provide certification that he or she is continuously enrolled in a treatment program and
actively participating in that program.
8. Upon successful completion of treatment, the employee will be returned to active status without
reduction of pay or seniority.
9. No employee will be eligible for the Employee Assistance Program more than one time, unless
additional participation would be a reasonable accommodation, not cause an undue burden to
the City of Auburn, and be within business necessity.
40.40 EVALUATION OF WORK
The Department head shall complete formal written evaluations of each
employee's job performance at least once a year. This may be done more often than once a year
at the discretion of the Department Head.
The Department Head will provide each employee a copy of the evaluation form at least one week
prior to the time of the formal evaluation meeting.
The written evaluation form will be placed in the employee's personnel file and a copy will be given
to the employee.
Official employee files will be kept CONFIDENTIAL. Access shall be limited by, federal and/or state
statute.
An employee shall have the right to enter a written statement into his/her personnel file on any
matter in the file that they consider to be inaccurate or irrelevant. If the request for correction or
addition of information is denied, then the employee shall have the right to appeal.
The Department Head and Supervisor of the employee are responsible for completion of timely and
accurate evaluations of employees.
Evaluations may not always be tied to an increase in pay or intended to be done for an increase in
pay. Evaluations are encouraged as a coaching and learning tool for employees.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 40-43
General Personnel Policy
CHAPTER 40
40.41 PERSONNEL CONDUCT / RULES
The City of Auburn wishes to create a work environment that promotes job satisfaction, respect,
responsibility, and value for all of our employees, citizens, vendors and other stakeholders. Every employee
at City of Auburn has a shared responsibility toward improving the quality of the work environment.
By agreeing to work at the City of Auburn, the employee agrees to follow the City of Auburn's rules
and to refrain from conduct, which is detrimental to our goals. The prohibited conduct that is listed
below is not an inclusive list, as the City of Auburn cannot, with foresight, determine what
inappropriate conduct under every circumstance is. Moreover, the City of Auburn does not limit its
right to discipline or discharge employees to the prohibited conduct listed below.
Violation of the prohibited conduct set forth below, or any other conduct deemed inappropriate by
management, may subject you to disciplinary action, including oral or written warnings, suspension
without pay, transfer or possible termination If you have any questions about your personal conduct
or that of any fellow employee, immediately consult your department head, supervisor, or human
resources if needed for clarification.
The following list contains examples of conduct considered improper which may result in discipline, including
termination. Again, note this is not a complete list and understand that other behaviors may also result in
discipline or termination.
1. Possessing, using, selling, negotiating the sale of a controlled substance at any time, or being
under the influence of alcohol, drugs or other controlled substances on City of Auburn property
(including City of Auburn vehicles), in City of Auburn uniform or on City of Auburn business. Any
Department Head or Supervisor, who does not relieve an employee, suspected of being under
the influence of alcohol, drugs, or chemicals, will be subject to disciplinary action.
2. Falsification of the hours worked by you or any other employee. Falsification of any other
employment related document including, but not limited to, personnel files, employment review
documents, intra-City of Auburn communication, communications with those outside the City of
Auburn, expense records, etc.
3. Theft or destruction of City of Auburn property or that of visitors, citizens or fellow employees.
4. Possession of potentially hazardous or dangerous property, such as firearms, weapons,
chemicals, etc., without prior authorization or job duties .
5. Fighting with, or harassment of, any fellow employee or citizen.
6. Unauthorized or excessive use of City of Auburn property or property of any visitors, citizens,
fellow employees, including but not limited to, vehicles, supplies, telephones, mail, credit/debit
cards, tools, equipment and computers.
7. Disclosure of City of Auburn confidential or proprietary information of the City of Auburn, its
citizens or fellow employees.
8. Insubordination, including but not limited to, refusal to perform a requested or required job task.
9. Failure to follow, or general neglect of, safety rules and procedures.
10. Excessive tardiness or absences.
11. The taking of unauthorized overtime.
12. Solicitation of fellow employees while on the job (during work time).
13. Failure to dress appropriately as defined by the department standard operating procedures and
guidelines set forth for job responsibilities. For example, a uniform provided by the city must be
worn during working hours, proper safety attire, etc. (See Code Section 40.13.Section 2.3)
14. Failure to keep your workplace in a neat and sanitary condition.
15. Use of obscene or otherwise inappropriate language or conduct in the work
place.
16. Failure to provide medical authorizations for medical absences upon request.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 40-44
General Personnel Policy
CHAPTER 40
17. Inappropriate horseplay which is either distracting to fellow employees or which could create
dangers to others.
18. Criminal activity at, or outside of, the workplace.
19. Off-duty conduct that does not serve the best interest of the city's credibility.
20. Outside employment which interferes with your ability to perform your job at this City of Auburn
including, but not limited to, that which could be a conflict of interest that may require approval
of the Board of Works and a Conflict of Interest and Disclosure statement.
21. Gambling on City of Auburn premises.
22. Sleeping or neglect of job duty.
23. Taking unauthorized gratuities of more than a $50.00 value in connection with City of Auburn.
24. Lending keys to City of Auburn property to unauthorized persons or allowing duplicate keys to
be made.
25. Being away from the work area without prior authorization.
26. Harassment of, or discrimination against, an employee, citizen or visitor because of that
person's race, religion, color, sex, sexual orientation age, disability, national origin, or sexual
orientation.
27. Slanderous or libelous statements.
Disciplinary Action
Violation of City of Auburn policies or procedures may result in disciplinary action, including but not
limited to, demotion, transfer, suspension with or without pay, or termination. The City of Auburn
encourages a system of “progressive” discipline depending on the type of prohibited conduct. The City
of Auburn is not required to engage in progressive discipline and may discipline or terminate an
employee where he or she violates the rules of conduct, or where the quality or value of their work fails
to meet expectations. Again, our attempt at progressive discipline does not imply a contract with you or
that your employment is anything other than on an “at will” basis. Unless otherwise required by
governing authority, all City of Auburn employees are employed “at will.” This means that both the City
of Auburn and the employee may terminate the employment relationship at any time, for any reason, or
no reason at all.
As part of a Progressive Disciplinary System, and based on the nature of the employee violation,
management will attempt to provide the employee first with a verbal warning, then one or more written
warnings, and if the conduct is not sufficiently altered, eventual demotion, transfer, forced leave or
termination. Your supervisor will make very effort possible to allow you to respond to any disciplinary
action taken.
Non-compliance of Policy & Procedures shall be reported to Human Resources as soon as practical, the
next work day, or no later than 48 hours, whichever comes first. Management shall discuss and wok with
human resources with disciplinary issues and any potential termination must be reviewed by and processed
with the human resources director or designee. The consequence for not following proper procedure could
result in disciplinary action up to and including termination of employment.
40.411 NEPOTISM
This Chapter applies to all employees of the City of Auburn, Indiana.
An individual who is employed by the City of Auburn on July 1, 2012, is not subject to this chapter
unless the individual has a break in employment with the City. The following are not considered a
break in employment:
1. The individual is absent from the workplace while on paid or unpaid leave, including vacation,
sick, or family medical leave, or worker’s compensation.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 40-45
General Personnel Policy
CHAPTER 40
2. The individual’s employment with the unit is terminated followed by immediate reemployment by
the City of Auburn, Indiana, without loss of payroll time.
For purposes of this chapter, the performance of the duties of:
1. A precinct election officer (as defined in IC 3-5-2-40.1) or
2. A volunteer firefighter; is not considered employment by the City of Auburn, Indiana.
As used in this chapter, “direct line of supervision” means an elected officer or employee who is in a
position to affect the terms and conditions of another individual’s employment, including making
decisions about work assignments, compensation, grievances, advancement, or performance
evaluation. The terms do not include the responsibilities of the executive, legislative body, or fiscal
body of a unit, as provided by law, to make decisions regarding salary. As used in this chapter,
“employed” means an individual who is employed by the City of Auburn on a full-time, part-time,
temporary, intermittent, or hourly basis. The term does not include an individual who holds only an
elected office. The term includes an individual who is a party to an employment contract with the
unit.
As used in this chapter, “member of the fire department” means the fire chief or a firefighter
appointed to the department.
As used in this chapter, “member of the police department” means the police chief or a police
officer appointed to the department.
As used in this chapter, “relative” means any of the following:
1. Spouse.
2. A parent or stepparent.
3. A child or stepchild.
4. A brother, sister, stepbrother, or stepsister.
5. A niece or nephew.
6. An aunt or uncle.
7. A daughter-in-law or son-in-law.
8. A brother-in-law or sister-in-law.
For purposes of this section, an adopted child of an individual is treated as a natural child.
For purposes of this section, the terms “brother” and sister” include a brother or sister by the half
blood.
An annual report filed by the City of Auburn, Indiana with the state board of accounts under IC 5-11-
13-1 must include a statement by the executive unit stating whether the City of Auburn, Indiana has
implemented a policy under this chapter.
Individuals who are relatives may not be employed by the City of Auburn, Indiana in a position that
results in one (1) relative being in the direct line of supervision of the other relative.
1. This section applies to an individual who:
a. Is employed by the City of Auburn on the date the individual’s relative begins serving a term
of an elected office of the City; and
b. Is not exempt from the application of this chapter.
c. An individual may remain employed by the City of Auburn and maintain the individual’s
position or rank even if the individual’s employment would result in the relative being in a
direct line of supervision of the other relative
An individual described in this chapter who is a relative may not:
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 40-46
General Personnel Policy
CHAPTER 40
1. Be promoted to a position; or
2. Be promoted to a position that is not within the merit ranks, in the case of an individual who is a
member of a merit police department or merit fire department. if the new position would result in
the direct line of supervision of a relative as defined herein.
3. This chapter does not abrogate or affect an employment contract with the City of Auburn that:
a. An individual is a party to; and
b. Is in effect on the date the individual’s relative begins serving a term of an elected office of
the City.
Each elected officer of the City of Auburn shall annually certify in writing, subject to the penalties for
perjury, that the officer has not violated this chapter. An officer shall submit the certification to the
executive of the City of Auburn not later than December 31 of each year
Failure to properly administer this policy will result in the state board of accounts finding that the
City of Auburn has not implemented or does not maintain a nepotism policy.
If the City of Auburn fails to implement a nepotism policy, the department of local government
finance may not approve:
1. The City’s budget; or
2. Any additional appropriations for the City; for the ensuing calendar year until the state board of
accounts certifies to the department of local government.
40.42 APPEAL PROCEDURE
See Sections covered 41.00; 42.00; and 43.00
ARTICLE 5 - COMMUNITY PUBLIC RELATIONS
40.51 PUBLIC RELATIONS RESPONSIBILITIES
The City Administration shall plan, stimulate, and organize a continuous program of accurate and
reliable public information which will define and explain the activities of the City to the public, in
order that the citizens of Auburn will fully understand the city's needs and programs.
Complaints from citizens should be handled by the Department Head in charge of the department
involved. However, such complaints may be carried to the Mayor if they cannot be solved at the
department level.
All public News Releases should be cleared through Department Heads, and/or the Mayor, and/or
Clerk-Treasurer, prior to their release.
Each employee is a good-will ambassador for the City of Auburn and as such should promote the
welfare of the City to the public.
Each employee should inform their Department Head of any public problem, which comes to their
attention in order for the City to solve problems.
40.52 SOCIAL NETWORKING / INTERNET USAGE
The City of Auburn recognizes that Social Networking (such as personal web sites, blogs, Facebook,
MySpace, Twitter, online group discussion, text messaging, message boards, chat rooms, etc.) can be used
by employees for City business purposes. The City also understands how the use of internet social network
sites and blogs can shape the way the public views our services, employees, vendors partners and citizen
customers. The City respects the right of any employee to maintain a blog or post a comment on social
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 40-47
General Personnel Policy
CHAPTER 40
networking sites. However, the City is also committed to ensuring that the use of such communications
serves the needs of the city business and the citizens by maintaining the City’s identity, integrity, and
reputation in a manner consistent with our values and policies. Therefore, the City of Auburn has established
the following rules and guidelines for communicating City-related information over Social Networking forums:
Personal Blogging or Social Networking while at work on City work time.
Working time is your scheduled time of work, not including lunch hour, breaks or time prior to or after
your shift. The City prohibits use of social networking sites during working time, unless said networking
is par of an official City function.
Legitimate Business Purposes
Any employee engaging in Social Networking of Blogging for legitimate business purposes on behalf of
the City of Auburn, Indiana must receive express approval of all content with the appropriate supervisor
before posting. Employees engaged in blogging or networking for legitimate business purposes on
behalf of the City of Auburn, Indiana are responsible for complying with all City of Auburn policies.
Discrimination and Harassment
The City of Auburn is firmly committed to its equal employment opportunity policies and does not
condone or tolerate discrimination. The City of Auburn also prohibits all forms of unlawful harassment.
Employees are prohibited from engaging in any conduct, activities, communication or postings that
violate City of Auburn policies regarding discrimination and harassment. No messages with derogatory
or inflammatory remarks about any legally protected characteristic shall be transmitted or retrieved. No
abusive, profane or offensive language is to be transmitted. Any conduct which is impermissible under
the law if expressed in any other form or forum is also impermissible if expressed through blogs, social
networks, text messages or other electronic means.
Right to Monitor
The City of Auburn reserves the right to monitor all City of Auburn, Indiana sponsored business blogs
and social networking forums for the purpose of protecting its interests and monitoring compliance with
City of Auburn policies. If activity is found to be compromising, insubordinate or adverse to the City of
Auburn’s legitimate business interests, the City of Auburn may require cessation and removal of any
detrimental commentary or postings. The City of Auburn reserves the right to access any City of Auburn
computers and electronic communication devices to monitor blogs and on-one websites. Employees
should not maintain any expectation of privacy with respect to information transmitted over, received by,
or posted on such sites.
Reporting
If an employee believes that a blog or other online communication violates any City of Auburn policy, the
employee should immediately report the blog or online communication to the department of human
resources. The City of Auburn may investigate the matter, determine whether such blog, posting,
website, or communication violate the City of Auburn policies, and take appropriate action.
Violations of Policy
Any employee who violates this policy may be subject to disciplinary action, up to and including
termination. Additionally, violations of this policy may result in criminal prosecution, reimbursement of
expenses incurred as a result of the violation, and additional legal action.
ARTICLE 6 - AMENDMENT PROCEDURE
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 40-48
General Personnel Policy
CHAPTER 40
40.61 CHANGES IN POLICY
Amendments may be made to any part of this personnel policy through the regular ordinance amendment
procedure, as prescribed by law. Suggestions for amendments may originate from employees, the Clerk-
Treasurer, the Mayor, or members of the Common Council of the City of Auburn.
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
Civilian Personnel Policy
CHAPTER
41
41.00 INTRODUCTION
41.01 CITY EMPLOYMENT INTRODUCTORY PERIOD
41.02 WORKING HOURS
A. Standard Work Period
B. Lunch Break
C. Breaks
D. Clean-up Periods
E. Overtime
F. Stand-By Pay
41.03 LEAVES
A. Vacation
B. Sick Leave
C. Personal Leave
D. Jury Duty
41.04 BENEFITS
A. Workers Compensation
B. Retirement (PERF-CIVILIAN)
C. Health Insurance for Civilian Retiree
41.05 APPEAL PROCEDURE
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
Civilian Personnel Policy
CHAPTER
41
41.00 INTRODUCTION
? This section applies only to the City of Auburn Civilian Employees, which are those employees who are
not classified as Public Safety (law enforcement or fire protection).
? Civilians are also covered under additional provisions in Section 40.00.
? Any provision in this policy which conflicts with State and/or Federal statutes is controlled by the State
and/or Federal statutes. This policy supersedes all other policies prior to its adoption.
? These policies and procedures do not create any form of contract of employment between the City of
Auburn and any employee. These policies apply to all employees of the City of Auburn and employees
of the City Utilities. Additional policy provisions are set forth in Code Sections 40.00 to cover all other
General Personnel Policies.
? It is the desire of the City Council that the policies be so expressed that they will not be misunderstood
and at the same time will provide the flexibility under which the department heads, management and the
city elected administration may implement and execute these policies for the betterment of the citizens
of the City of Auburn and the employees of the City of Auburn.
? Each individual employed by the City must comply, as a condition of employment, with the provisions of
this Policy and any related procedures and work rules and must perform his/her assigned duties in a
responsible manner creditable to the City. As such, all City employees are expected to become
knowledgeable about the contents and abide by the policies set forth in this Policy. Any questions,
concerns, or lack of understanding about a particular provision of this Policy should be promptly
discussed with your Department Head or Supervisor.
? Each employee shall read this policy in order to promote good working relationships within the
department of their employment and between the various departments of the City.
41.01 CITY EMPLOYMENT INTRODUCTORY PERIOD
It is the policy of the City of Auburn that all new employees and all present employees transferred or
promoted to a new job should be carefully monitored and evaluated for an initial introductory period. After
satisfactory completion of the introductory period, those employees will be evaluated for performance.
Normally, the introductory period will be 90 calendar days. Department Heads, or their designee,
shall observe carefully the performance of each employee in a new job position including
employees who have been promoted or transferred.. Where appropriate, weaknesses in
performance, behavior, or development shall be brought to the employee's attention for correction.
Department Heads, or their designee, shall prepare a written evaluation of the employee's job
performance at the end of 90 calendar days on the new job. The evaluation should include a
recommendation as to whether the employee should continue in the position. The original will be
forwarded to the Human Resources Department for inclusion in the employees’ personnel file.
Employees who do not receive a satisfactory evaluation and endorsement may be given additional
time in 30-day increments to demonstrate their ability to do the job, if the Department Head, or their
designee, feels additional time is warranted in order to achieve acceptable job performance.
Department Heads, or their designee, may recommend the termination of a newly hired employee at
any time. A recommendation for termination should be submitted in writing to Human Resources for
review and should include an evaluation and a list of actions taken to assist the employee. Action to
terminate shall have the prior approval of Human Resources.
Newly hired employees are eligible for employee benefits on the 91st day of employment with the
exception of health/life insurance, which will be as stated in the current Plan Document.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
Civilian Personnel Policy
CHAPTER
41
Transferred or promoted employees, although evaluated according to this policy, remain eligible for
all benefits while demonstrating their ability to perform their new jobs.
At the discretion of management and consultation with the human resources director, transferred or
promoted employees who are unable to perform satisfactorily in their new jobs may be returned to
their original jobs, if a vacancy exists, or may be terminated.
At all times, unless otherwise required by governing authority, including after successful completion
of the introductory period, employment with the City of Auburn is considered to be “at -will,” and the
employment relationship may be terminated at any time for any lawful reason by either party.
Employees in the introductory period shall follow all other policies and procedures.
41.02 WORKING HOURS
Standard Work Period
1. Hourly Non-Exempt Employees
a. The scheduled workweek will generally be no longer than 40 hours. The work week for all
regular hourly employees will begin at 12:00 A.M. on Sunday of each week and conclude at
11:59 p.m. of the succeeding Saturday. It is intended that overtime for non-exempt
employees will not begin until the employee has worked 40 hours in the work week except
as provided for emergencies in Code Section 41.02 (Section 1.2.F.). The scheduled work
day (time began and time ended) will be established by Department Head. All categories of
benefit days are considered as workdays in calculating 40 hours.
b. Overtime will be allowed only when authorized by an appropriate supervisor or when
absolutely necessary in an emergency.
2. Exempt (Salary) Employees
a. Exempt salary employees are expected to work a regular schedule of five workdays, without
regard to the number of hours per day or per week. As an exempt employee, hours of
service to the City of Auburn will fluctuate depending upon service demands.
b. Salary employees must track working hours on a daily basis. Exempt (salary) will document
time away from work and the reasons for said time. Furthermore, said time off must be
approved by the exempt (salary) employee’s supervisor prior to said time off. Sick and
emergency time off shall be documented with the supervisor as soon as practical.
Lunch Break
A non-paid lunch period may be given to employees according to each Department Head. An unpaid
lunch period shall consist of at least 30 minutes of consecutive time completely relieved from duties.
A paid lunch period may be paid when an employee is required to remain at work and will vary
according to daily circumstances.
Breaks
It is encouraged that two (2) fifteen (15) minute paid breaks may be permitted each day, one during
each four (4) hour period, as such breaks minimize loss of efficiency according to the nature of the
work, according to each Department Head, and the approval of the Supervisor under which the
employee works. Certain State and Federal Laws governing Child Labor may be different and will
prevail.
Clean-up Periods
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
Civilian Personnel Policy
CHAPTER
41
Each employee, where deemed necessary, according to each department's rules and regulations
will be paid for clean-up period prior to the lunch period and the end of the work day.
Overtime
? Overtime work must be pre-approved, except in instances of emergencies or special conditions.
Overtime will be paid to non-exempt employees after the first forty (40) hours of work each
week at the rate of time and a half for each hour over forty (40) hours in the time pay period
from midnight Saturday to midnight the following Saturday. All categories of benefit days are
considered workdays in calculating the forty-(40) hours worked.
? Non-scheduled work on Sundays and/or designated holidays will be paid at the rate of double
the regular hourly rate. Holiday pay will be in addition to the regular time pay unless the holiday
is a scheduled workday. If the holiday or Sunday is a scheduled workday then special criteria
will apply as prescribed in each department.
? In the case of an emergency situation, overtime pay may start after the regular eight (8) hour
workday has been completed. The Mayor and/or Clerk-Treasurer will determine when an
emergency exists to define this particular situation. For example: It is intended that emergency
snow and ice removal done on non-scheduled work hours will be considered under this clause
and overtime will be paid after the first eight (8) hours. If a Department Head decides that a rest
period is needed because of long continuous hours of work, the Department Head may declare
said rest period which will not be cause to interrupt the total number of hours used to calculate
overtime. Rest time longer than twenty (20) minutes will not be counted as hours worked. An
emergency situation will be handled on a situation by situation basis by the Mayor and Clerk -
Treasurer.
? Non-exempt employees may receive compensatory time in lieu of monetary compensation in
lieu of overtime wages pursuant to Code Section 40.35 (Section 4.5.D.) Also, see Code Section
40.34 (Section 4.4)
Stand-By Pay
Stand-by pay is established in the salary ordinance adopted annually by the Common Council.
41.03 LEAVES
(See CODE SECTION 40.00 for general information on leaves)
Vacation
The full time employee will receive paid vacation leave as follows:
Years of Service Completed Weeks Per Year
1 year 1 week
2 years 2 weeks
10 years 3 weeks
20 years 4 weeks
30 or more years 5 weeks
Each week is defined as five (5) working days or seven (7) calendar days.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
Civilian Personnel Policy
CHAPTER
41
1. Vacation leave will be granted at a time, which is mutually acceptable to the employee, and the
Department Head, consistent with the nature of the service provided by the department in which
the employee is employed.
2. Vacation time (non-exempt (hourly) employees) must be taken in four (4) or eight (8) hour
increments.
3. Vacation time (exempt (salary) employees) must be taken in increments of whole days or one
work week.
Sick Leave
The request for sick time to be taken must be made by the employee to his/her Department Head
prior to the workday to be taken. Unforeseen circumstances or emergency time off shall be
documented with the supervisor as soon as practical.
1. Full Time Non-Exempt (hourly) Employees
a. All full time non-exempt employees working a minimum 40-hour workweek will be awarded
one (1) hour sick leave time for that week.
b. Benefit days count as paid time to meet the minimum of 40 hours toward award of sick time.
c. Sick leave time can be accumulated and is available to use the week after the pay period in
which it is awarded.
d. For any week(s) the full-time non-exempt (hourly) employee has lost time they will not be
awarded sick leave time.
e. New employees shall have a waiting period of ninety (90) days before they are eligible for
sick leave pay, although the calculation of sick leave time will begin with their first full week
of employment.
f. Sick leave may be accumulated to one hundred eighty (180) days. Thereafter , an
employee's accrual of sick leave stops until the employee has used sick leave sufficient to
bring them under one hundred eighty (180) days, at which time accumulation will
recommence.
g. Sick leave may be taken according to the following limitations:
h. Sick leave can be used only for personal illness or family illness, which absolutely
necessitates the employee's absence from their duties.
i. The presentation of a physician's written certification of illness will be required in the
following cases:
i. Three (3) or more consecutive sick leave days, (see FMLA Policy Code Section 40.36, .
regarding more than 3 days are claimed); or
ii. Less than three (3) days are claimed and the Department Head deems a certificate
necessary.
iii. All employees sick leave of more than three (3) consecutive days taken by an employee
shall be reported to human resources as soon as knowledge of such leave is indicated
prior to or at the time such leave occurs. (Also, see Code Section 40.36)
j. Sick time must be taken in a minimum of one (1) hour increments.
Personal Leave
1. Personal leave time for full time employees can be accumulated and is available to use the
week after the pay period in which it is awarded.
2. New employees shall have a waiting period of ninety (90) days before they are eligible for
personal leave pay, although the calculation of personal leave time will begin with their first full
week of employment.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
Civilian Personnel Policy
CHAPTER
41
3. The request for personal time to be taken must be made by the employee to his/her Department
Head prior to the workday to be taken. Unforeseen circumstances or emergency time off shall
be documented with the supervisor as soon as practical.
4. Non-Exempt (hourly) – Full Time
a. Non-exempt (hourly) employees working a minimum 40-hour workweek will be awarded one
(1) hour of personal leave time for that week.
b. Benefit days count as paid time to meet the minimum of 40 hours toward award of personal
time.
c. For any week(s) the non-exempt (hourly) full time employee has lost time no personal time
will be awarded.
d. Non-exempt (hourly) employees shall be paid his/her regular hourly rate according to their
regularly scheduled work hours per day.
e. Non-exempt (hourly) employees may take personal time in a one (1) hour increments at a
minimum.
5. Exempt (Salary) – Full Time
a. Exempt (salary) full time employees will receive (6) days of personal leave time each
calendar year.
b. Exempt (salary) full time employees will receive regular pay for any work week whenever a
personal day has been taken.
Jury Duty
1. Leave shall be granted for jury duty upon prior notification to the Department Head.
2. The employee shall be paid the difference between jury duty pay and their regular workday pay.
41.04 BENEFITS
Workers Compensation
All accidents, on-the-job injuries, or near misses must be reported to human resources using the
prescribed forms completed fully and accurately and filed according to guidelines set forth in Code
Section 40.08 (Section 1.8).
Retirement (PERF-CIVILIAN)
The City of Auburn is a participant in the Public Employees' Retirement Fund (PERF), as
established by the Acts of 1945, Chapter 340, and all Acts amendatory and supplemental thereto.
1. Employees of the city, who are covered by the Public Employees Retirement Fund, are so noted
in Auburn City Code and filed with the PERF Board of the State of Indiana.
2. The City elects to enlarge its participation in the Public Employees’ Retirement Fund by
including additional classes of employees as stated below in the coverage under Chapter 340
of the Acts of 1945, all Acts amendatory and supplemental thereto. This agreement
supplements the original dated in the Ordinance 1046 adopted the 7th day of October 1969.
3. The City agrees to make the required contributions under the Public Employees' Retirement
Fund Act, which is the Act of 1945, Chapter 340, And all Acts Amendatory thereof and
supplemental thereto, including specifically the Acts of 1955, Chapter 329, commonly
designated as The Indiana Public Employees’ Social Security Integration and Supp lemental
Retirement Benefit Act.
4. The active participating membership of these added employees shall begin on the 1st day of
January 1993.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
Civilian Personnel Policy
CHAPTER
41
5. This Resolution 15-92 shall be in full force and effect from date of passage and upon approval
of the Board of Trustees of the Public Employees' Retirement Fund of Indiana, except that
active participation membership shall begin on the date set forth in Section Five.
Health Insurance for Civilian Retiree
1. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
? “DEPARTMENT”
Department from which an employee retires.
? “HEALTH INSURANCE”
Insurance policy in effect at the time an employee retires or a modified version thereof.
? “RETIREE”
An employee within the employment of the city who has met the requirements for retirement and
is paid retirement benefits from the Public Employees Retirement Fund.
2. Civilian Retiree Benefits
a. Health Insurance will be made available to Retirees until the retiree becomes eligible for
social security benefits or Medicare disability.
b. The level, extent, cost of benefits, and allocation of cost sharing between the city and
retirees shall be determined by the Common Council and applicable to all retirees.
c. The level and extent of benefits will not necessarily be identical to those benefits provided
for non-retired employees.
This section shall have retroactive effect for those retirees who are qualified on January 1, 1989.
41.05 APPEAL PROCEDURE
The section does not apply to employees hired by or appointed by the Clerk-Treasurer or Mayor, as
those employees are appointed at the elected official's pleasure.
It is the policy of the City of Auburn to offer to a City employee who feels they have been improperly
demoted, suspended, dismissed or disciplined, or has any other valid complaint as to the
application or interpretation of any personnel policies or work rules, an opportunity to voice their
complaint and appeal decisions under certain guidelines.
It is desired, whenever possible, to handle complaints, concerns and/or disagreements on an
informal basis. Both, the Department Heads and employees are expected to make every effort to
resolve problems as they arise. However, it is recognized that there will be situations and/or
circumstances, which will be resolved only after formal appeal. It is the goal to resolve issues in a
reasonable time frame. In such cases, employees and Department Heads and other officials shall
follow the appeal procedures listed below:
1. Notify the department head within three (3) days regarding the complaint, issue, incident or
problem on an informal basis (to include immediate supervisor if applicable) in an attempt to
resolve the issue, mutually.
2. If not resolved, the employee must submit a written complaint to the Department Head with the
following guidelines:
3. The written complaint must be submitted within three (3) working days after informal contact
with Department Head.
4. The appealing employee must sign the appeal.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
Civilian Personnel Policy
CHAPTER
41
5. The appeal must be dated.
6. The appeal must contain the specific matters of the complaint and surrounding circumstances
and how you wish the matter to be resolved.
7. The Department Head must send a written response or decision back to the employee within
three working days of receiving the complaint. A conference between the employee and
department head may be held at the department head's discretion.
8. If not resolved, the employee may make a written request to human resources for an
administrative review (hearing) and/or investigation within three (3) working days of receiving
the department head's written response by following the appropriate guidelines (i.e., for antiharassment
issues see Code Section 40.05 (Section 1.5).
9. Administrative Review Request must have employee name, date and signature;
10. Copy of the employee original written complaint and other documents related to the issue;
11. Copy of the department head's written response.
12. The request must contain the specific matters of the complaint, surrounding circumstances and
how the employee wishes the matter be resolved;
13. The Human Resource Director will provide findings of fact to the Board of Public Works & Safety
Members at the next meeting following the week of receipt of said issue.
14. The Mayor of the City shall place the item on the agenda of the next meeting of the Board of
Public Works and Safety.
15. The employee and Department Head must appear at such hearing along with any other person
or persons having relevant information as to the matter.
16. The Board of Public Works and Safety shall give a written answer to the employee and
Department Head within five (5) working days af ter the next regular meeting of the Board of
Public Works and Safety.
17. The Board of Public Works and Safety's decision will be final and binding.
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
WATER
CHAPTER
53
GENERAL PROVISIONS
53.001 SCOPE
53.002 AMENDMENTS AND REVISIONS
53.003 DEFINITIONS
53.004 UTILITY SERVICES PROVIDED TO AREAS NOT ANNEXED
53.010 RULES AND REGULATIONS ON FILE; INFORMATION PROVIDED TO CUSTOMERS
APPLICATION FOR SERVICE
53.011 WRITTEN APPLICATION OR CONTRACT REQUIRED
53.012 MODIFICATION OF CONTRACT
53.013 ASSIGNMENT OF CONTRACT
SERVICES OF UTILITY
53.020 WATER DEPOSITS
53.021 DESCRIPTION OF SERVICE TO BE FURNISHED
53.022 TURNING ON WATER SERVICE
53.023 DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE
53.024 SERVICE CONNECTIONS
53.025 MAINTENANCE OF SERVICE PIPES AND METER BOXES
53.026 THAWING FROZEN PIPES
53.027 INSIDE PIPING AND SERVICE LINES
53.028 CROSS-CONNECTIONS AND BACKFLOW
53.029 CROSS-CONNECTION PROTECTION DEVICES
53.030 USE OF BOOSTER PUMPS
53.031 ACCESS TO PREMISES
METERING; BILLING
53.040 METERING
53.041 PREWIRING FOR REMOTE WATER READING UNITS
53.042 BASIS FOR MONTHLY BILLING
53.043 PAYMENT OF BILLS
53.044 ADJUSTMENT OF BILLING
53.045 COLLECTIONS; DEFERRED PAYMENT CHARGE
53.046 WASTE OR EXCESSIVE USE OF WATER
OTHER REGULATIONS
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
WATER
CHAPTER
53
53.055 NOTIFICATION OF LOAD INCREASE
53.056 RESALE OF WATER
53.057 PRIVATE FIRE PROTECTION SERVICE
53.058 UTILITY NOT LIABLE FOR CERTAIN CONDITIONS
53.059 PERMANENT DISCONNECTIONS
53.060 WATER MAIN EXTENSIONS
ENFORCEMENT
53.070 ENFORCEMENT OF RULES AND REGULATIONS
WELLS AND PUMPS
53.080 ADOPTION OF MINIMUM STANDARDS
53.081 PERMITS AND INSPECTIONS
53.082 PUMP INSTALLATION
53.083 USE OF WELLS FOR DRAINAGE PURPOSES PROHIBITED
53.084 DISINFECTION, SAMPLES, AND REPORT
53.085 BASIC WELL CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS GUIDELINES
53.086 WELL ABANDONMENT
53.087 GEOTHERMAL HEAT PUMP SYSTEM STANDARDS
53.088 POWERS FOR INSPECTION AND ENFORCEMENT
53.089 ENFORCEMENT INTERPRETATION
53.090 CERTIFICATION
53.091 LIABILITY OF VIOLATOR
53.092 EFFECTIVE DATE
CONSERVATION; RATIONING
53.100 APPLICATION
53.101 DECLARATION OF NEED
53.102 VOLUNTARY CONSERVATION
53.103 MANDATORY CONSERVATION
53.104 RATIONING
53.105 EXCEPTIONS
53.106 NOTICE
EXTENSION OF SERVICE BEYOND CORPORATION LIMITS
53.110 AUTHORITY
53.111 STANDARDS FOR EXTENSION
53.112 WATER MAIN DESIGN
53.113 VALVES
53.114 FIRE HYDRANTS
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
WATER
CHAPTER
53
53.115 DESIGN CRITERIA
53.116 ADVISORY OPINIONS
53.117 INFORMATION REQUIRED
53.118 REPORTS
53.119 ANNEXATION
53.999 PENALTY
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
WATER
CHAPTER
53
GENERAL PROVISIONS
53.001 SCOPE
The rules and regulations of the utility, as amended and supplemented from time to time, shall govern all
water service rendered or to be rendered by the utility; shall be binding upon every customer; and shall
constitute a part of the terms and conditions of every contract for water service, whether expressly
incorporated therein or not or whether or not a signed application for water service is on file.
53.002 AMENDMENTS AND REVISIONS
The Board of Public Works and Safety and the Common Council of the city may, by appropriate action,
amend, modify, delete, change, or otherwise revise the general rules and regulations of the municipal water
utility as it may deem desirable or may deem necessary for the good of the utility operation for the public
supply.
53.003 DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of 53.001 through 53.070 the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
? COMMISSION
The Indiana Utility Regulatory Commission of the State of Indiana.
? CONSUMER
See "CUSTOMER."
? CONTRACT
An agreement between the utility and the customer by which the utility sets forth its conditions to provide
water service.
? CURB STOP or SERVICE VALVE
A fitting inserted in the service pipe near the curb or main for turning on and shutting off water to the
premises supplied or to be supplied.
? CUSTOMER or CONSUMER
The person, firm, corporation, governmental agency, or association having interest, whether legal or
equitable, sole or only partial, either as tenant or owner, in any property which is, or is to be, supplied with
water service, either temporarily or permanently, by the utility and all those having such interest.
? DISTRIBUTION MAIN
A pipe owned by the utility, located in a street, easement, road, right-of-way, or alley and used to deliver
water:
1. To fire hydrants or fire lines.
2. To service pipes attached to the water main.
3. To private mains.
? FIRE SYSTEM
See "PRIVATE FIRE SERVICE"
? METER
The mechanical device owned by the utility and used to measure and record the quantity of water supplied
to the customer.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
WATER
CHAPTER
53
? MONTH
The period between any two consecutive regular billings by the utility for service rendered to a customer at
his premises. The billings are scheduled at intervals of approximately 30 days.
? PLUMBER
A person for firm licensed by the State of Indiana, registered by the city and recognized qualified to perform
plumbing services.
? PREMISES
A dwelling, building, structure, or parcel of real estate which is normally supplied through a separate water
service pipe and meter.
? PRIVATE FIRE SERVICE or FIRE SYSTEM
A privately owned arrangement of pipes, fixtures, and devices designed for stand-by service and from which
is taken only for the extinguishment of fires.
? PRIVATE WATER MAIN
A privately owned pipe connected to the utility's distribution system and used to deliver water:
For private fire service purposes.
For general service purposes, services rendered through the private main shall be billed directly in
accordance with established rates unless otherwise provided by written contract with the utility.
? SECONDARY WATER SUPPLY
Water used on a premises as geothermal energy source, cooling water, manufacturing, and other
supplemental water usually drawn from private wells or captured surface waters, located on or near the
premises served by the utility public supply.
? SERVICE CONNECTION
That portion of a service pipe situated between and including the tap and the curb stop, installed or
maintained by the utility.
? SERVICE PIPE
A supply pipe including pipe and fittings leading from the tap in the distribution system main to or into the
premises supplied or to be supplied.
? TAP or CORPORATION COCK
A fitting owned by the utility and inserted in the distribution main to be used as the service pipe connection.
? UTILITY
The Auburn Water Utility, a department of the city, having its principal office at Cedar and Main Street,
Auburn, Indiana, and engaged in furnishing the public water supply in the City of Auburn and its environs.
53.004 UTILITY SERVICES PROVIDED TO AREAS NOT ANNEXED
No city utility service, including water, will be provided outside of the territorial limits of the city without:
A title search or letter from a title company certifying the owner of the real estate and provid ing a
copy of the title deed;
The execution and recording of a Consent to and Waiver of Notice for Annexation by the titleholder;
and
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
WATER
CHAPTER
53
Payment of the costs of the title search and recordation of the Consent and Waiver by the
titleholder.
53.010 RULES AND REGULATIONS ON FILE; INFORMATION PROVIDED TO CUSTOMERS
Rules on file
A copy of all rates, rules, and regulations under which water service will be rendered from the utility to
its customers is on file for the convenience of the public in the general offices of the utility and with the
Indiana Utility Regulatory Commission of the state.
Information provided by utility to applicants and customers
APPLICATION FOR SERVICE
Upon request by the applicant or customer, the utility will furnish, free of charge, a copy of the rate
schedule for new and existing customers.
The utility, whenever it petitions the Indiana Utility Regulatory Commission for a change in its rate
schedule, will furnish to each customer, within the prescribed schedule, a notice that fairly
summarizes the nature and extent of proposed changes in existing rates.
53.011 WRITTEN APPLICATION OR CONTRACT REQUIRED
A written service application or properly executed contract and paid receipt for all applicable fees
and charges will be required from the applicant, including contractors or builders, before the utility
will be able to supply service; however, the utility may reject an application for a valid reason.
Where unusual construction or equipment expenses are involved in the furnishing of service, the
utility may require the water services contract to be for an appropriate period of time specified by
the utility with notification of termination of water service.
A prospective service application customer must show positive identification when applying for
service, such as a driver's license, state issued I.D., or government issued passport. A written
contract for service shall be in full force and effect until the party contracting for service serves the
utility with notification of intent to terminate water service.
Should the utility deny service, the utility shall immediately notify the applicant, in writing, stating the
precise facts upon which the utility based its decision and shall provide the applicant with an
opportunity to rebut these facts and show facts demonstrating creditworthiness.
53.012 MODIFICATION OF CONTRACT
No promise, agreement, or representation by any agent, employee, or officer of the utility shall be binding
upon the utility unless incorporated in a written contract signed and approved by an agent authorized to sign
the contract on behalf of the utility and its administrators. No adjustments to applicable rates as set forth in
the rate schedule shall be allowed in any case and under any circumstances.
53.013 ASSIGNMENT OF CONTRACT
The benefits and obligations under any contract for supply of water by the utility will begin when the utility
commences to supply water in service thereunder and shall inure to and be binding upon the successors or
assigns or survivors, executors or administrators, as the case may be, of the original parties thereto,
respectively, for the full term thereof; provided, that no assignment thereof shall be made by the customer or
by any successor, assign, survivor, executor, or administrator unless there be expressed written consent by
the utility to any assignment.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
WATER
CHAPTER
53
SERVICES OF UTILITY
53.020 WATER DEPOSITS
Residential
1. The utility shall require from each new customer for utility service a cash deposit equal to the
customer’s estimated billing for a period of one-sixth (1/6th) of the estimated annual billings of
the property being serviced, but not less than $50.00, as a deposit and guarantee against
nonpayment of bills for service for those who fail to establish creditworthiness. For newly
constructed homes, the estimated annual billing shall be based on a home with similar square
footage as determined by the Clerk-Treasurer. Applicants for residential service shall establish
creditworthiness by a criterion that is established without regard to economic character of the
area which the applicant resides; and solely upon the credit risk of the individual without regard
to the collective credit reputation of the area in which he or she lives.
2. Each new applicant for residential utility service shall be deemed creditworthy and shall not be
required to make a cash deposit as a condition of receiving service if the applicant satisfies the
following criteria:
a. If the applicant has been a customer of any utility within the last two (2) years, the applicant:
(i) owes no outstanding bills for service rendered within the past four (4) years by any such
utility; (ii) during the last twelve (12) consecutive months that the service was provided, did
not have more than two (2) bills that were delinquent to any utility or, if service was
rendered for a period for less than twelve (12) months, did not have more than one (1)
delinquent bill in such period; and (iii) within the last two (2) years did not have a service
disconnected by a utility for nonpayment of a bill for services rendered by that utility.
3. If the applicant has not been a customer of a utility during the previous two (2) years, any two
(2) of the following criteria are met:
The applicant either:
a. Has been employed by his or her present employer for two (2) years;
b. Has been employed by his or her present employer for less than two (2) years, but has been
employed by only one (1) other employer during the past two (2) years; or
c. Has been employed by the present employer for less than two (2) years and has no
previous employment due to recently graduating from a school, university, or vocational
program or being discharged from military service.
d. Either owns or is buying his or her home or is renting a home or an apartment and has
occupied the premises for more than two (2) years.
e. The applicant has credit cards, charge accounts, or has extended credit by a bank,
commercial concern, or individual unless a credit check shows that the applicant has been
in default on any such account more than twice within the last twelve (12) months.
4. If the applicant fails to establish that he or she is creditworthy, the applicant may be required to
make a cash deposit. Such deposit shall not exceed one-sixth (1/6th) of the estimated annual
cost of service to be rendered to the applicant. A utility may require a present customer to
make such deposit when:
a. The customer has been mailed disconnect notices for two (2) consecutive months;
b. The customer has been mailed disconnect notices for any three (3) months within the
preceding twelve (12) month period; or
c. The service to the customer has been disconnected within the past four (4) years.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
WATER
CHAPTER
53
5. The amount of such deposit may not exceed an amount equal to one-sixth (1/6th) of the
expected annual billings for the customer at the address at which service is rendered. Deposits
may be held more than twelve (12) months and shall not earn interest. Following customer –
requested termination of service, the utility shall: Apply the deposit as applicable to the final bill.
6. Each utility shall maintain a record of each applicant or customer making a deposit that shows
the following:
a. The name of the customer.
b. The current address of the customer so long as he or she maintains an active account with
the utility in his or her name.
c. The amount of the deposit
d. The date the deposit was made.
e. A record of each transaction affecting said deposit.
7. Each customer shall be provided with a receipt f rom the utility at the time his or her deposit is
paid in full. The utility shall provide a reasonable method which a customer who is unable to
locate his or her receipt may establish that he or she is entitled to a refund of the deposit.
8. Any deposit made by the applicant, customer or any other person to the utility (less any lawful
deductions), or any sum the utility is ordered to refund for utility service that has remained
unclaimed for one (1) year after the utility has made diligent effort to locate the person who
made such deposit or the heirs of such person, shall be presumed abandoned and may be
transferred to the utility’s operating fund.
9. A deposit may be used by the utility to cover any unpaid balance following disconnection of
service.
10. In no event shall services be provided to any customer who is a renter or contract purchaser,
unless the owner of the real estate signs the application and agrees to be responsible for any
service rendered to the property in the event that the renter or contract purchaser fails to pay
the charges rendered for service. The owner of a property may require a co-signor on utility
accounts for renters, who shall sign the application and provide name and contact information to
the Clerk-Treasurer’s Office of the City of Auburn. The co-signor shall sign the appropriate
forms with the City of Auburn that shall jointly bind the individual for any past due accounts on
said property. The City shall make efforts to pursue collection of past due accounts from the
customer and the co-signor before pursuing the owner of the property. Notice of the past due
account shall also be made to the owner of the property being served before taking legal action.
All demands for payments for past due accounts made shall be copied to the property owner
and the owner shall be made aware that failure by the customer and/or co-signor to pay the
account may result in legal action against the customer, co-signor and the owner jointly in a
Court of competent jurisdiction. The owner of the real estate shall have ultimate responsibility
for all past due accounts.
11. The utility shall require current customers to maintain a deposit equivalent to one-sixth (1/6th) of
the properties annual billing but not less than $50.00 if the customer has been mailed a
disconnect notice for two (2) consecutive months or any three (3) months within the preceding
twelve (12) month period, or when the service has been disconnected. In cases where the
deposit is required as a result of a disconnection for nonpayment, full payment of the deposit
will be required prior to restoration of service.
12. Any deposit will be refunded promptly, along with a statement accounting for each transaction
involving the deposit, upon successful termination of services between the customer and the
City of Auburn.
13. The procedure following a customer request for termination of service is as follows:
a. The utility will require payment of any past due balance currently billed and owed.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
WATER
CHAPTER
53
b. The utility will apply the deposit to the final billing.
c. Any portion of the deposit remaining after the application will be forwarded to the customer.
14. The utility will maintain a record of each applicant or customer making a deposit which will
indicate the following:
a. The name of the customer.
b. The current address of the customer so long as there exists an active account with the utility
in the same name.
c. The name of the owner of the property.
d. The current address of the owner of the property.
e. The name of the co-signor.
f. The current address of the co-signor so long as there exists a current account with the
customer and the utility department.
g. The amount of the deposit.
h. The date of the receipt of the deposit.
15. Each customer shall be provided a receipt from the utility at the time the deposit is paid.
16. Any deposit made by the applicant, customer, or any other person to the utility (less any lawful
deductions) or any sum which the utility is ordered to refund for utility service, which has
remained unclaimed for one (1) year after the utility has made diligent efforts to locate the
person who made the deposit or the heirs of the person, will be presumed abandoned and may
be transferred to the utility’s operating fund.
17. A deposit may be used by the utility to apply toward any unpaid balance following disconnection
of service provided, however, any surplus may be returned to the customer. In instances where
the deposit is used to pay arrearages, the utility shall require a new deposit to replace that
applied to the unpaid balances before service is restored.
18. The procedure for taking legal action on past due accounts shall be as follows:
a. At all times, owners, customers and co-signors shall have access to all account information
upon request.
b. Upon a disconnect notice being issued a duplicate of said notice shall be sent by regular
U.S. Mail to the co-signor and/or owner of the property involved. No disconnection shall
take place until proper notice has been given to all relevant parties.
c. After disconnection and before any legal action is taken a demand letter shall be sent
requesting that the account be made current within ten (10) days.
d. Should the account not be made current within ten (10) days, the City of Auburn shall then
take action against the customer, the co-signor, and the property owner in a competent
court of law in an effort to recover the unpaid utility services.
e. Any judgment rendered shall act as a judgment on the real estate until said time that the
amount is paid by the account holder.
19. Utility deposits shall only be released to a third party upon written agreement between the
owner of the deposit and the third party being presented to the City of Auburn Utility
Department.
20. The City of Auburn shall develop a form that will be signed by all customers, co-signors, and
owners regarding the provisions continued in this chapter.
Non-Residential
All new non-residential customers may make a cash deposit to assure payment of such customer’s bill for
utility services. Such deposit may be required may be required as a condition for obtaining service.
Deposits taken shall not exceed one-sixth (1/6th) of the estimated annual billings for the property being
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
WATER
CHAPTER
53
serviced. Deposits received shall be refunded after a period of twelve (12) months, if said customer has
made timely payments for said period. If timely payments have not been made the deposit shall be held
until such time as timely payments have been made for twelve (12) consecutive months.
53.020 as amended Ordinance 2017-01 passed 2/7/2017
53.021 DESCRIPTION OF SERVICE TO BE FURNISHED
Upon request, the customer shall present to the utility a written list of the devices to be attached to
the utility lines, giving the location of the building. The uti lity will advise the form and character of
the supply available to the customer.
The City Water Department shall require all commercial and industrial customers to provide the
required approved backflow prevention device at the point of the water meter location.
53.022 TURNING ON WATER SERVICE
Until a contract for water service has been executed and a meter installed, a $20 Temporary
Construction User fee will be paid for un-metered water usage at the time a residential building
permit is pulled, for residential construction obtained, or special arrangements are made to pay for
other temporary un-metered water usage, water shall not be turned on at any premise, and then
only by the water utility representative. Water may not be turned on unless there is at least one
adult person present to see that all water outlets on the premises are closed in order to prevent
water damage.
Should the utility schedule an appointment for turning on a water service, for any reason, other than
credit turn-ons, and the customer fails to keep that appointment, the return trip to the premises will
cause an added trip charge of $75 to be levied to the account.
When water is required to test plumbing before a water contract has been executed and meter
installed, a water utility employee shall be called to make the turn-on and turn-off.
It is a violation of both the water utility's general rules and regulations and this code for anyone
except a water utility employee to make these turn-ons and turn-offs.
A fee of $75 shall be charged by the utility for turning water service off and on for the purpose of
making repairs to a private plumbing system or for an extended absence and similar occasions
when the turn-on or turn-off is for the benefit or convenience of the customer.
No person but an authorized representative of the utility, Fire Department, City Street Department,
or City Water Pollution Control Department shall open or operate any fire hydrant to which water is
supplied by the utility, or remove the nozzle cap from the hydrant.
Violation of this rule will subject the offender to the penalty provided in 53.999 and for payment of
the estimated quantity of water used or wasted during the period the water was turned on without
authority of the water utility.
53.023 DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE
Customer requested service
1. Residential customers shall notify the utility a minimum of one working day and Non-residential
customers a minimum of three working days, in advance of the day discontinuance is
requested. In the case of termination of a fire protection service, the customer's notice shall be
in written form, signed by an authorized agent/representative of the customer. The customer
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
WATER
CHAPTER
53
shall remain responsible for all the service used and the billings therefore until service is
terminated pursuant to notice by the customer.
2. Upon request by a customer of the utility to discontinue service, the utility shall discontinue the
service on the date, of the requested discontinuance. The customer shall not be liable for any
service rendered to the address or location after the expiration of said date. The customer is
responsible for providing access to the premises for an actual final reading on the date of
requested discontinuance. Failure to do so will result in the utility rendering a final bill based on
an average of previous consumption. No adjustments will be made after the expiration of the
requested date of discontinuance.
3. There will be no abatement of charges in whole or in part by reason of the extended absence of
the customer for any cause unless the utility has been notified to turn off water service.
4. When water service is temporarily discontinued at the request of the customer, a charge of $75
for turning off and on the water service will be made to the customer.
5. This section will not apply to any case where a customer has entered into a contract with the
utility to take service from the utility for a definite period of time specified or provided for in the
contract, and the stipulated time has not expired.
6. The utility will perform disconnect services only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.,
prevailing local time, subject to fulfilling the utility's rules and regulations as may apply. The
utility will not disconnect or terminate water service for nonpayment on any day on which the
utility's offices are closed to the public, or after 12:00 noon of the day that is immediately
preceding any day on which the utility office is not open to the public.
Without customer's request
1. The utility may disconnect service without request by the customer:
a. When an emergency exists.
b. For any unauthorized use of water.
c. For maintaining an unprotected cross-connection of a water customer's piping to any other
source of water supply or for permitting any condition to exist on or about the customer's
premises that causes or might cause contamination or the pollution of the utility public water
supply, or any part thereof.
d. Upon order by any authority having jurisdiction over matters of public water supply.
e. For failure to repair any leak in the service piping or appurtenances between the service
connection and the meter, or in any private fire protection system, or other un-metered
facilities.
f. For tampering or knowingly permitting tampering with any service piping, curb stop, service
valve, meter, or meter seal, or any other appliance or equipment owned by the water utility.
g. For the vacating of a premises, or abandonment of premises.
h. For issuing a bad check or draft to the water utility.
i. For the failure to comply with the terms of a credit agreement.
j. For failure to pay a cash security deposit in accordance with the utility's rules and
regulations or rate structure.
k. For failure to pay in accordance with the rules, any water billings or other charges in
connection with water utility service installations or facilities at the service address, other
service address, or otherwise, except as noted hereafter.
l. For failure to provide free and non-hazardous access to the premises and meter,
appliances, or other utility- owned equipment for the utility to read meters, make
inspections, additions, upgrades, replacements, and relocations of meters,
appliances/equipment.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
WATER
CHAPTER
53
m. For failure to maintain or cause to be maintained approved meter settings, meter pits, and
vaults.
n. For the installation of a new water service pipe and appurtenance or altering or removing
existing service pipe and appurtenances, including the meter, without written authority by an
authorized agent of the water utility.
o. For waste or excessive use by a customer on a special purpose un-metered rate, in excess
of contract.
2. In each case, except those arising under divisions (a), (b), (d), (f), (g), (h), (i), (j), (n), and (o)
above, the utility will issue written notice of at least five days either mailed to the customer at
the address of record, or personally delivered to the customer or person on the water
customer's premises, advising the customer of the reason for the proposed termination of water
service and stating that service will be discontinued if the reason continues and is uncorrected.
In most cases, the Customer shall have the option of an administrative hearing before the Board
of Public Works and Safety
3. When water service to the premises has been terminated for any reason, water service will be
restored only upon proper application to the utility after conditions of the notice of termination
have been properly corrected and inspected by the utility, when all charges due from the
customer have been settled, and when arrangements have been made to provide access to the
premises during regular working hours of the utility, 7:30 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. No payments in lieu
of disconnections will be accepted by utility personnel in the field. A $75 service charge will be
due and owing at the time the disconnect order is issued, whether disconnection of service has
been effectuated or not prior to the correction of the condition or conditions under or contained
in the notice of which service was scheduled to be discontinued. If the termination or
restoration of service involves any excavating, the cost of the work shall be borne by the
customer.
4. Should the conditions under which service was discontinued not be corrected within 60 days,
the utility shall have the right to finalize the customer's account. In the absence of a final meter
reading, the utility will render a final bill based on the average of previous consumption; if
arrangements are made within seven working days after or following the date of the final billing,
adjustments will be made. No adjustments will be made after the expiration of the seven-day
period.
5. Reconnection of the service is included in the initial base service charge of $75; however, if the
utility schedules an appointment for reconnection and the customer fails to keep that
appointment, an additional service charge will be added for each and every additional service
call, plus any applicable hourly charges for utility personnel.
Prohibited disconnections
1. Except as otherwise provided, the utility will postpone or cause to be postponed, the
disconnection of water service for 30 days, if: prior to the disconnection date specified in the
notice of disconnection, the customer provides to the utility a medical statement from a licensed
physician or public health official which states that discontinuance of water service woul d be a
serious and immediate threat to the health or safety of a designated person in the household of
the customer. The postponement or disconnection will be continued for one additional 30-day
period upon the furnishing of an additional medical statement.
2. The utility will not disconnect service to the customer:
a. Upon failure to pay for the service rendered at a different meter address, residence, or
location, if the billing has remained unpaid for less than 45 days.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
WATER
CHAPTER
53
b. Upon failure to pay for services to a previous occupant of premises to be served, unless the
utility has good reason to believe the customer/applicant is attempting to defraud the water
utility by using another name.
53.024 SERVICE CONNECTIONS
The utility reserves the right to determine the placement of each service connection so that the curb
stop will, as a general rule, be located between the present or proposed sidewalk and curb, or at
such other location that will, in the judgment of the utility, provide a safer, more convenient, or more
satisfactory location for the curb stop and service box. All commercial and industrial customers
shall obtain written approval from the Water Department Superintendent prior to installation of any
approved backflow prevention protection device. Plans shal l include full details of the proposed
installation.
The utility will furnish labor, equipment, and materials and the installation of the service connection,
including the tap in the water main, curb stop, and box, and that portion of the service pipe between
them. The customer shall pay the utility for the cost of the service connections installed by the
utility. Service connection pricing and fees are listed in the water rate ordinance. For installations
requiring longer than usual piping runs and runs made in congested areas, the actual or estimated
costs shall be paid accordingly.
The customer, at no expense to the utility, shall install or cause to be installed the service piping
beyond the curb stop and into the premises. The utility or the City Building Inspector or
Commissioner reserve the right to inspect each service run made by a plumber, contractor, or
individual, for proper materials and depth of the service before the service trench is backfilled.
However, the quality of material and workmanship shall be the customer's responsibility and must
conform to applicable plumbing codes and standards as if specifically mentioned.
1. Service piping of three inches and larger in diameter shall be disinfected, at the customer's
expense, before the water supply shall be turned on for service. The customer shall perform or
cause to be performed, disinfection of the piping and appurtenances in compliance with the
State Board of Health Standards. There shall be at least three samples obtained from the
service piping on consecutive days and must be proven satisfactory for usage, which shall be
reported in writing to the utility by a laboratory qualified to make the analysis and be acceptable
to the utility.
2. Ten days after water main installation, all testing must be completed per the utility rules and
regulations. Hydrostatic test, chlorination, and three consecutive samples are to be taken with
two consecutive satisfactory bacterial tests before the main is accepted for service. No building
permits, occupancy permits, or water service can be provided until all testing is completed and
accepted by the city. If all testing is not completed in ten days, the City Water Department may
complete the testing and bill the owner of the water lines the utility's costs for testing. No water
service shall be provided until all charges incurred by the utility are paid in full.
3. Water is furnished through a single service pipe to one property. Where a single property
consists of several units or buildings, and is served by a single service pipe, the property owner
has the option of valving and metering each unit or building separately. A separate valve must
be provided outside the building, and accessible to the utility, for each unit or building metered.
The utility may make special arrangements for exceptional situations as required.
4. In a case where a service has been installed prior to the adoption of and not in accordance with
these general rules and regulations, where water is being taken from a single curb stop for
supply for two or more units, buildings, or premises, each customer benefiting from these
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
WATER
CHAPTER
53
arrangements shall be responsible for the payment of the individual usage charges and all other
legitimate charges.
5. Any violation of the rules of the utility by either of the occupants of the premises shall be
deemed a violation as to all, and the utility may enforce compliance with these rules by
terminating the water supply to all, except that this action will not be taken until the innocent
customer not in violation of the utility's rules has been issued written notice and a reasonable
opportunity to attach the service to a separately controlled service as if a new applicant.
All service piping shall be or ductile iron, brass, or type "K" copper or approved plastic materials
from the curb stop to the meter. No service pipe shall be less than 3/4-inch nominal diameter, and
all service pipes shall be installed with a minimum of four feet of ground cover. The Water
Superintendent shall provide a list of all materials that are approved for installation to the property
owner, owners agent, water contractor, or developer as required.
Service pipes, curb stops, service boxes, meter pits, stop and waste valves, and other fixtures used
in the installation of, repairs to, or additions to service pipes shall be of a type and quality approved
by the utility. The material and supplies of any manufacturer in accordance with the utility's
standards is allowed.
New service piping between the water main and a building shall be run in a straight or direct line
when practicable, without bends and at a depth of not less than four feet. Pipe with joints shall not
be driven. Service pipes shall not be placed in the same trench with sewers or other piping and
shall be in accordance with state, local, and applicable standards, codes, regulations, and
ordinances.
There shall be no physical connection from a secondary water supply to any service provided by the
utility. The connection shall be cause for immediate termination of water service, as provided in
53.023(B).
53.025 MAINTENANCE OF SERVICE PIPES AND METER BOXES
The service connection and fixtures from the water main to and including the curb stop or service
valve will be maintained in good repair at the expense of the utility against damage, corrosion,
tuberculation, or other deterioration. However, if replacement is due to increased demand by the
customer, the replacement shall be at the customer's expense.
The customer shall maintain the service, pipe fixtures, and its appurtenances (meter excepted),
from the curb stop or valve into the property served by the utility, including leaks and other defects
promptly.
1. All private service lines or water mains shall be maintained by the customer or owner,
regardless of location, unless the utility has accepted, in writing, for maintenance by the utility.
2. Should needed repairs to any private service line or water main not be completed within five
days after issue of written notice to the customer, the customer or owner may be charged $30
per day for each day following the five-day grace period, that the leak or repair is allowed to
continue.
All meter boxes, pits, curb boxes, or vaults installed on private property regardless whether
constructed or installed by the customer or the utility shall be maintained in good condition by the
customer at their expense.
1. When meter boxes are of an approved frost-proof type and located within a public right-of-way
by the utility, the utility will maintain the boxes at utility expense.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
WATER
CHAPTER
53
2. The utility will not maintain piping and appurtenances leading to and from the meter boxes
except the piping between the water main and the curb stop, as referred to in division (A)
above.
53.026 THAWING FROZEN PIPES
The thawing of frozen service pipes is the customer's responsibility, except for service lines from
the water main leading to the curb stop or valve.
The thawing of customer service pipes from the curb stop or valve, to and including, the inside of
the structure, will not be performed by the utility personnel. Repairs of ruptured lines will be
arranged by the customer with a private plumber and shall be at the expense of the customer.
Upon request by the customer, the utility will make a basic inspection/investigation of the customer
service and advise of the needed repairs as determined. No excavation of the location will be
performed by the utility on the premises. A service charge of $75 may be levied for the
investigation service, to the customer or owner of the location.
53.027 INSIDE PIPING AND SERVICE LINES
Each water service applicant shall provide a main supply shut -off valve or valves, just inside the
building foundation wall, along with all piping and appurtenances, installed and maintained by the
applicant. All work and materials shall be subject to inspection and approval by any authorized
inspector in accordance with the utility general rules and regulations or other regulatory agencies as
applicable.
All service connections shall be fitted with separate inlet and outlet valves for each water meter
installed.
Service lines of larger sizes or supplying special equipment may require special valving and fitting
arrangements as specified in 53.040 and elsewhere in this subchapter.
53.028 CROSS-CONNECTIONS AND BACKFLOW
The designation of an approved protection device is available from the Water Department
Superintendent upon request.
No cross-connections or conditions which might permit potentially the backflow of contaminants or
pollutants from a customer's piping system into the public water distribution system shall be
permitted.
Piping systems within the customer's premises shall conform to the latest revision of the cross -
connection regulation ordinances and rules of the water utility and governing agencies, which are by
reference made a part of the general rules and regulations, the same as if printed herein.
Installation shall be subject to approval of the utility and any authorized inspector having j urisdiction
over the connections, and shall be maintained in accordance with manufacturer's specifications and
in total compliance with applicable rules, regulations, and guidelines.
Water meter installations are subject to approval from the Water Utility Superintendent, to be in
compliance with Section 13 of the rules and regulations.
All premises within the service area of the water utility shall conform to the requirements of the rules
and regulations as amended.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
WATER
CHAPTER
53
53.029 CROSS-CONNECTION PROTECTION DEVICES
Any service connection from the Water Department system shall be protected from any and all
threat of any type of cross-connection of any kind. This protection shall be the sole responsibility of
the water consumer to provide approved cross-connection control protection devices at any and all
locations, where the threat of system entry or penetration may exist along the system.
Cross-connection control protection devices shall be of an approved type as recognized by either of
or including: Uniform Plumbing Code, State Board of Health, Water Supply Division, American
Water Works Association, United States Environmental Protection Agency, and other applicable
regulatory agencies, and shall be certified as acceptable by a certified cross -connection control
technician, with final approval obtained in written form from the Water Department, prior to the
installation of these devices.
Unauthorized or unapproved connections of any type, either directly or indirectly, to any piping that
contains water from the Water Department system, shall be cause for termination of water services
from the Water Department, with subsequent removal of the service to the consumer or customer of
the Water Department.
Reference documents of record for implementation of this sect ion are Requirements for Protection
of Public Water Supplies From the Introduction of Contaminants Through Cross-connections, 320
IAC3 as it presently exists or is hereafter amended, and the Uniform Plumbing Code, and the
American Water Works Association, and other applicable standards and regulations, including the
terms, definitions, and interpretations as set forth in these regulations with any revisions thereto,
shall become as part of this section as specified hereto and as referenced herein.
53.030 USE OF BOOSTER PUMPS
No booster pump shall be installed, taking its suction or supply from the utility's water distribution
system, without the expressed written approval of the utility.
In all booster pump installations, the suction of the pump shall be connected to an atmospheric tank
with city water flow entering the tank being controlled by an automatic float valve and discharging
freely into the tank two pipe diameters, or a minimum of six inches, above the positive overflow
level of the tank.
As an alternate, suitable, control valve limiting suction pressure of the pump to a minimum 20 psig,
may be allowed with prior approval by the utility in writing. Proper and continuous operation and
maintenance shall be the customer's responsibility and expense.
53.031 ACCESS TO PREMISES
The utility's authorized representative shall have the right to enter upon the premises of the
customer at all reasonable times for the purpose of inspecting or testing cross -connection protective
devices, atmospheric tank installations, booster pump-vacuum breaker-type valves, general
plumbing, as well as read meters, make inspections, additions, upgrades, replacements, and
relocations of meters, appliances/equipment in connection with the water service. Failure to provide
or allow access for the utility to the customer premises for the hereinstated purposes, after written
notice of the purpose, shall be cause for discontinuance of water service.
Any customer providing a secondary water system supply on the customer's premises or available
to the premises, shall be required to give reasonable access to the utility representative during any
inspection of the customer's premises. The customer shall be required to provide evidence that no
connection exists between the customer secondary supply and the public water supply system.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
WATER
CHAPTER
53
The customer shall comply with all rules and regulations as set forth by applicable local, state,
federal, and health agencies as if in writing herein. (See 53.024(G)) Failure to comply as stated
shall be cause for immediate termination of water service to the premises with notice of the violation
to the State Board of Health and other agencies having jurisdiction over such matters. Water
service shall not be reinstated until proof of compliance is furnished to the utility.
METERING; BILLING
53.040 METERING
1. Unless specified in or by contract or tariff on file, all of the water provided to the customer shall
be measured by meters of standard manufacture, furnished and installed by the utility in
accordance with the requirements of the utility in force and effect, and as amended from time to
time.
2. The customer shall provide a suitable location for the placement of the meter, near the service
entrance either in the basement, in an approved meter box or in a location approved by the
utility prior to the water service installation. Meters shall not be installed in crawl-spaces.
Whenever extensive plumbing changes are being made where the meter exists in the crawl
space, the customer shall provision to re-locate the meter to a more accessible area. For
example, the basement, a closet, utility room, beneath a sink, or in an attached garage.
Customer may contact the utility to discuss these options.
Size and type of meter
1. The utility will designate the minimum size and type meter to be installed for each customer.
Each building to be served from the water main shall be supplied by at least a one-inch line.
2. For water services larger than the minimum size, the utility will reserve the right to designate the
number and size of meters that can be supplied for the service requested.
Irrigation Meters
1. Irrigation meters may be purchased and installed at request of the customer to allow for use of
sewer-deduct water for the purposes of lawn and garden irrigation, and pool fil ling. Customer
shall be responsible for all costs associated with scheduling a plumber to make any necessary
plumbing changes, as required by the utility, to allow for the installation of the irrigation meter.
All plumbing changes made shall be inspected by the utility before the irrigation meter is
installed. All Irrigation meters will be billed year -round, on a monthly basis.
2. Customers who have irrigation meter(s) and do not wish to pay the monthly costs associated
with such, have the option of having the irrigation meter(s) removed. Customer shall be
responsible for all costs associated with scheduling a plumber to make any necessary plumbing
changes as required by the utility, to allow for the removal of the irrigation meter and ALL
connections to the main service line supplying the irrigation meter being removed. At
completion, the utility will inspect all plumbing changes made. An approved inspection will then
allow the monthly costs associated with that irrigation meter will be removed from the
customer’s future utility bills beginning at the start of the next billing cycle.
3. In new construction, wherever the structure is pre- plumbed for an irrigation meter, and before
water service is activated to the property, customer must either purchase and have an irrigation
meter installed at the same time the domestic water meter is installed, OR have all plumbing
connections for the irrigation meter removed by a plumber then inspected by the utility.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
WATER
CHAPTER
53
4. No plumbing connections for irrigation are allowed to exist without the installation of an irrigation
meter.
By-pass
1. A by-pass arrangement around all new meter installations will be required under any of the
following circumstances.
a. The service line on the meter outlet side is 1-1/2 inches or larger.
b. The service line, regardless of size, serves refrigeration equipment or water suppl ied is
used in and for cooling.
c. The water service must not, for any other reason, be so interrupted while the meter is being
repaired or replaced.
2. The by-pass shall be furnished and installed by the customer in accordance with the utility's
specifications or codes. Where existing piping, not containing a by-pass, is altered to meet any
of the above conditions, the alteration shall also include a by-pass arrangement.
Protection of property
1. All meters, appliances, equipment, and appurtenances furnished by the utility and which may be
on the customer's premises, shall remain as the property of the utility, unless otherwise
expressly provided herein. The customer shall protect the property f rom freezing, loss, or
damage, and shall not be permitted to remove, tamper, or alter the property.
2. The customer shall be responsible and liable for all damages to the utility's property while on
the premises in the event that the property is damaged from freezing or hot water and shall pay
for cost for repair or replacement necessary to restore service and required accuracy of the
metering. Upon repeated instances of damaged meters due to negligence of the customer, the
utility can refuse service until the customer can properly protect the equipment from the
Repairs
Ordinary repairs to meters will be performed by the utility without expense to the customer.
Testing for accuracy
A meter will be tested for accuracy upon request from the customer. A utility will first investigate the
premises for other of reasons for excessive water usage before removing the meter for testing.
1. If leaks are found or if the meter test establishes accuracy of the meter to be between 98% and
102%, the utility may make a service charge of at least $75 for either service activity. The
customer may have a representative present during the investigation or testing.
2. The testing or investigation will not be performed more than once in 12 months, unless the
customer has abnormally high billings. A report of the results of the test will be made to the
customer and a complete record of the test will be maintained by the utility.
Seals
The utility may place seals on any water meter, by-pass, or related couplings, in and for any premises, and
will replace the seals found to be broken or removed. The water supply may be turned off if the seals are
found to be broken or removed.
Multi-family dwellings
Where water is taken through one meter servicing a multi-family dwelling, the utility requires the owner of the
real property to maintain the billing in the owner's name.
Meter reading equipment
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
WATER
CHAPTER
53
1. All users of the utility’s water service shall have installed, at the user's expense, an outside
remote water meter reader device.
2. All outside remote water meter reader stations shall be installed by the City Water Department;
the meters will be read at the time of the electric meters; and charges for water and sewer will
be billed on the same time intervals and along with the user's electric bill.
3. New meter applicants shall have installed remote/AMI meter reading equipment as designated
by the utility within its ordinances, general rules and regulations, and schedules of installation,
in effect.
Fire Hydrant Meter
1. For bulk tanker and pool filling, customers may purchase water in larger bulk amounts by
utilizing the water filling station at the Water Department, or at customer’s request, the Utility
can set a fire hydrant meter for use in bulk tanker and pool filling. To utilize the filling station at
the Water Department, customer shall pay a meter maintenance/convenience charge of $40 per
month, plus water usage, to be billed at the current rate approved by the Indiana Utility
Regulatory Commission.
2. When a customer requests to have the Utility set a fire hydrant meter for temporary use such as
bulk tanker filling, pool filling, or for irrigation, the Utility will evaluate and determine which
Hydrant, if any, are suitable for use in such purposes. Once a suitable hydrant has been
selected, the customer shall pay a temporary hydrant meter set fee of $75, plus water usage, to
be billed at the current rate approved by the Indiana Utility Regulatory Commission. Further
arrangements may be made by the Utility for contractors requiring the extended use of hydrant
meters. This temporary use will not be for more than seven days. Section 3 below outline rules
regarding extended use. The Utility will deliver and set the hydrant meter with a valve that can
be operated by the customer. When available, hydrant meter hoses can be delivered for use
free of charge.
3. Contractors requesting extended usage of hydrant meters shall pay a temporary hydrant meter
set fee of $75 per month, plus water usage, to be billed at the current rate approved by the
Indiana Utility Regulatory Commission. Contractors are required to call in/report meter usages
to the Utility on the first of every month for invoicing. Failure to comply will result in an estimated
minimum usage of 20,000 gallons for that month
4. The following applies to all fire hydrant meter usage as described above: When finished with
use of the fire hydrant meter, customer shall notify the Utility. Customer also responsible for
rolling up and leaving the hoses for pick-up at the location of the hydrant meter, otherwise an
additional charge of $75 will apply. Unless approved ONLY by the Water Utility, laying hoses
across streets, alleys, and driveways is prohibited. If the fire hydrant, or hydrant meter is
damaged by the customer due to negligence or misuse, the customer is responsible for all costs
associated with such.
53.041 PREWIRING FOR REMOTE WATER READING UNITS
All new dwelling units constructed within the service areas of the utility shall be pre-wired by the
builder with suitable transmission wire as a part of the construction costs to the unit.
When the water service is ordered for the unit, a reasonable fee will be charged by the Building
Commissioner, in addition to the costs of the water service connection, to compensate for materials,
labor, or equipment to install a water meter remote read unit at the location in the new dwelling unit.
53.042 BASIS FOR MONTHLY BILLING
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
WATER
CHAPTER
53
All water usage charges, other than for un-metered fire service or other special purposes, will be
calculated upon the registration of the meter or meters installed. This registration shall be prima
facie evidence of the amount of water used.
The utility will make an effort to read meters every month or at intervals as designated by the Board
of Public Works and Safety.
1. In the event that the utility is unable to read the meter, or should the meter fail to register, or if
the utility is unable to gain access to the customer's premises, the customer will be billed on the
basis of average of consumption as shown by the record of previous meter readings.
2. The first charge after a meter reading is obtained will be then adjusted by averaging
consumption over a period from the last reading, charging for each period in accordance with
the schedule of rates in effect for the periods, and allowing credit for the amount of estimated
billings as applicable to the event.
After three consecutive months of estimating, the utility will automatically boost the consumption to
four times the estimated amount. The customer will continue to be billed at the boosted rate until
such time as an actual read is taken and validated. Any necessary billing adjustments will be made
on the following billing, after the actual read.
Where water is taken through more than one meter, and, where the arrangement is for the
convenience of the customer, then, each meter will be read and billed separately. Where water is
taken through more than one meter for the convenience of the utility, then, the meter readings will
be aggregated and billed as one reading.
All water passing through meters will be charged for at the applicable rates, whether used, wasted,
or lost through leakage.
The utility will not be bound by billings rendered under a mistake of fact as to the quantity of service
rendered.
53.043 PAYMENT OF BILLS
Billings rendered to customers for water service will reflect at least the following information.
1. The dates at the beginning and ending of the service period, and the meter reading at the end
of the period for which the billing is rendered.
2. The previous balance, if any.
3. The amount of the billing.
4. The date on which the billing is due.
5. If an estimated billing, a clear coding, or other indication identifying the billing as an estimated
bill.
6. An explanation, which can be readily understood, of all of the codes or symbols on the billing.
Billings will be rendered monthly
If payment of the net amount is not received by Auburn or a bank duly authorized as a collection agent
within 17 days after the bill is mailed to the customer, the bill is delinquent. The net amount plus the late
payment charge then becomes due. If the bill remains unpaid, a separate disconnect notice will be mailed
to the customer 20 days after the due date, requiring payment of the delinquent amount within 14 days of
the mailing date. If such payment is not received by the expiration of such 14 day period, service is
thereafter subject to disconnection. Partial payments and payments on bills with disconnect notices will not
be accepted by banks authorized as collection agents. When the due date falls on Saturday, Sunday or any
legal holiday, the first business day thereafter shall be the due date.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
WATER
CHAPTER
53
Failure to receive a bill shall not entitle the customer to the net bill if he fails to make payment within
the said 17 day prompt payment period, nor shall it affect the right of Auburn to discontinue service
as provided above.
To qualify for the above consideration, the customer must not be entered into and have breached a
similar agreement with the utility during the last 12-month period.
At the time of the execution of any agreement, the customer must agree to pay all future billings as
they become due for water service. Failure to fulfill the terms of the agreement will make the same
null and void and the total unpaid past-due amount, together with any associated service charges
related thereto, will become due. Failure to comply with the conditions of the agreement will result in
the discontinuance of the service without further notice to the customer.
Disputing the accuracy of any billing shall not be a valid reason for nonpayment of the billing by the
customer, or abatement of charges.
The customer may pay a billing under protest, giving written notice that redress of the dispute is
being sought by the customer. The written notice must be filed with the Utility Office Department of
the utility, with payment, prior to the due date of the billing, with no exceptions.
The Board of Public Works and Safety shall review the written protests as received from the
customer, for disposition of the request. Utility Office personnel will not be in authority to render
disposition of the dispute.
Failure to make payment on or before the billing due date, pending settlement of a disputed billing,
shall be considered the same as with any other past -due account, regardless of past payment
history of the customer.
All water charges follow the property, not the customer. If a customer moved from the premises
where water service has been supplied, the customer will be held responsible for the payment of all
billings rendered for the service supplied to the premises until proper notice of discontinuance of
water service has been given to the office of the utility.
Moving from one location to another location in no way absolves the customer from any unpaid
charges incurred at a previous location.
A customer's service may be discontinued for failure to pay any of the unpaid charges due from the
customer, regardless of the premises with respect to which the charges were incurred.
53.044 ADJUSTMENT OF BILLING
Adjustments due to meter error
If any service meter is found to have a percentage error greater than that allowed by the Indiana Utility
Regulatory Commission, the following procedure for the adjustment of billings will be observed.
1. Fast meters
When a meter is found to have a positive average error (that is, is fast, in excess of 2%) the utility will
refund or credit the customer's account with the amount in excess of that determined to be an average
charge for one-half of the time elapsed since the previous test of the meter, or six months, whichever
period is shorter. This average charge will be calculated on the basis of the units registered on the
meter over corresponding periods either prior or subsequent to the period for which the meter is
determined to be fast. No part of a minimum service charge will be refunded.
2. Stopped or slow meters
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
WATER
CHAPTER
53
When a meter is stopped or has a negative average error (that is, is slow, in excess of 2%), the utility
may charge the customer an amount estimated to be an average charge for one-half of the time elapsed
since the previous meter test or six months, whichever period is shorter. This average charge shall be
calculated on the basis of the units registered on the meter over the corresponding periods or
subsequent to the period for which the meter is determined to be slow or stopped. This action may be
taken only in cases where the utility is not at fault for allowing the stopped or slow meter to remain in
service.
Errors adjusted
All billing errors, including incorrect tariff applications, will be adjusted to the known date of the error or for a
period of one year, whichever is shorter.
53.045 COLLECTIONS; DEFERRED PAYMENT CHARGE
Civil action to recover charges
The utility may bring a civil action to recover any delinquent charges together with applicable
interest at the statutory rate, the costs and disbursements of the actions, and any other remedies
prescribed by law.
Deferred payment charge
All billings for water services not paid on or before the due date indicated on the billing shall be
subject to a collection or deferred payment charge of 10% on the first $3 and 3% on the excess
over $3, or as amended by ordinance from time to time, and in effect at the time that the cha rge is
posted to the account.
53.046 WASTE OR EXCESSIVE USE OF WATER
If a customer on a special purpose un-metered rate is found using water in excess of the amount contracted
for, or permits leaks on the premises, or wastes water by allowing hydrants or faucets to run more or less
continuously, the utility may require the customer to provide a suitable place for the installation of a water
meter and thereafter will supply service in accordance with the applicable metered tariff.
OTHER REGULATIONS
53.055 NOTIFICATION OF LOAD INCREASE
The service and meters supplied by the utility have definite capacities. No substantial addition to the waterconsuming
equipment or appliances connected thereto shall be made except after written notice to a written
consent from the utility.
53.056 RESALE OF WATER
The water or service furnished under these rules and regulations is for the use of the customer on the
premises. He shall not resell any water or service without the expressed written consent of the utility.
Written consent shall be in the form of a clear contract with the utility.
53.057 PRIVATE FIRE PROTECTION SERVICE
The entire private fire protection service on a customer's premises shall be subject to inspection
and testing by the utility at the times as it is deemed necessary by the utility or other authority
having legal interest in private systems.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
WATER
CHAPTER
53
Before any modifications are made to any private fire protection system or before service is
furnished to any new private fire protection system connected to or proposed to be connected to
and supplied with water from the utility's distribution mains, the owner of the private fire protection
system or the owner's contractor shall provide certification in accordance with 53.024 to the utility,
that the system has been disinfected, and final plans of the fire protection system shall be filed with
and approved by the City Engineer and the Fire Department. The following shall be shown on the
final plans.
1. The number of sprinkler heads to be served.
2. The sizes and location of the system's piping.
3. The sizes and locations of all connections to the utility's distribution mains.
4. The sizes and locations of all hose connections, reels, or cabinets.
5. The sizes and locations of storage tanks connected to the fire system.
6. The outlet sizes and locations of all fire hydrants.
7. The sizes, locations, and types of all valves.
All fire protection lines within buildings must be installed in such a manner that all pipes will be
easily accessible for inspection at any time. Underground pipes outside of buildings must be placed
and be maintained at a minimum depth of 4-1/2 feet.
No connection with a fire protection system will be permitted to supply water for general purposes
unless the connection has been approved by the customer's fire underwriter and unless the general
purpose water is metered. If such a connection is approved, both the fire protection line and the
general purpose line shall be separately valved outside the building to be served and proper cross -
connection devices provided, all in accordance with the utility's specifications, thus permitting either
line to be turned on or off without affecting the other.
A private fire protection system without a tank shall be equipped with an alarm valve and an
approved cross-connection backflow protection device, to be located on the main service pipes
supplying fire protection to the property. All valving installed as part of the fire system shall protect
the utility's distribution from water hammer damage.
An un-metered private fire service is furnished for the sole purpose of supplying water for the
extinguishment of accidental fires, and the use of water from such a service connection for any
other purpose is absolutely forbidden.
Hydrants and other fixtures connected to a private fire service connection may be sealed by the
utility, and the seal shall be broken only in case of fire or as specifically permitted by the utility . The
customer must immediately notify the utility when any seal is then broken for any purpose.
When a service tap on a utility distribution main provides water for both fire and general purposes to
a customer or customers, separate charges will be made for each purpose to each customer by the
utility in accordance with the established rules and schedule of rates.
A private fire service, at the option of the customer and after approval by the customer's fire
underwriter, may be connected to the metered water service.
The monthly charges for combined fire and general purpose uses will be as set out in the
established scheduled rates. Any additional investment costs incurred by the utility in such
metering must be paid by the customer. Maintenance of the meter will be at the water utility's
expense.
Whenever a private fire system is to be tested under the regulations of the fire service underwriters,
the customer shall notify the utility of the proposed testing, naming the day and the hour of the
testing, so that the water utility may have a representative present.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
WATER
CHAPTER
53
53.058 UTILITY NOT LIABLE FOR CERTAIN CONDITIONS
The utility shall not be responsible in damages for any failure to supply water service, for interruption of the
supply of water, for defective piping on the customer's premises, or for damages resulting to a customer or
to third persons from the use of water or the presence of the utility's devices on the customer's premises,
unless due to fault, neglect, or culpability on the part of the utility. Neither party shall be liable to the other for
any failure or delay in case the failure or delay is caused by strikes, the acts of nature, unavoidable
accidents or contingencies beyond its control, and is not due to fault, neglect, or culpability on its part.
53.059 PERMANENT DISCONNECTIONS
In order to reduce the potential of leakage from the utility's distribution system, when water service is no
longer needed at a given property, the owner of the property shall, at the owner's expense, disconnect the
service line from the utility's distribution main or shall employ the utility to make this disconnection, for which
the owner shall pay the utility a reasonable fee.
53.060 WATER MAIN EXTENSIONS
The water utility requires persons, firms, or corporations to pay for the costs of the extensions required to
adequately serve water for domestic, commercial, or fire protection. This policy intends to place the costs of
installation of local water mains upon the owners of the properties benefited.
ENFORCEMENT
53.070 ENFORCEMENT OF RULES AND REGULATIONS
The remedies provided to the utility in these rules and regulations shall not be exclusive and shall be in
addition to any other remedies which the utility has at law or in equity.
WELLS AND PUMPS
53.080 ADOPTION OF MINIMUM STANDARDS
The city does adopt and place into effect, the minimum standards and requirements of Bulletin No. PWS2
(1983) Standards for Construction of Private Water Wells and Water Systems, Bulletin No. PWS5 (1984)
Standards for Construction of Geothermal Heat Pump Systems, and Bulletin No. S.E.13 (1983) Planning
Guide for Private Water Supply and Sewage Disposal for Small Public - Commercial and Place of
Employment
Buildings as those of the city and provisions thereof pertaining or adaptable to the subject matter and intents
of this subchapter are expressly incorporated herein by reference as fully as if set out at length herein.
53.081 PERMITS AND INSPECTIONS
Permit for well
1. Normal situations
Before commencement of construction of a well, the well driller shall obtain a written permit
signed by the City Building Commissioner, and the permit shall be posted in a conspicuous
place on the owner's premises prior to the commencement of work thereunder. No person shall
perform any work on the well project until the permit is obtained and posted on the premises.
The application for the permit shall be made on a form provided by the city and the applicant
shall supplement by any plans, specifications, and other information as deemed necessary by
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
WATER
CHAPTER
53
the city. A permit and inspection fee of $35 shall be paid to the city at the time the application is
filed. The permit shall be void if the installation is not then completed within a one-year period.
2. Emergency situations
In emergency situations, the well driller may drill the well prior to obtaining his permit; however,
the water shall not be used for human consumption until the application for the permit has been
filed, the permit secured, and the well inspected and approved along with proof of laboratory
bacterial acceptability. In emergency situations, the applicant for the well permit shall notify the
city by telephone of the pending well installation prior to such well installation. The well permit
shall be obtained within 24 hours of the regular scheduled workday after the start of the
emergency installation.
Permit for pump
1. Normal situations
a. Permit required
Before the installation of any pump or facilities to convey water from a well, including pitless
adaptors, well seal, well houses, or connecting piping as any part of construction of a
private water supply built under the provisions of this subchapter, the pump installer shall
obtain a written permit signed by the Building Commissioner, and the permit shall be posted
in a conspicuous place on the owner's premises prior to the commencement of work
thereunder. No person shall perform any work on the project until the permit is so obtained
and posted on the premises.
b. Application
The application for the permit shall be made on a form as provided by the city, and shall
supplement by any plans, specifications, and other information as are deemed necessary by
the city. A permit and inspection fee of $35 shall be paid to the city at the time the
application is filed. The permit shall be void if the installation is not then completed within a
one-year period. These same requirements shall apply to the repair of a well, pump, or
accessory lines thereto when it is deemed necessary to uncover the buried upper terminal
of the well.
2. Emergency situations
In emergency situations, the pump installer may then install a pump prior to obtaining a pump permit, but
the city shall be notified by telephone, by the pump installer, of the pending pump installation. In
emergency installations, the application for the permit shall explain the emergency and the reason why
the pump was installed, prior to obtaining a permit. The pump permit should be obtained within 24 hours
of the regular scheduled business day of the city offices for the start of the emergency installations.
Inspections
The city, by its lawfully authorized representative, shall be allowed to inspect the well installation at any
stage of construction. In any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the city when the work is
completed or of the intent to abandon the well, all in compliance with this subchapter. The inspection shall
be made within 48 hours of the receipt of notice by the city's representative. Days not considered regular
business days of the city are not considered part of the 48 hours.
Final inspection
The city, by its lawfully authorized representative, shall be allowed to inspect the well installation at any
stage of construction, and in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the city when the work will be
ready for final inspection at least four working hours before any of the underground portions are backfilled or
covered. The scheduled work hours shall be the business hour day of the city offices.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
WATER
CHAPTER
53
53.082 PUMP INSTALLATION
Hand pumps
All hand pumps, stands, or similar of any such devices, shall be installed so that no unprotected opening
connecting with the interior of the pump exists. The pump spout shall be closed to the outlet and directed
downward. The top of the casing shall extend at least one inch into the pump base.
Power-driven pumps
All power-driven pumps located over wells shall be mounted on the well casing with an approved pump
foundation pump stand, so as to provide an effective well seal at the top of the well. In most cases,
extension of the casing into the pump base of at least one inch shall be considered an effective seal,
provided the pump is mounted on a base plate and foundation in such manner to exclude dust and insects,
and the top of the well casing is at an elevation at least two feet above any known flood water level. Where
the pump unit is not to be located over the well and the pump delivery or suction pipe emerges from the top
thereof, a watertight expanding gasket or equivalent well seal shall be so provided between the well casing
and piping. A similar watertight seal shall be provided at the terminal of a conduit containing a cable for a
submersible pump. All submersible pumps should have one check valve located on the discharge line
above the pump and inside the casing. If the discharge pipe is at least 12 inches above the ground level and
slopes to drain into the well, the check valve may be located in the building.
Pump-bearing lubrication
Bearings of power pumps shall be lubricated with water of a bacterial quality equal to that of the water being
pumped.
1. Water-lubricated pumps
If a pump delivering potable water is provided with a water lubrication tank, the tank shall be so
designed and installed as to prevent contamination of the water therein.
2. Oil-lubricated pumps
The use of oil-lubricated pumps is expressly prohibited for the pumping of potable water, or in
service that might affect any other existing wells.
Pump houses
Unless the power-driven pump installation is of weather-proof and frost-proof construction as determined by
the applicable rules and regulations set forth in National Codes, and the like, a structure housing the pump
shall be constructed permitting access to the pump for maintenance and repair work. The pump house shall
be constructed of impervious material and shall slope away in all directions from the well or the suction pipe.
Protection against freezing
Pump water pipe lines and other wet parts of water systems shall be protected against possible freezing
conditions therein.
Well venting
All well vent openings shall be piped water-tight to a point not less than 24 inches above any known flood
water level, and, in any event, to the top of the well casing. The vent opening and the piping shall be of
sufficient size as to prevent any hard frost and in no case less than 1/4-inch in diameter. The terminal of
vent pipes shall be shielded and screened to prevent the entrance of foreign matter, and shall be turned
downward. If toxic or flammable gases are vented from the well, the vent shall extend to the outside
atmosphere at a point where the gases will not produce a hazard. Any openings in pump bases shall be
sealed watertight.
Sampling faucets
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
WATER
CHAPTER
53
In all pressure water systems, provisions shall be made for collection of water samples by the installation of
a faucet on the discharge side of and as close as possible to, the pump. The sampling faucet shall have a
smooth turned-down nozzle. A hose bib shall not be used.
Suction or non-pressure lines
1. All buried suction pipe, or non-pressure pipe lines, shall be enclosed in a pipe conduit having a
minimum wall thickness as equivalent to casing of same sizes, and shall be so located from
sources of pollution in accordance with the distances as specified in the minimum standards
applicable hereunder or as so stipulated under any and all codes deemed applicable to the
situation as may exist and be in force by other regulatory agencies, whichever is the more
stringent.
2. Suction pipes with annular space between pipe and encasement under pressure may be
installed within specified distances only. Sewers of cast-iron pipe, with leaded joints, clear
water drains, and cisterns shall not be located within 100 feet of a suction line. No suction line
shall be beneath a sewer. An exposed pipe or piping shall not be connected to the line without
an approved cross-connection control device, and shall be protected against freezing.
Materials prohibited
1. No material will be used in the well or pump installation that will result in, or might result in the
pollution of the delivered water. All metallic and nonmetallic materials used shall have sufficient
structural strength and other properties to accomplish the purpose for which they are installed.
Flexible or non-rigid plastic pipe shall not be used for suspending submersible pumps, unless
having the physical properties to withstand the torque and load to which it is subjected.
2. Plastic pipe and solvent shall not be used, unless the products bear the approval of the National
Sanitation Foundation (NSF) and unless having the physical properties to withstand the torque
and the load to which it is subjected.
Location of pumps
Offset pumps, pressure tanks, electrical controls, and components and sampling faucets shall be located
where they are readily accessible. They shall not be located in a crawl space unless the crawl space is
drained to the ground surface beyond the crawl space either by gravity or by means of a sump pump, and
minimum of four feet of clear working space is provided between the floor of the crawl space and the floor
underside over the pump's installation area. If located in a crawl space, the pump shall be located within five
feet of the point of entry. The access opening should be at the least two feet wide. A check valve shall not
be permitted between the well and the inlet side of the pressure tank. Any part or accessory to the water
system that requires maintenance routing will not be installed in a crawl space unless that crawl space
meets the requirements of the provisions of this subchapter.
Pressure tanks
Pressure tanks or approved substitutes used as part of the water system shall be of such size as to prevent
excessive wear on the pump due to frequency of start-stop operations.
Minimum distances from well to source of possible contamination or threat of contamination
1. Private water supply wells and pumping equipment shall be installed using the following
minimum separation in distance from potential sources of contamination. If the well terminates
in creviced or slightly highly porous formations, greater distances should be so maintained.
a. Independent clear water drain, rain water downspout outlet, cistern, hydrant drain, or similar
unit, building foundation drain connected to independent clear water or subsoil drain, well
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
WATER
CHAPTER
53
pit, pump pit, pressure tank pit, pressure tank access pit, subsurface pump rooms or
reservoir, ten feet.
b. Sanitary or storm sewer-connected foundation drain, or property lines, 200 feet.
c. Stream, lake, or pond shoreline, open ditch or waterway, sanitary or storm sewer line
constructed of waterworks grade ductile or cast -iron pipe with mechanical or push-on joints,
or private residential fuel tanks, 100 feet or more.
d. Watertight grease basin, septic tank, wastewater holding tank, privies utilizing solid wall
wastewater holding tanks, subsoil drain or building sanitary or storm sewer, sewer pump,
floor drain connected to building sanitary or storm sewer, sewer pump, floor drain connected
to building sanitary sewer or below-ground swimming pool and related, 200 feet.
e. Stable, milk house, feeding pen, livestock run, manure pile, animal barn with concrete floor,
glass-lined storage facility, conventional silo, watertight milk-house floor drain, other than
cast iron, or watertight sewer conveying manure juices, or a loose-jointed field tile drain, 200
feet.
f. Sanitary or connected storm sewers, 200 feet.
g. Absorption field, solid liquid manure holding tank, silage storage pit, cesspool, dry well, or
seepage pit or trench, 200 feet.
h. Surface or subsurface tanks used to store any of chemicals such as gasoline, benzene, fuel
oil, fertilizer, any hazardous substance, 1000 feet or as may be agency-approved by
authorities.
i. Treated sludge disposal area, wastewater absorption, storage, retention or treatment pond,
ridge and furrow waste disposal site, or any spray irrigation waste disposal site, 1500 feet,
or as may be agency-approved by authorities.
j. Uncovered salt or salt-mixture storage, 1500 feet.
Note
The distance for minimum separation is only a guideline and greater distances may be
required. The uncovered storage of salt and salt-mixtures is, in all cases, discouraged.
2. If the well is or will be located within 2500 feet of existing, abandoned, or proposed potential
source of groundwater pollution, the Land Pollution Control Division of the State Board of Health
should first be consulted concerning a recommended separation from the facility.
3. If the distance requirements as set forth in this subchapter cannot be met due to conditions at
the well site, consultation should be made with the city for the possible waiver based on special
construction or on favorable geological conditions as may qualify by the interpretation of
regulatory agencies having further jurisdiction over these matters.
53.083 USE OF WELLS FOR DRAINAGE PURPOSES PROHIBITED
The use of a well for the disposal of sewage or of other material which may pollute the potable groundwater
is prohibited.
53.084 DISINFECTION, SAMPLES, AND REPORT
Disinfections
1. To prevent contamination of the well or aquifer, it is desirable to maintain a chlorine-residual of
200 parts per million (ppm), or an alternative approved by the State Board of Health, in the well
hole during the drilling process. This excludes monitoring wells. Under these conditions the
well need not be disinfected until the pump is set. Every new, modified, or reconditioned water
source, including pumping equipment and gravel used in gravel wall wells, shall be disinfected
before being placed in service for general use.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
WATER
CHAPTER
53
This treatment shall be performed both when the well work is finished and when the pump is
installed or when the pump is reinstalled in the well.
2. If there is no significant lapse of time between the two operations, only the later disinfection will
be so required. The well or other pumping equipment and gravel used in gravel wall well
construction shall be disinfected with a solution containing enough of chlorine to leave a
residual of 25 parts per million in the well after a period of at least 24 hours.
Water samples
After pumping the well to remove all disinfectant, a water sample shall be collected by the well owner or
representative, from the well and submitted for laboratory analysis to the State Board of Health or a certified
private laboratory to determine portability of the sampled water, prior to the well being placed in service and
the proof of acceptance provided to the city.
Well records
The well driller shall supply to the city an accurate record of the construction details of the well, including a
log of the soil formation and deeper materials in which the well hole is drilled, results of pumping tests, and
other information that may be requested, within 30 days after drilling the well. The driller shall furnish the
owner a duplicate copy of this information as well as provide copies of the well record to the Division of
Water of the State Department of Natural Resources as required by the state statutes.
53.085 BASIC WELL CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS GUIDELINES
The casing of the well shall be steel or thermoplastic material and shall be of sufficient thickness
and quality to protect the well against structural deficiencies during construction, and against
contamination by surface water or other undesirable materials during the expected life of the well.
Only recessed couplings may be used on threaded steel pipe or casing. Ferrous casings shall be a
new first-class material meeting ASTM Standards as A-120 or A-53, or API Standards API-5A or
API-51. No thin- walled, sheet metal, used, reclaimed, rejected, or contaminated pipe or casing
shall be for use in a water well.
New pipe or casing, when salvaged from water well test holes only, shall not be considered as used
or contaminated, normally.
Where corrosive water or soil is likely to be then encountered, thicker walls in pipe or casing than
those which appear in the tables of acceptable and recommended materials, should be used.
53.086 WELL ABANDONMENT
Temporary abandonment
A temporarily abandoned well which may be equipped and used at some future time shall be temporarily
sealed at the surface by a welded or threaded cap, or in the case of a dug well, in a manner satisfactory to
the State Board of Health Standards.
Permanent abandonment
To limit ground water contamination, the 1988 Indiana water well drilling and pump installation
statute, Indiana Code 25-39, requires abandoned wells to be sealed at the surface or plugged with
impervious materials.
A well that is to be abandoned permanently shall be filled with a cement-type grout containing no less than
6% Bentonite, mixed into the grout or a thick Bentonite grout (1-1/2 lbs. of #8 mesh Bentonite mixed with
one gallon of water) placed from the base of the boring upward by pump or other acceptable procedure.
(Refer to PWS 2. section 5.1 Abandonment Criteria.)
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
WATER
CHAPTER
53
Other conditions
Dewatering, temporary service, construction water, process, wells, or other structures for withdrawing
groundwater or the lowering or raising of the water tables, regardless of location, length of intended service,
or original use or intent, shall be constructed to the identical procedures as prescribed herein for permanent
abandonment.
53.087 GEOTHERMAL HEAT PUMP SYSTEM STANDARDS
Purpose
Potable groundwater is one of man's most precious natural resources. The improper well drilling and
geothermal heat pump system installation procedures and installations may pollute the available supply of
groundwater in and around the city. To guide drillers and owners in the construction of geothermal heat
pump systems, the city establishes the following standards to protect its groundwater from contamination by
less than recognized installation methods.
Availability of groundwater
The availability of groundwater is an initial consideration in determining whether an open-loop or closed-loop
system shall be used. In areas where the available groundwater is limited or where there is a high density of
wells existing, special consideration and construction techniques may be required for an open-looped
system. The Division of Water, State Department of Natural Resources can provide general information on
groundwater availability in and around the city, DeKalb County, Indiana areas.
Open-loop systems
1. Supply wells
a. Wells used to supply open-loop groundwater heat pump systems shall comply with the
standards in the State Board of Health PWS 2 Bulletin, as Standards for Construction of
Private Water Wells and Water Systems, sections 2 and 3. Compliance shall not be
construed as ensuring that adequate water is available for this purpose. The availability of
groundwater may only be determined by a qualified well driller certified by the National Well
Association and licensed by the State Department of Natural Resources or a geologist
certified by the State Department of Natural Resources.
b. If the total from all sources of supply has the capability of withdrawing more than 100,000
gallons of water per day, the water withdrawal facility must be registered with the State
Department of Natural Resources pursuant to IC 14-25-7, and the city. Forms are available
upon request.
2. Discharge
Prior approval must be obtained from the proper officials before wastewater from an open-loop heat
pump system may be disposed of into storm water drain, stream, or any other method of wastewater
discharge. The discharge shall not cause a public health hazard or nuisance.
Vertical closed-loop systems
1. Criteria
a. Improperly installed vertical geothermal loops may, as in any other boring, constitute a
hazard to public health, safety, welfare, and to the preservation of the groundwater
resource. The proper sealing of the boring is an important consideration in preserving the
quality of the water present in the geologic formations encountered. The hydrologic
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
WATER
CHAPTER
53
conditions of any given area must be evaluated before the intended system is constructed.
Properly sealed vertical loop geothermal borings should accomplish the following.
i. Prevention of groundwater contamination.
ii. Conservation of well yield and maintenance of hydrostatic head of aquifers encountered.
iii. Prevention of the intermingling of desirable and undesirable waters.
b. The basic consideration governing the proper installation of the vertical geothermal loops is
in the preservation of the geohydrologic conditions that existed before the boring was in fact
drilled. Improperly installed, the loop might be an uncontrolled point for contamination of the
water located. The vertical bore should be completely filled in a manner that vertical
movement of water in the well bore is confined permanently to the specific zone of
penetration, as heretofore presented.
c. To seal a vertical boring, the original bore hole will be sealed with impermeable materials in
a manner as to prevent the percolation of surface waters downward through the boring, or
along the outside of the loop leading to the water table. If groundwater is encountered
under confined or artesian conditions, the sealing must confine the water to the aquifer in
the zone it occurred, thereby preventing loss of artesian pressure in the aquifer and
preventing the upward circulation of water to the surface; or into formations containing no
water; or to formations containing water under a lower head than that in the aquifer which is
to be sealed.
d. The entire heat exchange system shall be constructed of high density, high molecular
polyethylene pipe. All joints must be thermally fused.
e. Each drilling contractor is required to keep and maintain accurate records for each closed
loop installed. The record must contain at least the following information.
i. The location of the boring with reference to at least two permanent landmarks (such as
buildings and the like).
ii. The depth and diameter of the boring.
iii. The character and thickness of materials or formation drilled.
iv. Description of piping materials used.
v. Installation and bore hole sealing techniques used.
f. These records shall be submitted to the city, and to the State Department of Natural
Resources on a form provided by the department offices.
g. There shall be at least 50 feet of separation between vertical closed-loop excavations and a
water supply well. Exceptions may be made if it can be demonstrated that it will have no
adverse effect on public health. In addition, all borings shall satisfy the separation
distances from points of contamination by local and state statutes, as referenced in 53.082.
All borings shall be made by a well driller licensed by the State Department of Natural
Resources and by the National Water Well Association.
2. Installation procedures
All borings shall be filled with cement grout containing no less than 6% Bentonite mixed into the grout, or
a thick Bentonite grout (1-1/2 lbs., #8 mesh Bentonite mixed with one gallon of water) placed from the
base of the boring upward by pump or other acceptable method procedures. Drilling fluid can be used if
it is brought up to the required slurry viscosity and strength. It is advised that the end loop terminate
approximately 2.5 feet above the base of the boring to ensure adequate separation between the end of
the loop and base of the boring. To ensure adequate lateral protection between the loop pipes and
surrounding material, the bore diameter should be a minimum of two inches larger than the combined
diameter of the loop pipes. Sand, gravel, slag, and crushed limestone shall not be used in filling a hole.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
WATER
CHAPTER
53
Horizontal closed-loop systems
Horizontal closed-loop systems shall not be installed under sewage system or absorption field trenches, and
must also satisfy the minimum well distances from any sources of contamination as set forth in 53.082.
General closed-loop considerations
1. The earth in the vicinity of the bore holes should be graded to cause runoff water to drain away
to prevent pooling in the immediate surrounding area of the bore holes.
2. The antifreeze solution used in the closed-loop system shall be a nontoxic chemical which will
not, in any way, contaminate the potable water of the prevailing aquifer if the loop pipe has a
leak. A tag, identifying the type of chemical and the concentration in which the system is filled,
shall be attached to the system in a conspicuous place. A sampling faucet shall be installed as
set forth in 53.082.
3. Antifreeze solutions or additives within the closed-loop must be limited to the following.
a. Pure glycerine solution, provided the glycerine is of 96.5% U.S.
b. Food grade propylene glycol.
c. Depotassium phosphate.
4. A location sketch referencing the geothermal system to the proper boundary or other enduring
landmark, should be provided to the property owner.
5. Under no circumstances shall a connection be made between the potable water and the clos edloop
system.
53.088 POWERS FOR INSPECTION AND ENFORCEMENT
The city, by its duly authorized representative, or, the City Building Commissioner, bearing proper
identification, shall be permitted to enter upon all properties at a proper time, for the purpo se of
inspection, or monitoring necessary to carry out the provisions of this subchapter and any
amendments that may be in effect at the time of the inspections.
Whenever the inspection determines that there are reasonable grounds to believe that there has
been a violation of any provision of this subchapter, the city shall give notice of the violation, as
identified, to the person responsible therefore, and to any known agent of the person, as is
hereinafter provided.
The notice shall:
1. Be issued in writing.
2. Include a statement of reasons why it is being issued.
3. Allow reasonable time for the performance of any act it requires.
4. Be served upon the owner or his agent, or the occupant, as the case may require, provided that
the notice shall be deemed to be properly served upon the owner or agent, or upon the
occupant, if a copy thereof is sent by certified mail to his last known address, or if a copy
thereof is posted in a conspicuous place in or about the dwelling affected by the notice, or if he
is now served by any other method authorized or required under the laws of this state, and
5. The notice must contain an outline or remedial action, which if taken, will effect compliance with
the provisions of this subchapter.
Any person affected by any notice issued by the city may request, and shall be granted a hearing
on the matter, provided that the person shall file in the office of the City Clerk -Treasurer's Office
within ten days after service of the notice, a written petition requesting the hearing and setting forth
a brief statement of the grounds therefore. Upon receipt of the petition, the Board of Public Works
and Safety shall arrange a time and place for the hearing and shall give the petitioner written notice
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
WATER
CHAPTER
53
thereof. The hearing shall be held as soon as practicable after the receipt of request therefore. At
the hearing, the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be heard and to show cause why
compliance with this subchapter should not be met.
After the hearing, the Board of Public Works and Safety shall sustain, modify, or withdraw the
notice, depending upon the findings as to whether compliance with the provisions of this subchapter
have been met. If modified or if sustained, it shall be deemed to be an order as such. Any notice
pursuant to 53.087(C) shall automatically become an order if a written petition for a hearing in not
filed within the ten days after the notice is served. After a hearing in the case of any notice
suspending any permit required by this subchapter, when the notice has been sustained, the permit
shall be deemed to have been revoked. Any such permit which has been suspended by a notice
shall be deemed to be automatically revoked if a petition for hearing is not filed in the office of the
Clerk-Treasurer's Office within ten days after the notice is served.
Whenever the city, or any other agency having lawful jurisdiction over such matters, finds that an
emergency exists which may require immediate action to protect the public health, either agency
may, without notice or hearing, issue an order then reciting the existence of such an emergency and
requiring that the action be taken as deemed necessary to meet the emergency. Notwithstanding
the other provisions of this subchapter, such order shall be as effective immediately, but upon
petition to the city, any request shall be afforded a hearing as soon as possible in the manner
provided herein. After the hearing, depending upon the finding as to whether the provisions of this
subchapter have been caused to comply with, they may continue in effect, or, be so modified, or
may be revoked.
53.089 ENFORCEMENT INTERPRETATION
The city may initiate any procedures needed for the proper enforcement and to carry out the
purpose and intent of this subchapter.
Any person, firm, or corporation found to be in violation of 53.087(B) or (C) shall abandon and seal
the well unless all materials from the well are pulled and proved to meet all the requirements of this
subchapter, only at that time would a permit be issued for the purpose of reinstalling said materials.
In the event that special conditions seem to make construction under these standards impossible or
impractical, the city should be so consulted for a possible waiver of these requirements.
53.090 CERTIFICATION
All well drillers operating in the city are to be certified by the National Water Well Association and the
appropriate state agencies. Those well drillers not certified at the time of enactment of this subchapter will
have a time period of two years from the date of the enactment of this subchapter to obtain necessary well
drilling certification.
53.091 LIABILITY OF VIOLATOR
Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this subchapter shall become liable for any
expense, loss, or damage occasioned by reason of the violation.
53.092 EFFECTIVE DATE
This subchapter shall be effective November 1, 2018
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
WATER
CHAPTER
53
CONSERVATION; RATIONING
53.100 APPLICATION
This subchapter shall apply to all persons, firms, partnerships, associations, corporations, companies, or
organizations of any kind connected to the city public water system or using water therefrom (hereafter
referred to as users).
53.101 DECLARATION OF NEED
Upon determining that the city public water system is in imminent danger of a shortage of water or is
experiencing a shortage of water, the governing body shall declare a water conservation emergency and
establish the appropriate conservation measures and the duration thereof.
53.102 VOLUNTARY CONSERVATION
In accordance with 53.106, users shall be requested to reduce water consumption by practicing voluntary
conservation techniques. The governing body shall suggest reasonable and meaningful actions which will
alleviate existing or potential water shortage.
53.103 MANDATORY CONSERVATION
In accordance with 53.106, users shall be prohibited from the water uses listed below, subject to reasonable
terms, times, and conditions as the governing body shall determine.
Sprinkling, watering, or irrigating of shrubbery, trees, grass, ground covers, plants, vines, gardens,
vegetables, or any other vegetation.
Washing of automobiles, trucks, trailers, mobile homes, railroad cars, or any other type of mobile
equipment.
Cleaning or spraying of sidewalks, driveways, paved areas, or other outdoor surfaces.
Washing and cleaning of any business equipment or machinery.
The filling of swimming pools, wading pools, and ornamental fountains.
Knowingly allowing leakage through defective plumbing.
53.104 RATIONING
In addition to the mandatory conservation measures identified in 53.103 and in accordance with 53.106,
users shall be limited to water use per the following schedule.
Residential use shall be limited to 75 gallons per person per household per day.
Business, commercial, and industrial users shall be limited to 70% of the volume of water used
during the corresponding month of the preceding year. Business, commercial, or industrial users
that were not in business and operating in the area served by the city public water system more
than one year prior to the declaration of need shall be restricted to 70% of the average monthly
volume of water used during the number of months such business, commercial, or industrial user
was in business and operating in the public water system area.
53.105 EXCEPTIONS
The Common Council reserves the right to establish alternative rationing requirements for the following:
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
WATER
CHAPTER
53
Health care providers;
A reasonable use of water to maintain adequate health and sanitary standards; and
Those industrial and agricultural activities declared to be necessary for the public health an d wellbeing.
53.106 NOTICE
Notice of voluntary conservation measures shall be by publication in a local newspaper of gener al
circulation or other means as deemed appropriate by the governing body. This notice shall be
effective upon publication.
Notice of mandatory conservation or rationing shall be by first class U.S. mail, or by other door -todoor
distribution to each current user, and by electronic and print media. This notice shall be
deemed effective at the conclusion of door-to-door distribution, or at noon of the third day after
depositing same in the U.S. mail.
EXTENSION OF SERVICE BEYOND CORPORATION LIMITS
53.110 AUTHORITY
The Superintendent of the Water Department shall have the authority to act on behalf of the Board
of Public Works and Safety to contract for the extension of water services beyond the city's
corporation limits subject to the conditions enumerated in subsequent sections of this subchapter.
The Board of Public Works and Safety may require the Water Department Superintendent to seek
approval from the Board for any or all contracts.
53.111 STANDARDS FOR EXTENSION
The city requires certain facilities and accessories to be furnished when requesting water service to
any location not presently served by the city. The following rules shall apply in the approval
process for water service from any point along the Auburn water distribution network:
All materials, equipment, fixtures and related items, along with required installation methods, shall
be in conformance with standards of the state and within standards set by the cit y, whichever is
more stringent.
53.112 WATER MAIN DESIGN
Pressure
All water mains, including those not designed for providing fire protection, shall be sized after a
hydraulic analysis based on flow and pressure demand requirements. The system shall be designed
to maintain a minimum pressure of 30 psi at ground level at all points in the new distribution system
under all conditions of flows. Normal working pressure shall be approximately 60 psi, static to the
city system.
Diameter
Minimum size water main allowed for system design shall be eight inch diameter. For providing fire
protection and for serving fire hydrants, minimum size water main and connection shall be Six -Inch
diameter. Installation of six-inch water mains are allowed ONLY for a maximum distance of 300’,
and only in residential dead- ends. Larger size mains will be required if necessary to allow for the
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
WATER
CHAPTER
53
withdrawal of the required fire flow while maintaining the minimum residual pressure specified
herein
Fire protection
When fire protection is to be provided, system design shall be such that fire flows and any facilities
are in accordance with requirements of the State Insurance Services Office (ISO) and with the
Auburn Fire Department specifications.
Fire hydrants
Water mains not designed to carry required fire flows shall not have fire hydrants connected to
them.
Dead-end water mains
Dead-end water mains shall be minimized by looping of all mains except where extensions are
designed for the future and as approved by the Auburn Water Department.
Flushing devices
Approved dead-end water mains shall be provided with a fire hydrant if flow and pressure are
sufficient, or with an approved flushing hydrant or blow-off that will give a velocity of at least 2.5
feet-per-second in the water main being flushed. There shall not be any flush valve connected
between the water main and a sewer.
53.113 VALVES
Valves shall be provided by design of the water main network that are located not more than 500 feet
intervals and as approved by the Auburn Water Department.
53.114 FIRE HYDRANTS
Fire hydrants shall be provided at each street intersection and at intermediate points along the
water mains running between intersections spaced 500 feet apart and not more than 500 feet from
the furthest point of any structure in any single family residential district, not more than 300 feet
apart and not more than 500 feet from the furthest point of any structure in any multi -family,
commercial or industrial district or adjacent to any hospital, nursing home, mental health institution,
health maintenance organization, asylum, educational institution, private school or place of worship,
and shall be of a design approved by the Auburn Plan Commission and the City of Auburn Fire
Department. This requirement applies to new or extensions of public or private systems attached to
a public system.
Hydrants and appurtenances shall be in conformance with Auburn Water Department specifications
for valves, connections, size and type.
53.115 DESIGN CRITERIA
A summary of complete design criteria shall be submitted for the proposed project including, but not limited
to estimated average and maximum day water demands for development; number of proposed water
services; fire fighting requirements; future extensions of total development, as applicable; and engineering
study with data.
53.116 ADVISORY OPINIONS
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
WATER
CHAPTER
53
Any requests for water service extensions shall be reviewed by the committee whose member shall
issue a written advisory opinion as to the feasibility of the requested extension along with the
estimated cost for the extension to the city.
There shall be a plan prepared by the Water Superintendent for the recapture of all costs
associated with the extension.
53.117 INFORMATION REQUIRED
The requesting party shall provide the number of services required and future expansion plans; fire
protection is planned, now or in the future; topography of the area to be served, in general; brief statement
on projected completion dates, by phase; and brief statement on formula for recovery of funds by tap-on
fees.
53.118 REPORTS
The Water Superintendent shall issue a comprehensive report to the Board of Public Works and Safety
before the commencement of any extensions detailing the necessity for the extensions, the costs involved,
the plan for recapture of costs, the method of funding the extension and including a drawing depicting the
extension.
53.119 ANNEXATION
The requestor of water services shall be required to sign an agreement waiving any remonstrance of future
annexation of the property served by the water extension. Said agreement shall become a part and
condition of any conveyance of real property which is the subject of the water extension.
53.999 PENALTY
Any person who shall violate a provision of this chapter for which a penalty is not specifically
provided shall, upon conviction, be subject to such penalties as are contained in 10.99.
Any person who violates any provision of 53.080 through 53.092 shall be subject to the penalties as
herein provided.
1. Any person, firm, or corporation who shall violate any provision of 53.080 through 53.086, or
53.088 through 53.092 shall be served with a written order stating the nature of the violation
and providing a time limit for satisfactory correction thereof, and shall be subject to the penalties
as set forth in division (2) below.
2. Any person, firm, or corporation who shall violate any provision of 53.080 through 53.092 shall
be subject to penalty as hereinafter prescribed in this division. On finding a violation of
provisions of 53.080 through 53.092, the violator shall be fined, for the first offense, $200; for
the second offense, a fine of not more than $500; for the third and any subsequent offense, a
fine of not more than $1,000. Each day after the expiration of the time limit for abating and
completing improvements as so ordered, shall constitute a distinct and separate offense, to be
assessed separately.
Any person, firm, or corporation who violates 53.103 and 53.104 shall be subject to a fine of not
more than $25. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense. In addition, or as an
alternative to a fine, water service may be terminated for any user who violates 53.103 and 53.104.
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Public Safety Fire
Protection Personnel
Policies
CHAPTER 42
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 42-2
Public Safety Fire Protection Personnel Policies
CHAPTER 42
Table of Contents
42.00 FIRE PERSONNEL POLICY INTRODUCTION
42.01 WORKING HOURS
42.02 COMPENSATION
42.03 LEAVES
42.04 BENEFITS
42.05 FIREFIGHTERS’ PENSION
42.06 SOCIAL SECURITY FOR FIREFIGHTERS
42.07 DEATH BENEFITS
42.08 DISCIPLINARY ACTION/DISMISSAL
42.09 APPEAL PROCEDURE
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 42-3
Public Safety Fire Protection Personnel Policies
CHAPTER 42
42.00 FIRE PERSONNEL POLICY INTRODUCTION
This section applies to the City of Auburn FIRE Department, excluding civilian classification. Fire protection
personnel are also covered under additional provisions in Section 40.00.
If there is a conflict between Section 40.00 and this Section, this section will control.
A preference in employment in Fire Protection Services (a Firefighter) shall be given according to the
following priority:
1. A war veteran who has been honorably discharged from the United States armed forces;
2. A person whose mother or father died in the line of duty (as defined by I.C. 5-10-10-2) was a:
a. Firefighter of a unit,
b. Municipal police officer, or
c. County police officer, or
d. Other public safety officers.
A person may not be considered within the preference described herein unless the person applies for
employment according to the application procedure, meets all employment requirements as prescribed by
law, including physical, and are requirements, and all employment requirements prescribed by the fire
department.
The fire chief is the head of the Fire Department, but is at all times subordinate to the Mayor.
Subject to the rules and orders of the Board of Works and Safety, in time of an emergency, the fire chief is
subordinate to the Mayor and shall obey his/her orders and directions, notwithstanding any law or rule to the
contrary.
42.01 WORKING HOURS
FIREFIGHTERS STANDARD WORK PERIOD
1. The basic work period for Fire Protection Personnel is a 28 day schedule as established by the
Board of Public Works and Safety. In that 28 consecutive day work period, if more than 212
hours are worked, the employee is entitled to one and a half times his or her regular rate.
2. All categories of benefit days are considered as workdays in calculating the 212 hours worked.
The basic schedule for firefighters shall be 24 hours on duty and 48 hours off duty unless
economic conditions dictate a change, at which time city management and firefighters will
discuss the changes.
3. All firefighters shall be allowed to exchange working time subject to departmental rules and
regulations. All times shall be recorded.
FIRE ADMINISTRATIVE PERSONNEL STANDARD WORK PERIOD
1. Exempt (Salary) Employees are expected to work a regular schedule of five workdays, without
regard to the number of hours per day or per week. As an exempt (salary) employee, hours of
service to the City of Auburn will fluctuate depending upon service demands.
2. Salary employees must track working hours on a daily basis. Exempt (salary) will document
time away from work and the reasons for said time. Furthermore, said time off must be
approved by the exempt (salary) employee’s supervisor prior to said time off. Sick and
emergency time off shall be documented with the supervisor as soon as practical.
LUNCH BREAK
The Fire Department's lunch break is a paid break subject to call out.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 42-4
Public Safety Fire Protection Personnel Policies
CHAPTER 42
42.02 COMPENSATION
FIRE DEPARTMENT OVERTIME
Any firefighter who works more than 212 hours in a 28 consecutive day schedule shall be paid overtime
at the rate of time and a half of their regular pay schedule. All categories of benefit days are considered
as workdays in calculating the 212 hours worked.
FIRE ADMINISTRATIVE PERSONNEL
Fire Chief, District Chief, Division Chief and Fire Marshall shall be exempt [salary]. See Code Section
40.35 (4.5) Compensation – Exempt Pay Policy.
FIRE DEPARTMENT HOLIDAY PAY
1. This applies to all full time fire protection personnel working a 24 hour shift in the combat
division on a holiday.
2. Fire protection personnel working a twenty-four (24) hour shift will be paid at the rate of one and
a half times their hourly rate.
3. Payment will be made from the start of the holiday to the end i.e., seven half-hours to the shift
working 00:00 hours to 07:30 hours, and 16 half-hours for the shift working 07:30 to midnight of
the holiday. The firefighter/officer will be required to work the entire 24 hour shift to receive this
benefit.
4. All other fire department administrative personnel will be the same as civilian employees (see
Code Section 41.00 - Civilian).
42.03 LEAVES
(See CODE SECTION 40.00 for general information on leaves)
FULL-TIME FIREFIGHTERS VACATION
During subsequent years of continuous full time employment, the employee will receive paid vacation
leave as follows:
OFFICER & FIREFIGHTER PERSONNEL (24-hour scheduled shift)
Complete Years of Service Work Days per Year
1 to 3 years 3 scheduled days
4 to 6 years 5 scheduled days
7 to 10 years 8 scheduled days
11 to 19 years 11 scheduled days
20 plus years 12 scheduled days
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 42-5
Public Safety Fire Protection Personnel Policies
CHAPTER 42
SALARY/EXEMPT FIRE ADMINISTRATIVE PERSONNEL
Complete Years of Service Work Days per Year
1 to 3 years 5 working days
4 to 6 years 10 working days
7 to 10 years 15 working days
11 to 19 years 20 working days
20 plus years 25 working days
1. Vacation leave shall be on-duty days commencing at the end of the probationary year.
2. Vacation leave will be granted at a time which is mutually acceptable to the employee and the
Fire Chief. Seniority will be used if a conflict exists in requests. The vacation request form is
available at the Fire Station or electronically on the network system’s common drive, which is
available to all employees.
3. Vacation will be taken in 24-hour increments by personnel working the 24 hour shift.
FULL-TIME FIREFIGHTERS SICK / INJURY LEAVE
1. Any full-time firefighter who may be hurt, injured, or sick shall receive full pay and benefits
supplied by the City for a period up to, but not more than, one year.
2. Any sick leave in excess of ten (10) scheduled working days is subject to approval of the Fire
Chief and the Board of Public Works and Safety. The following regulations are required:
a. Each member will be responsible for reporting their inability to report for duty, prior to their
normal starting time, to the officer in charge.
b. At the time of said reporting, each member will give a brief description of why they are
unable to report as scheduled, the name of the attending physician, and the estimated date
to return to work.
c. Any time a member is able to return to their normal duty hour, they shall provide a medical
return to work form provided by their physician. This form is required for any person on a
24/48 hour shift that is off for more one working day or any 40 hour personnel off for more
than three working days.
d. The Department or Board of Public Works and Safety may send a member to a physician of
the city's choice any time at the department’s expense.
e. The department may require the member's attending physician to certify ability to perform in
the member's job classification.
f. Sick leave that will require more than three (3) working days (starting with the fourth (4th)
day shall be reported to the human resources director for FMLA purposes. (see FMLA
Policy Code Section 40.36 - Leaves
FULL-TIME FIREFIGHTERS PERSONAL LEAVE
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 42-6
Public Safety Fire Protection Personnel Policies
CHAPTER 42
1. Two personal days per calendar year, either full (24 hrs.) or half (12 hrs.) day increments may
be taken by personnel working the 24/48 hour schedule to attend to a personal need or
obligation without loss of pay.
2. New employees shall have a waiting period of ninety (90) days before they are eligible for
personal leave pay, although the calculation of personal leave time will begin with their first full
week of employment.
3. The request for personal days to be taken must be made by the employee to the Chief prior to
the work day to be taken.
FULL-TIME FIREFIGHTERS DISABILITY LEAVE
(See IC 36-8-5-2 and IC 36-8-8 for Disability Leave)
FIREFIGHTERS BEREAVEMENT LEAVE
In the event of a death in the immediate family, Full-time firefighters will receive up to one working day
(24 hrs.) leave with regular pay and hours. Additional days may be granted with department head
approval.
42.04 BENEFITS
WORKERS COMPENSATION INSURANCE
The City of Auburn will provide Workers Compensation as prescribed by law for all full time fire
protection personnel and volunteer firefighters. All accidents, on- the-job injuries, or near misses
must be reported and proper forms completed and filed according to guidelines set forth in Code
Section 40.08 (Section 1.8).
Fire Protection Personnel see IC 36-8-5-2.
Volunteer Fire Protection Personnel see IC 36-8-12-7.
42.05 FIREFIGHTERS’ PENSION
All firefighters (unless otherwise excluded) hired on or after May 1, 1977 will be members of the
Firefighters Pension Fund per IC 36.8.8.1.
Fire department personnel not covered under Fire Pension will be covered by the civilian public
employee retirement fund (PERF). See CODE SECTION 41.04 (Section 4.4) Benefits (B. 1. a-e)
42.06 SOCIAL SECURITY FOR FIREFIGHTERS
The city shall assume liability for the payment of retroactive payments of employer and employees
for social security for firefighters of the city for the years 1977, 1978, and 1979.
Effective January 1, 1980, the firemen employed by the city shall have social security contributions
deducted from their wages as required by the Indiana Public Employees Retirement Fund Trustees.
42.07 DEATH BENEFITS
See IC 36-8-8 [13.8; 14.1; 16; and 20].
42.08 DISCIPLINARY ACTION/DISMISSAL
FULL-TIME FIREFIGHTERS
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 42-7
Public Safety Fire Protection Personnel Policies
CHAPTER 42
Disciplinary action and dismissal procedures for full-time firefighters are specifically outlined in IC 36-8-3-4
and IC 36-8-3-4.1. Copies of these statutes are available upon request.
42.09 APPEAL PROCEDURE
FULL-TIME FIREFIGHTERS
Disciplinary action and dismissal procedures for full-time firefighters are specifically outlined in IC 36-8-3-4
and IC 36-8-3-4.1. Copies of these statutes are available upon request.
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Public Safety Law
Enforcement Personnel
Policy
CHAPTER 43
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 43-2
Public Safety Law Enforcement Personnel Policy
CHAPTER 43
Table of Contents
43.00 LAW ENFORCEMENT PERSONNEL POLICY INTRODUCTION
43.01 WORKING HOURS
43.02 COMPENSATION
43.03 LEAVES
43.04 BENEFITS
43.05 DISCIPLINARY ACTION, DISMISSAL & APPEAL PROCEDURES
43.06 DEATH BENEFITS/ POLICE
43.07 POLICE CAPTAIN
43.08 LIEUTENANT, SERGEANT AND CORPORAL
43.09 DETECTIVE
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 43-3
Public Safety Law Enforcement Personnel Policy
CHAPTER 43
43.00 LAW ENFORCEMENT PERSONNEL POLICY INTRODUCTION
This section applies only to the City of Auburn POLICE Department (Law Enforcement Personnel), excluding
civilians. Law Enforcement Personnel are also covered under additional provisions in Section 40.00
If there is a conflict between Section 40.00 and this Section, this section will control.
A preference in employment in Law Enforcement shall be given according to the following priority:
1. A war veteran who has been honorably discharged from the United States armed forces
2. A person whose mother or father who died in the line of duty (see IC 5-10-10-2) and was a:
a. Firefighter of a unit,
b. Municipal police officer
c. County police officer, or
d. Other public safety officers
A person may not be considered within the preferences described herein unless the person applies for
employment according to the application procedure, meets all employment requirements as prescribed by
law, including physical, and age requirements; and all employment requirements prescribed by the police
department.
The police chief is the head of the Police Department, but is at all times subordinate to the Mayor.
Subject to the rules and orders of the Board of Works and Safety, in time of an emergence, the police chief
is subordinate to the Mayor and shall obey his/her orders and directions, notwithstanding any law or rule to
the contrary (IC 36-8-4-10)
43.01 WORKING HOURS
POLICE OFFICERS STANDARD WORK PERIOD
1. The basic work period for Police Personnel is a 28 day schedule as established by the Board
of Public Works and Safety. In that 28 consecutive day work period, if more than 171 hours are
worked, the employee is entitled to one and a half times his or her regular rate. All categories of
benefit days are considered workdays in calculating the 171 hours worked. [See annual Salary
Ordinance]
2. All Police Officers shall be allowed to exchange working time subject to departmental rules and
regulations. All exchanges in working times shall be approved by the Road Lieutenant, Captain,
and/or Chief, prior to the scheduled work time.
LUNCH BREAK
The Police personnel’s lunch break shall be one-half hour paid time subject to call out.
43.02 COMPENSATION
POLICE OFFICERS’ OVERTIME
Anytime between the officers' normal work schedule and one hundred seventy-one (171) hours per
twenty-eight (28) day schedule will be regular time, not time and a half. All categories of benefit days
are considered as workdays in calculating the one hundred seventy-one (171) hours worked. Any
overtime must be approved by the Shift Command, Road Lieutenant, Captain, and/or Chief.
POLICE DEPARTMENT HOLIDAY PAY
1. This applies to all full time police officers.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 43-4
Public Safety Law Enforcement Personnel Policy
CHAPTER 43
2. Those police officers whose regular work schedule falls on a holiday will receive an optional day
of leave for said holiday.
3. Optional holiday time shall be taken at a time mutually agreed upon by the officer and the Chief
of Police.
4. Optional holiday time should be-arranged or at least two days in advance unless an emergency
arises and said time is approved by the Chief of Police and/or his designee.
43.03 LEAVES
(See CODE SECTION 40.00 for general information on leaves)
POLICE VACATION
1. During subsequent years of continuous full time employment, the employee will receive paid
vacation leave as follows:
Complete Years of Service Work Days per Year
1 to 4 years 12 working days
5 to 9 years 14 working days
10 to 14 years 16 working days
15 plus years 20 working days
2. Vacation leave shall be on-duty days commencing at the end of the probationary year.
3. Vacation leave will be granted at a time which is mutually acceptable to the employee and the
Police Chief. No vacations shall be scheduled over any special events as designated by the
Police Chief or his designee.
4. Vacation time must be taken in a minimum of four hour increments.
5. Exempt (salary) employees will take vacation in full day or week increments
(see Code Section 40.35)
SICK / INJURY LEAVE
1. Any full-time police officer who may be hurt, injured, or sick shall receive full pay and benefits
supplied by the City of a period up to, but not more than, one (1) year.
• Sick leave of more than three (3) consecutive working days (or starting with the 4th day)
shall be reported to the human resources director for FMLA purposes.
2. Any sick leave in excess of ten (10) scheduled working days is subject to approval of the Police
Chief and the Board of Public Works and Safety. The following regulations are required:
a. Each member will be responsible for reporting their inability to report for duty, prior to their
normal starting time to the officer in charge.
b. At the time of said reporting, each member will give a brief description of why they are
unable to report as scheduled, the name of the attending physician, and the estimated date
to return to work.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 43-5
Public Safety Law Enforcement Personnel Policy
CHAPTER 43
c. Any time a member is able to return to their normal own forty hour, they shall provide a
medical return to work form provided by their physician. This form is required for any person
on a 5/2 5/3 scheduled shift that is off for more than three (3) working days or any forty (40)
hour personnel off for more than three (3) working days.
d. The department or Board of Public Works and Safety may send a member to a physician of
the city’s choice at any time at the department’s expense.
e. The department may require the member’s job classification. Employees will receive regular
pay for any work week.
PERSONAL LEAVE
1. Personal leave time for full time employees can be accumulated and is available to use the
week after the pay period in which it is awarded.
2. New employees shall have a waiting period of ninety (90) days before they are eligible for
personal leave pay, although the calculation of personal leave time will begin with their first full
week of employment.
3. The request for personal time to be taken must be made by the employee to his/her Department
Head prior to the workday to be taken. Unforeseen circumstances or emergency time off shall
be documented with the supervisor as soon as practical.
4. Non-exempt (hourly) – Full Time
a. Non-exempt (hourly) employees working a minimum 40-hour workweek will be awarded
one (1) hour of personal leave time for that week.
b. Benefit days count as paid time to meet the minimum of 40 hours toward award of personal
time.
c. Any week(s) the non-exempt (hourly) full time employee has lost time no personal time will
be awarded.
d. Non-exempt (hourly) employees may take personal time in one (1) hour increments at a
minimum.
5. Exempt (Salary) – Full Time
a. Exempt (salary) full time employees will receive (6) days of personal leave time each
calendar year.
b. Exempt (salary) full time employees will receive regular pay for any work week whereas a
personal day has been taken.
POLICE OFFICERS DISABILITY LEAVE
(See IC 36-8-6-8 or IC 36-8-8 for Disability Leave)
POLICE BEREAVEMENT LEAVE
In the event of a death in the immediate family, a police officer will receive up to three working days
leave with regular pay and hours. Additional days may be granted with department head approval.
43.04 BENEFITS
WORKERS COMPENSATION INSURANCE
1. The City of Auburn will provide Workers Compensation as prescribed by law for all full time law
enforcement personnel and reserves. All accidents, on-the-job injuries, or near misses must be
reported and proper forms completed and filed according to guidelines set forth in Code Section
40.08 (Section 1.8).
2. Police Department see IC 36-8-8 and IC 36-8-6-8 as may be amended.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 43-6
Public Safety Law Enforcement Personnel Policy
CHAPTER 43
3. Police Reserve Personnel see IC 22-3-2 through IC 22-3-6.
POLICE OFFICERS’ PENSION
1. Law Enforcement is covered by one of two different Police Pension Funds. One applies to
officers hired prior to May 1, 1977 (1925 Police Pension Fund), and the other applies to officers
hired on or after May 1, 1977. Also those in the old system may have converted to the new
system. For details, refer to IC 36-8-6 and IC 36-8-8 as may be amended by the state.
2. Police department personnel not covered under Police Pension will be covered by the civilian
public employer retirement fund (PERF). See CODE SECTION 41.04 (Section 4.4) Benefits
(B.1. a-e).
43.05 DISCIPLINARY ACTION, DISMISSAL & APPEAL PROCEDURES
POLICE OFFICERS
Disciplinary action, dismissal and appeal procedures for Police Officers are specifically outlined in IC 36-8-3-
4 and IC 36-8-3-4.1. Copies of these statutes are available upon request.
43.06 DEATH BENEFITS/ POLICE
All persons entitled to receive benefits under Indiana Code 36-8-8 [13.8; 14.1; 16; and 20].
43.07 POLICE CAPTAIN
The position of Police Captain is established as a classification for the Police Department.
The Police Chief shall appoint one person to the classification of Police Captain from the full time
paid police force and this person shall serve at the pleasure of the Police Chief.
The duties of the Police Captain shall be set forth by the Police Chief.
43.08 LIEUTENANT, SERGEANT AND CORPORAL
The ranks of Lieutenant, Sergeant, and Corporal are established as a classification for the Auburn
Police Department.
The Police Chief shall appoint two people to the rank of Lieutenant from the full- time paid police
force and these people shall serve at the pleasure of the Police Chief.
The Police Chief shall appoint four persons to the rank of Sergeant from the full- time paid police
force and these persons shall serve at the pleasure of the Police Chief.
The Police Chief shall appoint three persons to the rank of Corporal from the full time paid police
force and these persons shall serve at the pleasure of the police chief.
The duties of the Lieutenant, Sergeants and Corporals shall be set forth by the Police Chief.
43.09 DETECTIVE
The rank of Detective is established as a classification for the Police Department.
The Police Chief shall appoint two to the classification of Detective from the full- time paid police
force and shall serve at the pleasure of the Police Chief.
The duties of the detective shall be set forth by the Police Chief.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 43-7
Public Safety Law Enforcement Personnel Policy
CHAPTER 43
City of Auburn
HUMAN RESOURCES
EMPLOYEE ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
By signing below, I acknowledge that it is my responsibility to read and understand the UPDATED AND
REVISIONS to the City of Auburn Personnel Policies and Procedures outlined within and passed by Common
Council effective. I understand that the policies are intended as a general reference and not a full statement of
all policies and procedures or a legal contract.
I agree to keep the personnel policies and procedures in my possession during my employment and to update it
whenever provided with materials to do so.
I further understand that personnel policies and procedures provided to me is an approved document and may
be available electronically for convenience of viewing, as well. I understand that altering content or changes to
the policy is against regulations.
Employee Department Head or Administrator
______________________________ _______________________________
Print (First, Middle & Last Name) Print Name
______________________________ _______________________________
Job Title Job Title
______________________________ _______________________________
Signature Signature
______________________________ _______________________________
Date Date
Human Resources Representative:
____________________________________ _______________________
Print Name Date
____________________________________ _______________________
Signature
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Sewer Ordinance
CHAPTER 50
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 50-2
Sewer Ordinance
CHAPTER 50
Table of Contents
50.001 DEFINITIONS
50.002 ABBREVIATIONS.
50.003 BYLAWS AND REGULATIONS OF THE BOARD OF PUBLIC WORKS.
50.004 ADMINISTRATIVE ORDERS.
50.005 CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.
50.006 WASTEWATER QUANTITIES, CONSTITUENTS AND CHARACTERISTICS WILL NOT BE
RECOGNIZED AS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.
50.007 DAMAGING, DEFACING, ETC. PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS PROPERTY.
50.008 TAMPERING WITH EFFLUENT MONITORING STATION.
50.020 APPLICABILITY.
50.021 GENERAL DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS.
50.022 NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.
50.023 MODIFICATION OF NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.
50.024 SPECIFIC POLLUTANT LIMITATIONS.
50.025 STATE REQUIREMENTS.
50.026 CITY'S RIGHT OF REVISION.
50.027 DILUTION PROHIBITION.
50.028 ADMISSIBILITY - PROHIBITION OF UNPOLLUTED WATERS.
50.029 GREASE, OIL AND SAND INTERCEPTORS.
50.030 RIGHT TO REJECT WASTE.
50.031 SPILLS AND SLUG DISCHARGES.
50.032 INDUSTRIAL PRETREATMENT BYPASSES: [REFER ALSO TO 4.4.5]
50.033 COMPLIANCE SCHEDULES.
50.034 DUTY TO COMPLY.
50.035 DUTY TO MITIGATE - PREVENTION OF ADVERSE IMPACT.
REPORTING REQUIREMENTS.
50.050 HAZARDOUS WASTE NOTIFICATION.
50.051 NOTIFICATION OF CHANGED DISCHARGE.
50.052 PERIODIC COMPLIANCE REPORTS.
50.053 SIGNATORY REQUIREMENTS.
50.054 REPORTS OF SPILLS, SLUG DISCHARGES AND OPERATION UPSETS.
50.055 NONCOMPLIANCE.
50.056 DISCHARGER'S REQUEST FOR INTERPRETATION.
COMBINED SEWERS.
50.065 PROHIBITION OF NEW COMBINED SEWER CONSTRUCTION.
50.066 NEW CONSTRUCTION TRIBUTARY TO EXISTING COMBINED SEWER.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 50-3
Sewer Ordinance
CHAPTER 50
ADMINISTRATION
50.075 APPLICABILITY.
50.076 WASTEWATER DISCHARGERS.
50.077 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITS.
50.078 GENERAL.
50.079 PERMIT APPLICATION.
50.080 PERMIT MODIFICATIONS.
50.081 PERMIT CONDITIONS.
50.082 PERMITS DURATION.
50.083 CONTINUATION OF EXPIRED PERMIT.
50.084 PERMIT TRANSFER.
50.085 RECORDS RETENTION.
50.086 REPORTING REQUIREMENTS FOR PERMITTEE. (IN ADDITION TO THOSE SPECIFIED IN 3.17)
50.087 SELF-MONITORING REPORTS.
50.088 BASELINE MONITORING REPORT.
50.089 90-DAY COMPLIANCE REPORTS.
50.090 SIGNATORY REQUIREMENTS AND CERTIFICATION.
50.091 REPORTS OF INDUSTRIAL PRETREATMENT BYPASSES.
50.092 MONITORING FACILITIES.
50.093 METHODS FOR MEASUREMENT OF INDUSTRIAL WASTES FLOW.
50.094 LOCATION OF MONITORING FACILITIES.
50.095 INSPECTION AND SAMPLING.
50.096 SEARCH WARRANTS.
50.097 SAMPLE ANALYSES.
50.098 PRETREATMENT.
50.099 DESIGN PLANS.
50.100 FACILITIES OPERATION.
ENFORCEMENT
50.105 APPLICABILITY.
50.106 SUSPENSION OF SERVICE.
50.107 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
50.108 NOTIFICATION OF VIOLATION.
50.109 SHOW CAUSE HEARING.
50.110 LEGAL ACTION.
50.111 PUBLICATION OF VIOLATIONS.
PENALTIES/COSTS
50.115 APPLICABILITY.
50.116 ADMINISTRATIVE/CIVIL PENALTIES.
50.117 FALSIFYING INFORMATION.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 50-4
Sewer Ordinance
CHAPTER 50
CONNECTION TO MUNICIPAL WASTEWATER SYSTEM
50.125 PRIVIES, SEPTIC TANKS, CESSPOOLS, ETC.
50.126 WHEN CONNECTION TO THE MUNICIPAL WASTEWATER SYSTEM IS REQUIRED.
50.127 CONSTRUCTION OF BUILDING SEWERS.
50.128. SEPARATE SEWER REQUIREMENTS.
50.129 USE OF OLD BUILDING SEWER FOR A NEW BUILDING.
50.130 ELEVATION AND LOCATION OF BUILDING SEWER.
50.131 CONNECTION OF DOWNSPOUTS, DRAINS, ETC.
50.132 INSPECTION, SUPERVISION OF CONNECTION.
50.133 RIGHT TO PROHIBIT NEW CONNECTIONS.
50.144 EXTENSIONS OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS.
PRIVATE WELLS
50.145 REGISTRATION OF WELLS.
50.146 METERING OF WELL WATER.
50.147 INSPECTION OF WELLS.
50.148 WELL DIGGING.
WASTEWATER MONITORING
50.160 APPLICABILITY.
50.161 SURVEILLANCE OF SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USERS.
50.162 SURVEILLANCE SURVEY CHARGE.
50.163 MONITORING OF SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USERS.
50.164 LIMITATIONS ON POINT OF DISCHARGE.
50.165 LICENSED COMMERCIAL OR INDUSTRIAL WASTE HAULING.
50.166 SPECIAL AGREEMENTS.
SEWER CHARGES, SURCHARGES AND SERVICE FEES
50.175 PERSONS SUBJECT TO FEES AND SEWER CHARGES.
50.176 EFFECTIVE DATE: EXTENSION TO ADDITIONAL PROPERTY.
50.177 RATE BASIS.
50.178 SCHEDULE OF METER READING.
50.179 PROCEDURE WHEN WATER IS OBTAINED PARTIALLY OR WHOLLY FROM SOURCES OTHER
THAN CITY.
50.180 PORTION OF WATER NOT ENTERING MUNICIPAL WASTEWATER SYSTEM.
50.181 BILLING PROCEDURE GENERALLY.
50.182 TENANTS MAY BE BILLED: RIGHT OF OWNERS TO EXAMINE RECORDS.
50.183 LIABILITY OF CITY FOR CHARGES.
50.184 SURCHARGE BASED ON FLOW AND CONCENTRATION OF WASTEWATER.
50.185 RATES OF SURCHARGE.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 50-5
Sewer Ordinance
CHAPTER 50
50.186 RATES OF SURCHARGE.
50.187 SEWER CONNECTION FEES.
50.188 BASIC SEWER CHARGES.
50.189 PRETREATMENT PROGRAM CHARGES.
50.200 RATES FOR LICENSED, COMMERCIAL OR INDUSTRIAL WASTE HAULING
50.201 CHARGES FOR SPECIAL AGREEMENTS
50.202 GOVERNMENTAL EXEMPTION TO SURCHARGE
50.203 DELINQUENT ACCOUNTS.
50.204 BUDGET PAYMENTS.
50.999 PENALTY
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 50-6
Sewer Ordinance
CHAPTER 50
50.001 DEFINITIONS
Unless otherwise defined herein, terms shall be as adopted in the latest edition of the Glossary of Water and
Wastewater Control Engineering, Third Edition, published by American Public Health Association, American
Society of Civil Engineers, American Water Works Association, and Water Pollution Control Federation.
• Act or "the Act".
The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C.
1251, et. seq.
• Approval Authority.
The Director of the Indiana Department of Environmental Management.
• Authorized Representative of Significant Industrial User.
An authorized representative of a Significant Industrial User may be:
1. A principal executive officer of at least the level of vice-president, if the Significant Industrial
User is a corporation;
2. A general partner or proprietor if the Significant Industrial User is a partnership or
proprietorship, respectively;
3. A duly authorized representative of the individual designated above if (a) such representative is
responsible for the overall operation of the facilities from which the discharge into the POTW
originates; (b) the authorization is in writing and (c) the written authorization is submitted to the
POTW.
• Best Management Practices or BMPs.
Means schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other
management practices to implement the prohibitions listed in Section 3.2 General Discharge
Prohibitions (40 CFR 403.5(a)(1) and (b) and their successors thereto). BMPs include treatment
requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge
or waste disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.
(Note: BMPs also include alternative means (i.e., management plans) of complying with, or in place of
certain established categorical Pretreatment Standards and effluent limits.)
• Beneficial Uses of Receiving Water.
These include, but are not limited to, domestic, municipal, agricultural and industrial use, power
generation, recreation, aesthetic enjoyment, navigation, and the preservation and enhancement of fish,
wildlife and other aquatic resources or reserves, and other uses, both tangible and intangible, as
specified by state or federal law.
• Biochemical Oxygen Demand.
(or BOD) of wastewater, wastewater effluent, polluted waters or industrial wastes shall mean the
quantity of dissolved oxygen in milligrams per liter required during stabilization of the decomposable
organic matter (carbonaceous component) by aerobic biochemical action under standard laboratory
procedures for five (5 days) at 20° Celsius. The laboratory determinations of BOD shall be made in
accordance with Section 4.6.2 of this
• Ordinance.
This term is also expressed as carbonaceous biochemical oxygen demand or CBOD2.1.55Biosolids.
Means solid, semisolid, or liquid residue generated during the treatment or domestic sewage in a
treatment works. Examples of biosolid include the following:
1. Scum or solids removed in primary, secondary, or advanced wastewater treatment processes.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 50-7
Sewer Ordinance
CHAPTER 50
2. A material derived from biosolid.
3. An industrial waste product that contains domestic sewage or material under (1) or (2)
[subdivision (1) or (2)].
Biosolid does not include ash generated during the firing of biosolid in a biosolid incinerator or grit and
screenings generated during preliminary treatment of domestic sewage in a treatment works.
• Board.
The Board of Public Works and Safety of the City of Auburn. It is the governing body of the municipal
wastewater system of the City, which system is a publicly owned treatment works.
• Building Drain.
In plumbing, that part of the lowest horizontal piping within a building that conducts water, wastewater or
storm water to a building sewer.
• Building Sewer.
The extension from the building drains to the public sewer or other place of disposal. (Also called the
house connection).
• Categorical Pretreatment Standards.
National Pretreatment Standards, specify quantities or concentrations of pollutants or pollutant
properties that may be discharged or introduced to a POTW by existing or new industrial user in a
specific industrial subcategory, that are established by EPA, under section 307 (b) or 307 (c) of the
Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. 1317(b) or 33 U.S.C. 1317(c) as separate regulations under the appropriate
subpart of 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N.
• Categorical Industrial User.
(or CIU) If you are a CIU, then you must comply with the categorical pretreatment standards specified in
the federal regulations and any local limits established by the POTW that receives your wastewater
discharges.
• Chemical Oxygen Demand
(or COD) of wastewater, wastewater effluent, polluted waters or industrial wastes is a measure of the
oxygen equivalent of that portion of the organic matter in a sample that is susceptible to oxidation by a
strong chemical oxidant. The Laboratory determination shall be made in accordance with Section 4.6.2
of this Ordinance.
• City.
The City Auburn Indiana.
• Combined Sewer.
A sewer which carries storm water, surface runoff, or groundwater infiltration in addition to sewage.
• Compatible Pollutants.
Wastewater having or containing (a) measurable biochemical oxygen demand, (b) suspended solids, (c)
pH, (d) fecal coliform bacteria, or (e) additional pollutants identified or defined in the City's National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit or by the State or Board. It is further clarified
that conventional pollutants as identified by the USEPA pursuant to Section 304(a)(4) of the Act in a
form which causes interference with the POTW operations shall be considered non-compatible.
• Constituents and Characteristics.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 50-8
Sewer Ordinance
CHAPTER 50
(of wastewater) The chemical, physical, bacteriological and radiological properties, including volume,
flow rate and such other properties, which serve to define, classify or measure the contents, quality,
quantity and strength of wastewater.
• Control Authority.
The City of Auburn.
• Daily Maximum.
The arithmetic average of all effluent samples for a pollutant collected during a calendar day.
• Daily Maximum Limit.
The maximum allowable discharge limit of a pollutant during a calendar day. Where Daily Maximum
Limits are expressed in terms of a concentration, the daily discharge is the arithmetic average
measurement of the pollutant concentration derived from all measurement taken that day.
• Debt Service Charge.
A charge levied on users of the wastewater conveyance and treatment system to fund debt service on
outstanding bonds and current capital costs.
• Direct Discharge.
When used without qualification, means a discharge of a pollutant.
• Discharge of a Pollutant.
Means any addition of any pollutant, or combination of pollutants, into any waters of the state from a
point source in Indiana. The term includes, without limitation, additions of pollutants into waters of the
state from the following:
1. Surface run-off collected or channeled by man.
2. Discharges through pipes, sewers, or other conveyances that do not lead to treatment works.
• Effluent.
The water, together with any wastes that may be present, flowing out of a drain, sewer, receptacle or
outlet.
• Equivalent Dwelling Unit (EDU).
A single family residence situated upon a single lot and also the sewage contribution for that residence,
being 310 gallons per day.
• Environmental Protection Agency or EPA.
The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, or where appropriate the term may also be used as a
designation for the Administrator or other duly authorized official of said agency.
• Existing Source.
Any source of discharge that is not a “New Source.”
• Fats (wastes).
Triglyceride esters of fatty acids. Erroneously used as synonymous with grease.
• Garbage.
The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, and serving of foods.
It is composed largely of putrescible organic matter, and its natural moisture.
• Grab Sample.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 50-9
Sewer Ordinance
CHAPTER 50
An individual sample, which is collected from a waste stream over a period of time not exceeding 15
minutes.
• Grease and Oil.
In wastewater, a group of substances including fats, waxes, free fatty acids, calcium and magnesium
soaps, mineral oils, and certain other fatty materials. Water-insoluble organic compounds of plant and
animal origins, or industrial wastes that can be removed by natural flotation skimming.
• Holding Tank Waste.
Any waste from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, and
vacuum-pump tank trucks.
• Incompatible Pollutants.
Any pollutants, which are not compatible pollutants.
• Indirect Discharge.
The discharge or the introduction of pollutants from any non-domestic source regulated. under Section
307(b), (c), or (d) of the Act, (33 U.S. C. 1317), into the POTW (including holding tank waste discharged
into the system).
• Industrial Pretreatment Bypass.
Means an intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of an Industrial User's treatment
facility.
• Industrial Pretreatment Program.
A program administered by a POTW regulating discharges from industrial processes which has been
approved by a Regional Administrator or State Director in accordance with state and/or federal law
• Industrial User.
Source of indirect discharge.
• Industrial Wastes.
Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance or form of energy discharged, permitted to flow into or enter the
municipal wastewater system or ground from an industrial, manufacturing, commercial or business
process or from the development, recovery or processing of any natural resource carried on by any
person and shall further mean any waste from an industrial user, but not including sanitary sewage or
storm water.
• Infiltration.
The groundwater entering the municipal wastewater system directly or via private sewers, building
drains and building sewers connected therewith, from the ground, through such means as, but not
limited to, defective pipe joints, connections, or manhole walls.
• Inflow.
Water other than wastewater entering the municipal wastewater system from sources such as cellar,
yard area, and foundation drains, drains from springs and swampy areas, manhole areas, cross
connections between storm and sanitary sewers, catch basins, cooling towers, storm water, surface
runoff and street waters or drainage.
• Inspector.
A person authorized by the Board or the Superintendent to perform inspection and monitoring duties
assigned to him by the Board or Superintendent.
• Instantaneous Limit.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 50-10
Sewer Ordinance
CHAPTER 50
The Maximum concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the
analysis of any discrete or composited sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the
duration of the sampling event.
• Interference.
Means a Discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources,
both:
1. Inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations, or its sludge processes,
use or disposal; and
2. Therefore is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW’s NPDES permit (including
an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge
use or disposal in compliance with the following statutory provisions and regulations or permits
issued thereunder (or more stringent State or local regulations): Section 405 of the Clean Water
Act, the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA) (including Title II, more commonly referred to as the
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), and including State regulations contained in
any State sludge management plan prepared pursuant to subtitle D of the SWDA), the Clean Air
Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, and the Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries
Act.
• Lateral Sewer.
A public sewer that discharges into a branch or other sewer and has no other public sewer tributary to it.
• Local Limit.
Specific Discharge limits developed and enforced by The City of Auburn, Indiana upon industrial or
commercial facilities to implement the general and specific discharge prohibitions listed in 40 CFR 403.5
(a)(1) and (b).
• May.
“May” means that the act referred to is both permissible and approved.
• Medical Waste.
Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body
parts, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and dialysis
wastes.
• Monthly Average.
The sum of all “daily discharges” measured during a calendar month divided by the number of “daily
discharges” measured during that month.
• Monthly Average Limit.
The highest allowable average of “daily discharges” over a calendar month, calculated as the sum of all
“daily discharges” measured during a calendar month divided by the number of “daily discharges”
measured during that month.
• National Pretreatment Standard.
Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance to Section
307 (b) and (c) of the Act which applies to Industrial Users. This term includes prohibitive discharge
limits established pursuant to 40 CFR 403.5.
• New Source.
1. A new source means any building, structure, facility or installation that is discharging or may
discharge pollutants, and its construction commenced after the publication of proposed
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 50-11
Sewer Ordinance
CHAPTER 50
pretreatment standards under Section 307(c) of the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. 1317(c)) that
will be applicable to the source, if those standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance
with Section 307(c) of the Clean Water Act, provided one (1) of the following conditions is met:
a. The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at a site at where no other
source is located.
b. The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces the process or production
equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source.
c. The production of wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility, or
installation is substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In
determining whether these processes are substantially independent, the following factors
will be considered:
i. he extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant.
ii. The extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as
the existing source.
2. Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than
a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility or installation
meeting the criteria of subsection (i) or (ii) above but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to
existing process or production equipment.
3. Construction of a new source as defined in this section has commenced if the owner or operator
has:
a. begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous on-site construction program:
i. any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or
ii. significant site preparation work, including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing
buildings, structures, or facilities that is necessary for the placement, assembly, or
installation of new source facilities or equipment; or
iii. entered into a building contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment
that is intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time.
Options to purchase, contracts that can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts
for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this
section.
• NPDES Permit.
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit now or hereafter held by the City and setting
forth conditions for the discharge of any pollutants or combinations of pollutants.
• Non-Contact Cooling Water.
The water discharged from any use such as air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration and/or to which the
only pollutant added is heat.
• Normal Domestic Sewage.
Sanitary wastewater discharged by residential users. (250 mg/L BOD and TSS). This term is also
expressed as domestic wastewater.
• Nuisance.
Any substance, which is injurious to health or offensive to the senses or an obstruction to the free use of
property so as to interfere with the comfort or enjoyment of life or property.
• Operation and Maintenance (O & M).
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 50-12
Sewer Ordinance
CHAPTER 50
All expenses related directly to the operating and maintaining, including replacement of the publicly
owned treatment works as identified in the "Uniform System of Accounts for Wastewater Utilities" or as
prescribed by the Indiana State Board of Accounts under the general headings, Plant Operation and
Maintenance, Sewer Operation and Maintenance, Customer Accounts, Administrative and General,
Insurance and Taxes.
• pH.
The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions expressed in units.
Measurement of pH shall be in accordance with Section 4.6.2 of this Ordinance.
• Pass Through.
Means a discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the State of Indiana in quantities or
concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a
cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit (including an increase in the
magnitude or duration of a violation).
• Person.
Any individual, partnership, co-partnership firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company,
trust, estate, governmental entity or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or
assigns. The masculine gender shall include the feminine, the singular shall include the plural where
indicated by the context.
• Pollutant.
Means, but is not limited to:
a. dredged spoil;
b. incinerator residue;
c. filter backwash;
d. sewage;
e. garbage;
f. sewage sludge;
g. munitions;
h. chemical wastes;
i. solid wastes;
j. toxic wastes;
k. hazardous substances;
l. biological materials;
m. radioactive materials (except those regulated under the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as
amended; 42 U.S.C. 2011, et seq.);
n. heat;
o. wrecked or discarded equipment;
p. rock;
q. sand;
r. cellar dirt; and
s. other industrial, municipal, and agricultural waste; discharged into water.
• Pollution.
Specific impairment of water quality by agricultural, domestic, or industrial wastes (including thermal and
radioactive wastes), to a degree that has an adverse effect upon any beneficial use of water.
• Pretreatment or Treatment.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 50-13
Sewer Ordinance
CHAPTER 50
The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of
pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state, other than by dilution, prior to or in lieu of
discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a POTW. The reduction or alteration can be
obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, or process changes or other means, except
dilution, as prohibited by 327 IAC 5-18-4 (f).
• Pretreatment Requirements.
Any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment, other than a pretreatment standard
imposed on an industrial user.
• Pretreatment Standards or Standards.
Means:
a. state pretreatment standards as established in 327 IAC 5-18-8; and
b. pretreatment standards for prohibited discharges, as established in 327 IAC 5-18-2;
c. national categorical pretreatment standards incorporated by reference in 327 IAC 5-18-10.
• Publicly Owned Treatment Works or (POTW).
Means a treatment works as defined by Section 212(2) of the Clean Water Act owned by the state or a
municipality (as defined by Section 502(4) of the Clean Water Act), except that it does not include pipes,
sewers, or other conveyances not connected to a facility providing treatment. The term includes any
devices and systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of municipal sewage or
compatible industrial wastes. It also includes sewers, pipes, and other conveyances only if they convey
wastewater to a POTW treatment plant. The term also means the municipality, as defined by Section
502(4) of the Clean Water Act that has jurisdiction over the indirect discharges to and the discharges
from such a treatment works.
• POTW Treatment Plant.
Means that portion of the POTW, which is designed to provide treatment (including recycling and
reclamation) of municipal sewage and industrial waste.
• Public Sewer.
A common sewer controlled by a governmental agency or public utility.
• Receiving Stream.
Cedar Creek and its tributaries within the City.
• Residential Sprinkler Credit.
In recognition that small individually-metered customers of the residential class (including only single
family or duplexes) typically have a single service with a single meter for measuring water use; a
sprinkler credit is given since the water used for lawn sprinkling does not get discharged to the sewage
system. The summer (June, July, and August) sewer bill is computed based on water consumption
readings from the nonsprinkling season (average of the previous January, February, and March). This
adjustment is applicable to all single-family dwelling residential units on individual meters whether they
are conventional site-built housing or manufactured housing.
• Sanitary Sewage.
Sewage such as, and having the characteristics of, normal domestic sewage from dwellings (including
apartment houses and hotels), office buildings, factories, or institutions, free from storm and surface
water and industrial wastes.
• Sanitary Sewer.
A sewer intended to carry only sanitary or sanitary and industrial wastewaters from residences,
commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 50-14
Sewer Ordinance
CHAPTER 50
• Sewage.
Household and commercial wastewater that contains human waste. Distinguished from industrial
wastewater, and further described as human excrement and gray water (household showers,
dishwashing operations, etc.).
• Sewage System.
The network of publicly owned sewers and appurtenances used for collection, transporting, and
pumping wastewater to the wastewater treatment plant, and the wastewater treatment plant itself. This
term is also expressed as municipal wastewater system or wastewater collection system.
• Sewer.
A pipe or conduit laid for carrying sewage or other liquids, and solids suspended or entrained therein.
• Shall.
“Shall” means the act referred to is mandatory.
• Shredded Garbage.
Garbage that is shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely in suspension under
the conditions normally prevailing in the municipal wastewater system, with no particle being greater
than one-half (1/2) inch in dimensions
• Significant Industrial User.
1. Except as provided in subsection (b), means the following:
a. Industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standards under 327 IAC 5-18-10.
b. An industrial user that:
i. Discharges an average of twenty-five thousand (25,000) gallons per day or more of
process wastewater (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and boiler blowdown
wastewater) to the POTW;
ii. contributes a process waste stream that makes up five percent (5%) or more of the
average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant; or
iii. is designated as a significant industrial user by the control authority on the basis that
the industrial user has a reasonable potential to:
aa. adversely affect the POTW’s operation;
bb. violate a pretreatment standard; or
cc. violate a requirement of 327 IAC 5-19-3.
2. A control authority may, on its own initiate or in response to a petition received from an
industrial user or a POTW and in accordance with 327 IAC 5-19-3(6), determine that an
industrial user is not a significant industrial user if it does not meet subsection (a)(2)(C).
• Slug.
Means any discharge, including but not limited to spill or non-customary batch discharge, of such
characteristics (including flow rate, pollutant concentration, and/or volume) which may cause
Interference and/or Pass Through to the POTW; or which may alone or in conjunction with a discharge
or discharges from other sources, cause a hazard to human life (including POTW workers) or create a
public nuisance.
• State.
State of Indiana
• Standard Industrial Classification (SIC).
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 50-15
Sewer Ordinance
CHAPTER 50
Means the standard industrial classification application to a particular industrial activity in accordance
with the Standard Industrial Classification Manual published by the Office of Management and Budget of
the Executive Office of the President of the United States.
• Standard Methods.
An assembly of analytical techniques and descriptions commonly accepted in water and wastewater
treatment ("Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater") published jointly by the
American Public Health Association, American Water Works Association and the Water Pollution Control
Federation.
• Storm Sewer.
A sewer intended to carry only storm waters, surface runoff, street wash waters, non-contact cooling
water and drainage.
• Storm Water.
Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation and resulting therefrom.
• Superintendent.
The person designated by the Mayor to supervise the operation of the POTW, and who is charged with
certain duties and responsibilities by this Ordinance, or a duly authorized representative.
• Surcharge.
An extra monetary charge imposed on flows into the wastewater collection system when BOD or TSS
concentrations (or concentrations of other parameters as may be determined from time to time by the
Board) exceed those commonly found in normal domestic sewage (250 mg/L BOD or 250 mg/L TSS).
• Suspended Solids.
Solids which either float on the surface of or are in suspension in water, wastewater or other liquid or
which are removable by laboratory filtration. Their concentration shall be expressed in milligrams per
liter. Quantitative determinations shall be made in accordance with Section 4.6.2 of this Ordinance.
• Toxic Pollutant.
Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the Administrator
of the Environmental Protection Agency under the provision of Section 307(a)(1) of the Act.
• Upset.
Means an exceptional incident in which there is an unintentional and temporary noncompliance with the
effluent limitations of this ordinance because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the discharger.
An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly
designed or inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventative maintenance, or careless or improper
operations.
• User.
A person who introduces into or discharges into, including both the owner and occupant of real estate
from which is introduced or discharged into the municipal wastewater system, any substance whatever.
• User Charge.
A charge levied on users of a treatment works for the user's proportionate share of the cost of operation
and maintenance (including) replacement of such works.
• Waste.
Sanitary wastewater and any and all other waste substances, liquid, solid, gaseous, or radioactive,
associated with human habitation, or of human or animal origin, or from any producing, processing,
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 50-16
Sewer Ordinance
CHAPTER 50
manufacturing, or industrial operation of whatever nature, including such waste placed within containers
of whatever nature prior to, and for purposes of, disposal.
• Wastewater.
The water-carried waste from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments,
singular or in any combination, together with such ground, surface and storm waters as may be present.
• Wastewater Treatment Plant.
Any arrangement of devices and structures used by the City for treatment and disposing of wastewater,
biosolids, and other wastewater constituents and products.
50.002 ABBREVIATIONS.
The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings:
BOD Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD)
CFR Code of Federal Regulations
COD Chemical Oxygen Demand
EPA Environmental Protection Agency
L Liter
mg Milligrams
mg/L Milligrams per liter
ppm parts per million
Solids TSS Total Suspended
50.003 BYLAWS AND REGULATIONS OF THE BOARD OF PUBLIC WORKS.
The Board of Public Works may adopt and enforce such reasonable regulations not in conflict herewith as it
may be deemed necessary for the safe, economical and efficient management of the City's wastewater
system and wastewater treatment plant and for the construction and use of building (or house connection)
sewers and connections to the municipal wastewater system, which regulations may include limitations of or
prohibition of introduction of or infiltration by storm water, surface water, and ground water into the municipal
wastewater system; and a schedule of initial connection charges to recover capital costs of new sewers
installed for the particular new customer, and a capital cost recovery schedule for customers outside the City
to include capital investment in existing or contribution in aid of construction for future treatment capacity.
50.004 ADMINISTRATIVE ORDERS.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 50-17
Sewer Ordinance
CHAPTER 50
The Board of Public Works or its designee may issue to any User orders as deemed by the Board or its
designee to be necessary in order to achieve and/or maintain compliance with the requirements and
provisions of this Ordinance or a permit issued by the Board.
50.005 CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.
Information and data on a User obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits and
monitoring programs and from inspections shall be available to the public or other governmental agency
without restriction unless the User specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the
City that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of production
entitled to protection as trade secrets or confidential information.
When requested by the person furnishing a report, the portions of a report which might disclose trade
secrets or confidential information shall not be made available for inspection by the public but shall be made
available upon written request to governmental agencies for uses related to this Ordinance, the National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Permit, State Disposal System permit and/or the
Pretreatment Programs; provided, however, that such portions of a report shall be available for use by the
State or any State agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the
report.
50.006 WASTEWATER QUANTITIES, CONSTITUENTS AND CHARACTERISTICS WILL NOT BE RECOGNIZED
AS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.
Notwithstanding anything in the paragraph immediately above, information accepted by the City as
confidential, shall not be transmitted to any governmental agency (except US EPA) or to the general public
by the City without User's written permission, and when so transmitted, it shall be done so under the
protective provisions of 320 IAC 6 for submissions made to the Indiana Department of Environmental
Management, and the exclusionary provisions of the "Freedom of Information Act" (FOIA), 5USC 522 (b)(4)
for submissions made to any federal agency.
US EPA shall have immediate and unlimited access to all information compiled as part of the Pretreatment
Program, including confidential documents.
50.007 DAMAGING, DEFACING, ETC. PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS PROPERTY.
A person shall not maliciously, willfully or recklessly break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with
any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the City wastewater system.
50.008 TAMPERING WITH EFFLUENT MONITORING STATION.
It shall be a violation of this Ordinance for any person to tamper with or modify any pump, valving
appurtenance, flow control section, meter or sampling equipment so as to have the effect of rendering
inaccurate any meter or other monitoring equipment.
50.020 APPLICABILITY.
This article shall apply to all classes of users, connections, customers, and situations.
50.021 GENERAL DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS.
No User shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater which
will cause Pass Through or Interference to the POTW. These general prohibitions apply to all such Users of
a POTW whether or not the User is subject to National Categorical Pretreatment Standards or any other
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 50-18
Sewer Ordinance
CHAPTER 50
National, State or local Pretreatment Standards or Requirements. A User may not contribute the following
substances to any POTW:
Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity are, or may be, sufficient
either alone or by interaction with other substances to create a fire or explosion hazard in the
POTW, including, but not limited to waste streams with a closed cup flashpoint of less than 140
degrees Fahrenheit or 60 degrees Centigrade using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21.
In addition, at no time shall two successive readings on an explosion hazard meter, at the point of
discharge into the system (or at any point in the system) be more than five percent (5%) nor any
single reading over ten percent (10%) of the Lower Explosive Limit (LEL) of the substance
measured. Prohibited materials include, but are not limited to, gasoline, kerosene, naphtha,
benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates,
bromates, carbides, hydrides and sulfides.
Solid, viscous or other substances which may cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer or other
interference with the operation of the wastewater treatment facilities such as, but not limited to:
grease, garbage with particles greater than one-half inch (1/2") in any dimension, animal guts or
tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes,
cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags,
spent grains, spent hops, waste paper, wood, plastics, gas, tar, asphalt residues, residues from
refining, or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud, or glass grinding or polishing wastes.
Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin in amounts that may
cause interference or pass through.
Any wastewater having a pH greater than 10.0 more than 1% of the time each month or for a period
exceeding 30 minutes; or wastewater having any corrosive property capable of causing damage or
hazard to structures, equipment, and/or personnel of the POTW; or, in no case, any discharges with
pH lower than 5.0. POTW may require continuous documentation of compliance through pH strip
chart recordings.
Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with
other pollutants, to cause Interference with POTW, injure or constitute a hazard to human or
animals, create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the POTW, or to exceed the limitation set
forth in the applicable Pretreatment Standard. A toxic pollutant shall include but not be limited to
any pollutant identified pursuant to Section 307(a) of the Act.
Any substance which would either singly or by interaction with other wastes result in the presence
of noxious, or malodorous gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a quantity sufficient to
create a public nuisance or hazard to life or to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance,
repairs, inspections, or monitoring.
Any substance which may cause the POTW's effluent or any other product of the POTW such as
residues, biosolids, or scums, to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the
reclamation process. In no case, shall a substance discharged to the POTW cause the POTW to be
in non-compliance with biosolids use or disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations developed under
Section 405 of the Act; any criteria, guidelines, or regulations affecting biosolids use or disposal
developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substance Control
Act, or State criteria applicable to the biosolids management method being used.
Any substance, which may cause the POTW to violate its NPDES Permit.
Any wastewater with objectionable color not removed in the treatment process, such as, but not
limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 50-19
Sewer Ordinance
CHAPTER 50
Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological activity in the POTW Treatment
Plant resulting in Interference, but in no case wastewater causing the temperature at the
introduction into the POTW treatment plant to exceed 40°C (104°F).
Any pollutant, including oxygen-demanding pollutant (BOD, etc.) released at a flow rate and/or
pollutant concentration, which will, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, cause
Interference with POTW. In no, case shall a slug load have a flow rate or contain concentration or
qualities of pollutants that exceed for any time period longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five
(5) times the average twenty-four (24) hour concentration, quantities or flow during normal
operation.
Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such halflife or concentration as
may exceed limits established by the Board in compliance with applicable State or Federal
regulations.
Any wastewater, which, either alone or by interaction with other substances, causes a hazard to
human life or creates a public nuisance, or is deleterious to the POTW.
Storm water, surface water, ground water, artesian well water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage,
swimming pool drainage, condensate, deionized water, non-contact cooling water, and unpolluted
wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the Superintendent.
Sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of industrial wastes.
Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the Superintendent in a wastewater discharge
permit.
Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources, the treatment plant's effluent to fail
a toxicity test.
Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances, which may cause excessive foaming in the
POTW.
50.022 NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.
Upon the promulgation of National Categorical Pretreatment Standards for a particular industrial
subcategory, the National Pretreatment Standard, if more stringent than limitations imposed under this
Ordinance for sources in that category, shall immediately supersede the limitations imposed under this
Ordinance. Therefore, the National Categorical Pretreatment Standards located in 40 CFR, Chapter I,
Subchapter N, Parts 405-471, are hereby incorporated into this Ordinance.
50.023 MODIFICATION OF NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.
Where the City's wastewater treatment system achieves consistent removal of pollutants limited by National
Categorical Pretreatment Standards, the City may apply to the Approval Authority for modification of specific
limits in the National Pretreatment Standards. “Consistent Removal” shall mean the average reduction in
the amount of a pollutant or alteration of the nature of the pollutant by the wastewater treatment system to a
less toxic or harmless state in the effluent as shown by the lowest 50% of the samples taken according to
the procedures set forth in Section 403.7(c)(2) of 40 CFR 403 - "General Pretreatment Regulations for
Existing and New Sources of Pollution" promulgated pursuant to the Act. The City may then modify pollutant
discharge limits in the Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards if the requirements contained in 40 CFR,
Part 403, Section 403.7, are fulfilled and prior approval from the Approval Authority is obtained.
50.024 SPECIFIC POLLUTANT LIMITATIONS.
No person shall discharge wastewater containing in excess of:
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 50-20
Sewer Ordinance
CHAPTER 50
Constituent Maximum Daily Monthly
Discharge
(milligrams per liter)
Average Monthly Discharge
(milligrams per liter)
Arsenic 1.2 0.6
Cadmium 1.1 0.6
Copper 0.2 0.1
Lead 1.1 1.1
Mercury 0.04 0.04
Nickel 20 10
Silver 0.5 0.5
Total Chromium 18.0 18.0
Zinc 10 5
Cyanide 0.8 0.4
50.025 STATE REQUIREMENTS.
State requirements and limitations on discharges shall apply in any case where they are more stringent than
Federal requirements and limitations or those in this Ordinance.
50.026 CITY'S RIGHT OF REVISION.
The City reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or permit, more stringent limitations or requirements on
discharges to the municipal wastewater system if deemed necessary to comply with the objectives of this
Ordinance.
50.027 DILUTION PROHIBITION.
No User shall ever increase the use of process water or, in any other way, attempt to dilute a discharge as a
partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a Pretreatment
Requirement or Standard.
50.028 ADMISSIBILITY - PROHIBITION OF UNPOLLUTED WATERS.
Unpolluted water, including, but not limited to, City water, noncontact cooling water, or blowdown shall not
be discharged through direct or indirect connection to the municipal wastewater system for purposes of
diluting wastewater in order to reduce sewer rates or charges of the user.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 50-21
Sewer Ordinance
CHAPTER 50
50.029 GREASE, OIL AND SAND INTERCEPTORS.
Such interceptors shall be provided at (a) all restaurants, and at (b) all industrial or commercial enterprises
when, in the opinion of the City, they are necessary to contain grease, flammable wastes or sand and other
harmful inert materials. All interceptors shall be approved by the City and shall be readily and easily
accessible for cleaning and inspection.
50.030 RIGHT TO REJECT WASTE.
The City shall have the right to reject waste and prohibit the introduction of rejected waste into the municipal
wastewater system, or the City may require pretreatment of the waste when the strength or character of the
waste is such that it could cause damage to or interfere with the operation of the municipal wastewater
system.
50.031 SPILLS AND SLUG DISCHARGES.
Any user with potential spill or slug discharges shall provide protection from spills or slugs
discharges, which may cause Pass Through or Interference. Any User with spill or slug discharge
potential shall develop slug discharge prevention/control plans which meet the approval of the City
and implement the approved plan. Facilities necessary to implement these plans shall be provided
and maintained at the User's expense. Such plans shall contain, at a minimum, the following
elements:
1. Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch discharges;
2. Description of stored chemicals;
3. Procedures for immediately notifying the POTW of spills or slug discharges, including any
discharge that would violate a prohibition under Article III, with procedures for follow-up written
notification within five days;
4. If necessary, procedures to prevent adverse impact from slug discharges or spills, including
inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and
unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment
structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants (including solvents),
and/or measures and equipment for emergency responses.
Such plans shall be revised and updated whenever plant operational changes affect the validity of the plans,
but in any case not less often than every three (3) years. Failure to comply with this requirement may result
in legal remedies as defined in Section 5.5. Any significant plan revisions including revisions involving
construction/installation of new facilities, shall be approved by the City prior to implementation of such
revisions.
The City's review and approval of such plans (including any facilities and/or operating procedures) shall not
relieve the User from the responsibility to modify such plans as necessary to maintain compliance with
applicable federal, state, and local regulations. In addition, City's approval of such plans shall not relieve the
User from complying with all other laws and regulations governing the use, storage, and transportation of
hazardous substances.
No prospective User that would have slug discharge or spill potential may commence discharge to the
POTW unless slug discharge prevention/control plans have been approved by the City.
Notice to Employees: A notice shall be permanently posted on the User's bulletin board or other
prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a hazardous waste discharge.
Employer’s or User’s shall insure that all employees who may cause or suffer such a hazardous
waste discharge to occur are advised of the emergency notification procedure.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 50-22
Sewer Ordinance
CHAPTER 50
50.032 INDUSTRIAL PRETREATMENT BYPASSES: [REFER ALSO TO 4.4.5]
Any industrial pretreatment bypass is allowable which does not cause a violation of this ordinance,
but only if such bypass is to allow for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation.
Any industrial pretreatment bypass is prohibited which does not meet the conditions specified in
(a)(1) above is prohibited unless approved in advance by the City. The City may consider
approving an industrial pretreatment bypass if all of the following conditions are met:
1. Such bypass would be unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury or severe property
damage. As used here, “severe property damage" means substantial physical damage to
property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or
substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur
in the absence of such a bypass. As used here, severe property damage does not mean
economic loss caused by delays in production.
2. There would be no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment
facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment
downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been
installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent such a bypass from
occurring during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventative maintenance.
3. The industrial discharge complied with notification requirements as specified in section 4.3.5.
With any prohibited bypass, the Industrial User must comply with notification requirements as
specified in section 4.3.5.
50.033 COMPLIANCE SCHEDULES.
Any User which is not in compliance with the City's ordinance limitations and/or requirements must develop
a compliance schedule of corrective measures to be taken in order to return to compliance. This schedule
shall be submitted to the City for review and approval. If an approvable schedule is not submitted by the
User, the City may develop and enforce a schedule for the User. For compliance schedule reporting
requirements refer to 3.17.3. This schedule shall contain milestone dates for the commencement and
completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional facilities required for the
discharger to comply with this ordinance, including, but not limited to, dates relating to hiring an engineer,
hiring other appropriate personnel, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing contracts
for major components, commencing construction, completing construction and all other acts necessary to
achieve compliance with this ordinance.
50.034 DUTY TO COMPLY.
All Users shall comply with all applicable State and federal pretreatment regulations.
50.035 DUTY TO MITIGATE - PREVENTION OF ADVERSE IMPACT.
All Users shall take all reasonable steps to minimize or prevent any adverse impact of any discharge in
violation of this ordinance, which has a reasonable likelihood of adversely affecting human health, the
POTW, the waters receiving the POTW's discharge, or the environment.
REPORTING REQUIREMENTS.
50.050 HAZARDOUS WASTE NOTIFICATION.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 50-23
Sewer Ordinance
CHAPTER 50
Any Industrial User, except as specified in subpart (e) below, which discharges to the POTW any
substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a listed or characteristic hazardous waste
under 40 CFR part 261, shall notify the POTW in writing of such discharge.
All hazardous waste notifications shall include:
1. The name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR part 261;
2. The EPA hazardous waste number;
3. The type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other); and
4. A certification that the user has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of
hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be economically practical.
In addition to the information submitted in section 3.17.1(b), Industrial Users discharging more than
100 kg of hazardous waste per calendar month to the POTW shall maintain to the extent such
information is known and readily available to the Industrial User;
1. An identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the waste;
2. An estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the waste stream and
discharged during that calendar month; and
3. An estimation of the mass of constituents in the waste stream expected to be discharged during
the following 12 months.
Industrial Users commencing the discharge of listed or characteristic hazardous wastes shall, in
addition to complying with 3.17.3, provide the notification no later than 180 days from the discharge
of the wastes. Any notification under this provision need be submitted only once for each
hazardous waste discharged, although notifications of changed discharges must be submitted under
section 3.17.3 of this Ordinance.
Industrial Users are exempt from the hazardous waste notification requirement during a calendar
month in which they discharge 15 kg or less of non-acute hazardous wastes. Discharge of any
quantity of acute hazardous waste as specified in 40 CFR 261.30 (d) and 261.33 (e) requires a onetime
notification.
50.051 NOTIFICATION OF CHANGED DISCHARGE.
All Industrial Users shall notify the POTW within 48 hours in advance of any substantial change in the
volume or character of pollutants in their discharge, including the listed or characteristic hazardous wastes
for which the Industrial User has submitted initial notification as required in Section 3.17.1 of this Ordinance.
50.052 PERIODIC COMPLIANCE REPORTS.
All Users subject to compliance schedules (see Section 3.14 of this Ordinance) must submit a progress
report to the City no later than fourteen (14) days following each date in the compliance schedule. This
report must include whether it complied with the increment of progress to be met on that date, the reason for
delay if the date was not met, and the steps being taken to return to compliance. In no event, can more than
nine (9) months elapse between progress reports.
50.053 SIGNATORY REQUIREMENTS.
All reports required by the City shall be signed and certified by an Authorized Representative of the
discharger. See requirements of Section 4.4.4.
50.054 REPORTS OF SPILLS, SLUG DISCHARGES AND OPERATION UPSETS.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 50-24
Sewer Ordinance
CHAPTER 50
The User shall immediately, telephone and notify the Superintendent of any spill, slug discharge, or
operation upset. The notification shall include location of discharge, type of waste, concentration and
volume and corrective actions.
Written Notice. Within five (5) days following such an incident the User shall submit to the Superintendent a
detailed written report under oath and signed by the User describing the cause of the discharge and the
measures to be taken by the User to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve
the User of any expense, loss, damage or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the
POTW, fish kills, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the User of
any fines, civil penalties, or other liability which may be imposed by this article or other applicable law.
Following such incident, the User may be required by the City to appear before the Board and provide a full
explanation of the discharge and of steps being taken to prevent its recurrence.
50.055 NONCOMPLIANCE.
Any User shall notify the City immediately after becoming aware of any discharge of such User which
constitutes a violation of this Ordinance.
50.056 DISCHARGER'S REQUEST FOR INTERPRETATION.
In an effort to assure fuller understanding of and compliance with the goals and objectives of this Ordinance,
it shall be the privilege of any interested party to request, in writing an interpretation or ruling by the
Superintendent on any matter covered by this municipal ordinance.
COMBINED SEWERS.
50.065 PROHIBITION OF NEW COMBINED SEWER CONSTRUCTION.
The construction of new combined sewers is hereby prohibited.
50.066 NEW CONSTRUCTION TRIBUTARY TO EXISTING COMBINED SEWER.
New construction tributary to the combined sewer shall be designed to minimize inflow and infiltration
contribution to the existing combined sewer. For any new construction see Section 3.19.1.
ADMINISTRATION
50.075 APPLICABILITY.
This Article shall apply only to users that are subject to Industrial Pretreatment Program requirements.
50.076 WASTEWATER DISCHARGERS.
It shall be unlawful to discharge without an NPDES permit to any natural outlet, including groundwater,
within the City of Auburn. It shall also be unlawful to direct discharge without notification to the City in any
area within the corporate limits of the City. It shall also be unlawful to discharge to the POTW any
wastewater except as authorized by the Superintendent in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance.
50.077 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITS.
50.078 GENERAL.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 50-25
Sewer Ordinance
CHAPTER 50
All Significant Industrial Users proposing to connect to or to contribute to the POTW shall obtain a
Wastewater Discharge Permit before connecting to or contributing to the POTW, and shall apply for such
permit at least 90 days prior to the proposed discharge to the POTW.
50.079 PERMIT APPLICATION.
Users required to obtain a Wastewater Discharge Permit shall complete and file with the City of Auburn
Wastewater Treatment Utility, an application in the form prescribed by the Board, and accompanied by a fee
as follows:
Permit Fee
Initial Significant Industrial User Permit $500.00
Renewal Significant Industrial User Permit $250.00
In support of the application, the user shall submit, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the
following information:
1. A statement that indicates the wastewater discharge permit issuance date, expiration date and
effective date;
2. A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable without prior notification to
the city and provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of the existing
wastewater discharge permit;
3. Effluent limits based on applicable Pretreatment Standards;
4. Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and record-keeping requirements. These
requirements shall include an identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location,
sampling frequency and sample type based on Federal, State, and local law;
5. A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of Pretreatment Standards
and Requirements, and any applicable compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend
the time for compliance beyond that required by applicable Federal, State, or local law;
6. Requirements to control Slug Discharge, if determined by the City to be Necessary;
7. Name, address, and location, (if different from the plant address);
8. Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) number(s) according to the Standard Industrial
Classification Manual, Bureau of the Budget, 1972, as amended;
9. Wastewater constituents and characteristics including but not limited to those mentioned in
Section 3.4 of this Ordinance as determined by a reliable analytical laboratory; sampling and
analysis shall be performed in accordance with Section 4.6.2 of this Ordinance;
10. Time and duration of contribution;
11. Average daily and estimated 30 minute peak wastewater flow rates, including daily, monthly and
seasonal variations if any;
12. Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details to show all sewers, sewer
connections, and appurtenances by the size, location and elevation and a current water use
schematic;
13. Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the premises, including all materials,
which are or could be discharged;
14. Basis of Design of the pretreatment facility including, where applicable:
15. Design Loading
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 50-26
Sewer Ordinance
CHAPTER 50
a. average
b. peak
c. future
i. Rationale for process selection.
ii. Design calculations for sizing of tanks, pumps, piping and other treatment
appurtenances.
iii. Calculation of predicted effluent quality and loading under normal and peak operating
conditions.
16. Where known, the nature and concentration of any pollutants in the discharge which are limited
by any City, State or Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards including any listed or
characteristic hazardous wastes as defined in federal regulations [40 CFR 261] and a Statement
regarding whether or not the pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and if
not, whether additional Operation and Maintenance (O & M) and/or additional pretreatment is
required for the User to meet applicable Pretreatment Standards;
17. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the Pretreatment Standards; the
shortest schedule by which the User will provide such additional pretreatment. The completion
date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable
Pretreatment Standard:
18. The following conditions shall apply to this schedule:
a. The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates for the
commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of
additional pretreatment required for the User to meet the applicable Pretreatment Standards
(e.g., hiring an engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing
contract for major components, commencing construction, completing construction, etc.)
b. No increment referred to in paragraph (1) shall exceed 9 months.
c. No later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date for compliance,
the User shall submit a progress report to the Superintendent including, as a minimum,
whether or not it complied with the increment of progress to be met on such date and, if not,
the date on which it expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason for delay,
and the steps being taken by the user to return the construction to the schedule established.
In no event shall more than 9 months elapse between such progress reports to the
Superintendent.
19. Number of employees, and hours of operation of plant and proposed or actual hours of
operation of pretreatment system;
20. Each product and/or byproduct produced by type, amount, process or processes and rate of
production;
21. Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day)
22. List of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility;
23. Any other information as may be deemed by the City to be necessary to evaluate the permit
application.
24. The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with
procedures set out in Section 4.4 of this ordinance. Where the Standard requires compliance
with a BMP or pollution prevention alternative, the User shall submit documentation as required
by the (Superintendent) or the applicable Standards to determine compliance with the Standard.
50.080 PERMIT MODIFICATIONS.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 50-27
Sewer Ordinance
CHAPTER 50
The terms and conditions of the permit may be subject to modification by the City during the term of the
permit as limitations or requirements as identified in Article III are modified or other just cause exists. The
User shall be informed of any proposed changes in his permit at least 30 days prior to the effective date of
change. Within 9 months of the promulgation of a National Categorical Pretreatment Standard, the
Wastewater Discharge Permit of Users subject to such standards shall be revised to require compliance with
such standard within the time frame prescribed by such standard. Where a User, subject to a National
Categorical Pretreatment Standard, has not previously submitted an application for a Wastewater Discharge
Permit as required by 4.3.2., the User shall apply for a Wastewater Discharge Permit within 180 days after
the promulgation of the Applicable Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standard. In addition, the User with an
existing Wastewater Discharge Permit shall submit to the Superintendent within 180 days after the
promulgation of an applicable Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standard the information required by
Section 4.3.2.
50.081 PERMIT CONDITIONS.
Wastewater Discharge Permits shall be expressly subject to all provisions of this Ordinance and all other
applicable regulations, user charges and fees established by the City. Permits may contain the following:
The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the wastewater to be discharged to a
public sewer;
Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents and characteristics;
Limits on average and maximum rate and time of discharge or requirements for flow regulations and
equalization;
Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities, and for
providing entry for sampling and inspection.
Specifications for monitoring programs, which may include sampling locations, frequency of
sampling, number, types and standards for tests and reporting, schedule;
Compliance schedules;
Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge reports
Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating to wastewater discharge as
specified by the City, and affording City access thereto;
Requirements for notification of the City of any new introduction of wastewater constituents or any
substantial change in the volume or character of the wastewater constituents being introduced into
the wastewater treatment system, including listed or characteristic hazardous wastes;
Requirements for notification of spills or slug discharges (as per 3.17.5) or upsets or violations;
Requirements for installation, operation and maintenance of pollution control equipment;
Requirements to develop and implement spill and slug prevention/control plans;
Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the City to ensure compliance with this Ordinance and
State and Federal pretreatment standards and requirements.
Effluent limits, including Best Management Practices, based on applicable Pretreatment Standards.
50.082 PERMITS DURATION.
Permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five (5) years. A permit may be issued for
a period less than a year or may be stated to expire on a specific date. The User shall apply for permit
reissuance a minimum of 90 days prior to the expiration of the User's existing permit.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 50-28
Sewer Ordinance
CHAPTER 50
50.083 CONTINUATION OF EXPIRED PERMIT.
An expired permit will continue to be effective and enforceable until the permit is reissued if:
The permittee has submitted a complete permit application at least 90 days prior to the expiration
date of the user’s existing permit.
The failure to reissue the permit, prior to expiration of the previous permit, is not due to any act or
failure to act on the part of the permittee.
50.084 PERMIT TRANSFER.
Wastewater Discharge Permits are issued to a specific User for a specific operation. A wastewater
discharge permit shall not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new User, different
premises, or a new or changed operation without the approval of the City. Any succeeding owner or User
shall also comply with the terms and conditions of the existing permit. The City must receive notice of all
transfers within 5 business days of said transfer.
50.085 RECORDS RETENTION.
All information, records, reports, books, etc., required pursuant to Industrial Wastewater Discharge Permit
whether prepared by or on behalf of the discharger, shall be retained and preserved by such discharger for a
minimum period of three (3) years from the time of their creation. All records which pertain to matters which
are the subject of any enforcement or litigation shall be retained and preserved by the discharger until all
enforcement activities have concluded and all periods of limitations with respect to any and all appeals have
expired. This period of retention shall also be extended when requested by the EPA, Indiana Department of
Environmental Management, or the City. All documentation associated herewith shall be subject to Best
Management Practices.
50.086 REPORTING REQUIREMENTS FOR PERMITTEE. (IN ADDITION TO THOSE SPECIFIED IN 3.17)
50.087 SELF-MONITORING REPORTS.
This requirement calls for the submission of all notices and self-monitoring reports from Significant Industrial
Users that are necessary to assess and assure compliance by Significant Industrial Users with applicable
pretreatment standards and requirements. These reports will normally be required on a monthly basis and
must be certified and signed as required in 4.4.4.
Resampling Requirement. If sampling performed by the User indicates a violation, the User shall
notify the City immediately after becoming aware of the violation. The User shall also repeat the
sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the City within 30 days after
becoming aware of the violation.
Additional Self-Monitoring. If an Industrial User subject to reporting requirements monitors any
pollutant more frequently than required by Control Authority, using procedures established by 40
CFR 136, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report.
In cases where the Pretreatment Standard requires compliance with a Best Management Practice
(BMP) or pollution prevention alternative, the User must submit documentation required by (the
Superintendent) or the Pretreatment Standard necessary to determine the compliance status of the
User.
50.088 BASELINE MONITORING REPORT.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 50-29
Sewer Ordinance
CHAPTER 50
Within one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective date of a Categorical Pretreatment Standard,
existing industrial Users subject to such Categorical Pretreatment Standards and currently discharging to or
scheduled to discharge to a POTW will be required to submit to the City a report containing the information
listed in paragraphs (b) (1) through (7) of 40 CFR 403.12, as follows:
identifying information,
applicable permits,
description of operations,
flow measurement,
measurement of pollutants,
certification statement,
compliance schedule
Baseline Monitoring Report must be signed and certified as required in 4.4.4. Upon promulgation of a
Categorical Pretreatment Standard the City will provide the appropriate form for distribution to the Industrial
Users who are affected by the promulgated standard. The Industrial Users are then required to submit the
completed report to the City.
50.089 90-DAY COMPLIANCE REPORTS.
Within ninety (90) days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment
standards, or in the case of a new source subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements the
Industrial User shall submit to the Superintendent a report containing the information described in 4.4.2 (a)-
(g) of this Ordinance. For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established in accordance
with the procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the User's longterm
production rate. For all other Users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms
of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall
include the User's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports must be
signed and certified in accordance with 4.3.4 of this Ordinance.
50.090 SIGNATORY REQUIREMENTS AND CERTIFICATION.
Self-Monitoring Reports, Baseline Monitoring Reports, Periodic Compliance Reports, and 90 day
Compliance reports must be properly signed and submitted with a certification statement, as follows:
Certification Statement.
I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction
or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather
and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the
system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is,
to the best of my knowledge, and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are
significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for
knowing violations.
Signatory Requirements.
1. By an individual as defined in Section 2.1.3.
2. By a responsible corporate officer, if the Industrial User submitting the reports is a corporation.
For purposes of this paragraph, a responsible corporate officer means (1) a president,
secretary, treasurer, or vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 50-30
Sewer Ordinance
CHAPTER 50
function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision making functions for the
corporation, or (2) the manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operation facilities
employing more than 250 persons or having gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding $25
million if authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in
accordance to corporate procedures.
3. By a general partner or proprietor if the Industrial User submitting the reports is a partnership or
sole proprietorship respectively.
4. By a duly authorized representative of the individual designated in paragraph (i) or (ii) of this
section if:
a. The authorization is made in writing by the individual described in paragraph (i) or (ii).
b. The authorization specifies either the individual or a position having responsibility for the
overall operation of the facility from which the Industrial Discharge originates, such as the
position of plant manager, operator of a well, or well field superintendent, or a position of
equivalent responsibility, or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the
company; and
c. The written authorization is submitted to the Control Authority.
d. If an authorization under paragraph (b)(iii) is no longer accurate because a different
individual or position has responsibility for the overall operation of the facility, or overall
responsibility for environmental matters for the company, a new authorization satisfying the
requirements of this section must be submitted to the Control Authority prior to or together
with any reports to be signed by an authorized representative.
50.091 REPORTS OF INDUSTRIAL PRETREATMENT BYPASSES.
Anticipated Industrial Pretreatment Bypasses. [Refer also to 3.13]
If an Industrial User knows in advance of the need for an industrial pretreatment bypass, it shall submit
prior notification to the City, if possible, at least ten days before the date of such bypass.
Unanticipated Industrial Pretreatment Bypasses.
An Industrial User shall notify the City of an unanticipated industrial pretreatment bypass that causes a
violation of this ordinance. The notification shall include the following:
1. Oral notice to the Superintendent of the Wastewater Treatment Plant immediately after the
Industrial User becomes aware of the need for such bypass.
2. A written report within five days of the time the Industrial User becomes aware of such bypass.
This report shall specify the following.
a. A description of the bypass, the cause thereof, and the bypass's impact on any limits;
b. The amount/volume and duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times;
c. If the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue;
d. Steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass.
3. The City may waive the written report if the oral notice has been received as specified above.
Industrial Pretreatment Bypasses Not Subject to Notification Requirements.
Industrial pretreatment bypasses not subject to the notification requirement as specified in items 4.3.5.
(a) and (b) above include only any such bypass, which does not cause violation of this ordinance, but
only if such bypass is to allow for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation.
50.092 MONITORING FACILITIES.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 50-31
Sewer Ordinance
CHAPTER 50
50.093 METHODS FOR MEASUREMENT OF INDUSTRIAL WASTES FLOW.
Any Significant Industrial User (SIU) who, on the effective date of these regulations, is discharging industrial
waste to the POTW shall provide the City independent access means and facilities for the purpose of
observation, measurement and sampling of such industrial waste. If such access means and facilities are
not otherwise available, the SIU shall construct and maintain a control manhole at the SIU's expense. The
City shall have full access at all times to the SIU's monitoring facility or facilities to conduct tests on quality
and quantity of effluent. The volume or quantity of industrial waste discharged by any SIU into the POTW
may be measured by one or more of the following methods:
If the volume of water used by any SIU in its industrial or process operations is greater than 85% of
the volume obtained from the City, then the volume of water purchased from the City shall be
considered to be the volume of waste discharged;
If the volume of water used for industrial purposes is less than 85% of the volume of water obtained
from the City, then the quantity of industrial wastes generated by an SIU shall be determined as
follows:
1. By a meter or meters on the water supply line or lines to the SIU's industrial and/or process
operations; or
2. By a meter or meters on the waste line or lines from the SIU's industrial and/or process
operations.
If any SIU now discharging or proposing to discharge industrial waste to the POTW does not obtain
its entire water supply requirements from the City, the SIU shall install and maintain a meter or
meters on the waste line or lines from its industrial and/or process operations or shall install such
additional meters on the private water supply as required to permit a determination of the total
amount of discharge to the sewers from all sources under procedures comparable to Subsections
(a) and (b) above.
50.094 LOCATION OF MONITORING FACILITIES.
The City may require to be provided and operated at the User's own expense, monitoring facilities to allow
inspection, sampling and flow measurement of the building sewer and/or internal drainage systems. The
monitoring facility should normally be situated on the User's premises, but the City may, when such a
location would be impractical for purposes of providing for independent and unscheduled monitoring
activities or cause undue hardship on the User, allow the facility to be constructed in the public street or
sidewalk area and located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles.
There shall be ample room in or near such sampling manhole or facility to allow accurate sampling and
preparation of samples for analysis. The facility, sampling, and measuring equipment shall be maintained at
all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the user.
Whether constructed on public or private property, the sampling and monitoring facilities shall be provided in
accordance with the City's requirements and all applicable local construction standards and specifications,
and such sampling and monitoring facilities shall be constructed and maintained in such a manner so as to
enable City personnel to perform independent and unscheduled monitoring activities.
50.095 INSPECTION AND SAMPLING.
The City shall inspect the facilities of any User to ascertain whether the purposes of this Ordinance are being
met and all requirements are being met. Owners or occupants of premises where wastewater is created or
discharged shall allow the City or the City's representative ready access at all times of operation to all parts
of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, or in the
performance of any of their duties. The City, Approval Authority, and EPA shall have the right to set up on
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 50-32
Sewer Ordinance
CHAPTER 50
the User's property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling inspection, compliance monitoring
and/or metering operations. Where a User has security measures in force, which would require proper
identification and clearance before entry into their premises, the User shall make necessary arrangements
with their security guards so that upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the City,
Approval Authority and EPA will be permitted to enter, without delay, for the purposes of performing their
specific responsibilities. Unreasonable delays in allowing the Superintendent access to the user's premises
shall be a violation of this ordinance.
50.096 SEARCH WARRANTS.
If the Superintendent has been refused access to a building, structure, or property, or any part thereof, and
is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this ordinance, or that there
is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program of the City designed
to verify compliance with this ordinance or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall
public health, safety and welfare of the community, then the Superintendent may seek issuance of a search
warrant from the DeKalb Circuit or Superior Court.
50.097 SAMPLE ANALYSES.
All analyses, including sampling results submitted in support of any application reports, evidence or required
by any permit or order shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136
and amendments thereto. If 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the
pollutant in question, sampling and analyses shall be performed using validated analytical methods or any
other sampling and analytical procedures approved by EPA.
50.098 PRETREATMENT.
Significant Industrial Users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as required to comply with this
Ordinance and shall achieve compliance with all Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards within the time
limitations as specified by the Federal Pretreatment Regulations. A New Source Significant Industrial User
must install and have in operating condition, and shall "start up" all pollution control equipment required to
meet applicable Pretreatment Standards before beginning to discharge. Such New Source must meet all
applicable Pretreatment standards and requirements in the shortest time, not to exceed 90 days after the
start of discharge. Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable to the City shall be
provided, operated, and maintained at the User's expense.
50.099 DESIGN PLANS.
Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the City for
review, and shall be acceptable to the City before construction of the facility. The City's review and
acceptance of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of
modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent meeting National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards and acceptable to the City under the provisions of this Ordinance. Any subsequent changes in
the pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported to and be acceptable to the City prior to
the User's initiation of the changes.
50.100 FACILITIES OPERATION.
Industrial Users shall, at the User's expense, at all times maintain in good working order and operate as
effectively as possible all pretreatment/control facilities or systems installed or used by the User to achieve
compliance with the terms and conditions provided for and in accordance with the requirements set forth by
this Ordinance. Such facilities shall at all times be accessible to inspection by the City.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 50-33
Sewer Ordinance
CHAPTER 50
ENFORCEMENT
50.105 APPLICABILITY.
The Article shall apply only to Users that are subject to Industrial Pretreatment Program requirements.
50.106 SUSPENSION OF SERVICE.
The City, by and through its Board of Public Works or the Superintendent, may suspend the wastewater
treatment service and/or a Wastewater Discharge Permit when such suspension is necessary, in the opinion
of the City, in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present an imminent or
substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons, to the environment, causes interference to the
POTW or causes the City to violate any condition of its NPDES Permit.
Any person notified of a suspension of the wastewater treatment service and/or the Wastewater Discharge
Permit shall immediately stop or eliminate the contribution. In the event of a failure of the person to comply
voluntarily with the suspension order or if otherwise deemed necessary by the City, the City shall take such
steps as the City deems necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or
minimize damage to the POTW system or endangerment to any individuals. The City shall reinstate the
Wastewater Discharge Permit and/or the wastewater treatment service upon proof of the elimination of the
non-complying discharge. A detailed written statement submitted by the user describing the causes of the
harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence shall be submitted to the City
within 15 days of the date of occurrence.
50.107 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
Any User, who violates the following conditions of this Ordinance, or applicable state and federal
regulations, is subject to having his permit revoked in accordance with the procedures set forth herein.
Failure of a User to factually report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of his discharge;
Failure of the User to report significant changes in operations, or wastewater constituents and
characteristics;
Refusal of reasonable access to the User's premises for the purpose of inspection or monitoring; or,
Violation of conditions of the permit.
50.108 NOTIFICATION OF VIOLATION.
Whenever the City finds that any User has violated or is violating this Ordinance, wastewater discharge
permit, or any prohibition, limitation or requirements contained herein, the City may serve upon such person
a written notice stating the nature of the violation and requiring submission by the User to the City within a
specified time a written response including corrective measures taken and/or planned to prevent recurrence
of the violation.
50.109 SHOW CAUSE HEARING.
The City may order any User who violates a condition of this Ordinance or their permit to show
cause before the Board why a proposed enforcement action should not be taken. A notice shall be
served on the User specifying the time and place of a hearing to be held by the Board regarding the
violation, the reasons why the action is to be taken, the proposed enforcement action, and directing
the User to show cause before the Board why the proposed enforcement action should not be
taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 50-34
Sewer Ordinance
CHAPTER 50
receipt requested) at least 10 (ten) days before the hearing. Service may be made on any agent or
officer of a corporation.
The Board may itself conduct the hearing and take the evidence, or may designate any of its
members or any officer or employee of the City Legal Department to:
1. Issue in the name of the Board notices of hearings requesting the attendance and testimony of
witnesses and the production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in such hearings;
2. Take the evidence;
3. Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including transcripts and other evidence,
together with recommendations to the Board for action thereon.
At any hearing held pursuant to this Ordinance, testimony must be under oath and recorded
stenographically. The transcript, so recorded, will be made available to any member of the public or
any party to the hearing upon payment of the usual charges thereof.
After the Board has reviewed the evidence, it may issue an order to the User responsible for the
discharge directing that, following a specified time period, the sewer service be discontinued unless
the User has returned to compliance of this Ordinance, their permit, and/or orders and directives
issued by the City. Further orders and directives as are necessary and appropriate may be issued.
50.110 LEGAL ACTION.
Industrial User shall be liable for any and all damages, losses and expenses sustained by the
POTW as a result of noncompliance by Industrial User. The City Attorney may commence an action
for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief in the appropriate Court of this county to obtain
remedies for noncompliance by Industrial User with any Pretreatment Standard or Requirement.
When the Superintendent finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this
ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment
standard or requirement, the Superintendent may petition the DeKalb Circuit or Superior Courts,
through the City Attorney, for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate,
which restrains or compels the specific performance of the wastewater discharge permit, order, or
other requirement imposed by this ordinance on activities of the user. The Superintendent may also
seek such other action as is appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief, including a requirement for
the user to conduct environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar
against or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user.
50.111 PUBLICATION OF VIOLATIONS.
The City shall at least annually publish in the newspaper of general circulation having the largest
circulation within the city a list of the Users, which, at any time during the previous twelve (12) months,
were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment requirements. A User is in significant
noncompliance if its violation meets one or more of the following criteria:
Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined as those in which sixty-six percent or
more of all the measurements taken for each pollutant parameter during a six month period exceed
(by any magnitude) the numeric pretreatment standard or the average limit for the same pollutant
parameter;
Technical Review Criteria (TRC) violations defined as those in which thirty-three percent or more of
all the measurements for each pollutant parameter taken during a six month period equal or exceed
the product of the numeric pretreatment standard multiplied by the applicable factor (factor = 1.4 for
BOD, TSS, fat, oil, and grease; and 1.2 for all other pollutants, except pH);
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 50-35
Sewer Ordinance
CHAPTER 50
Any other violation of a pretreatment effluent limit (daily maximum or long-term average) that the
City determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or passthrough
(including endangering the health of City personnel or the general public);
Any discharge of a pollutant that caused imminent endangerment to human health, welfare or to the
environment or has resulted in the City's exercise of its emergency authority under Section 5.1 of
Article V to halt or prevent such a discharge;
Failure to meet, within 90 days after the schedule date, a compliance schedule milestone contained
in a local control mechanism or enforcement order for starting construction, completing
construction, or attaining final compliance;
Failure to provide within 30 days after the due date, required reports such as baseline monitoring
reports, 90 day compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with
compliance schedules;
Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
Any other violations, which may include a violation of Best Management Practices, which the City
determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program.
PENALTIES/COSTS
50.115 APPLICABILITY.
This Article shall apply only to Users that are subject to Industrial Pretreatment Program Requirements.
50.116 ADMINISTRATIVE/CIVIL PENALTIES.
Any User who is found to have violated an Order of the Board or failed to comply with any provision of this
Ordinance, and the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued hereunder, may be fined not less than Five
Hundred Dollars ($500.00) nor more than Two Thousand Five Hundred Dollars ($2,500.00) for each offense.
Each day on which a violation shall occur or continue shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense. In
addition to the penalties provided herein, the City may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs, court
reporters' fees and other expenses of litigation by appropriate suit at law against the person found to have
violated this Ordinance or the orders, rules, regulations, and permits issued hereunder.
50.117 FALSIFYING INFORMATION.
Any person who makes any false statements, representation or certification in any application, record,
report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this Ordinance, or Wastewater
Discharge Permit, or who falsifies, tampers with, or renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method
required under this Ordinance, shall, upon judgment, be punished by a fine of not less than Five Hundred
Dollars ($500.00) nor more than Two Thousand Five Hundred Dollars ($2,500.00) for each violation.
CONNECTION TO MUNICIPAL WASTEWATER SYSTEM
50.125 PRIVIES, SEPTIC TANKS, CESSPOOLS, ETC.
A person shall not construct or maintain a privy, septic tank, cesspool, dry well other facility intended or used
for the disposal of wastewater; except that existing septic tank systems and absorption fields may be
repaired and maintained in accord with applicable laws and ordinances.
50.126 WHEN CONNECTION TO THE MUNICIPAL WASTEWATER SYSTEM IS REQUIRED.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 50-36
Sewer Ordinance
CHAPTER 50
Any person constructing a new house or other building for occupancy, employment, recreation, industrial or
commercial activity within the City and abutting on any street, alley or easement in which there is now
located a public sanitary or combined sewer, or along or across which there is access to such a sewer, must
connect to such sewer in accordance with applicable ordinances and regulations, and shall not discharge
wastewater elsewhere than into the sewage system.
50.127 CONSTRUCTION OF BUILDING SEWERS.
The size, shape, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer and the methods to be used in
excavating, placing the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling the trench shall conform to the requirements of
the building and plumbing codes and other applicable rules and regulations of the City.
50.128. SEPARATE SEWER REQUIREMENTS.
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building except where one building
stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the
rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway. In such cases, the building sewer from the
front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer.
50.129 USE OF OLD BUILDING SEWER FOR A NEW BUILDING.
Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are determined, upon
examination and test by the representative of City Engineer, to meet all requirements of this Ordinance.
50.130 ELEVATION AND LOCATION OF BUILDING SEWER.
Whenever reasonably possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the
basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the appropriate
public sewer, wastewater carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an appropriate means and
discharged to the building sewer.
50.131 CONNECTION OF DOWNSPOUTS, DRAINS, ETC.
No person shall hereafter connect any new roof downspouts, footing drains, areaway drains, driveways,
parking lots, or other sources of surface, runoff or groundwater, or single pass non-contact cooling water to
a building sewer or building drain which is in turn connected directly or indirectly to the municipal wastewater
system. Further, the Board reserves the right to require present users to disconnect, at user's expense,
existing sources of such inflow where such disconnection is technically and economically feasible.
50.132 INSPECTION, SUPERVISION OF CONNECTION.
The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the Superintendent of the Water Pollution Control
Department or his designated representative when a building sewer is ready for inspection and connection
to the municipal wastewater system. The connection shall be made under the observation of the
representative of Superintendent of the Water Pollution Control Department using materials and techniques
conforming to the requirements of the Board. The applicant shall give notice before the burial or covering of
the building sewer and shall not cover or bury the sewer until the inspection is completed and the connection
approved. A fee for the inspection shall be paid to the Department of Building, Planning and Development
at the time of the application for the inspection, in accordance with the fee schedule in Section 10.12.1.
50.133 RIGHT TO PROHIBIT NEW CONNECTIONS.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 50-37
Sewer Ordinance
CHAPTER 50
The City shall have the right to prohibit new connections when the capacity of the municipal wastewater
system is deemed insufficient by the Board to accommodate the expected flow, BOD and/or suspended
solids loading from the prospective sewer user.
50.144 EXTENSIONS OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS.
If a location is outside the City corporate limits but within four (4) miles of such limits and within the facility
planning area of the City's POTW, then the City may extend wastewater service to any such location,
providing for payment of capital cost expenditures of any such extension through the applicable Barrett Law
procedures, contract with the property owners or by contract with those directly benefited by such extension.
Any such contract for extension of services shall be entered into between the City by its Board of Public
Works and the property owner upon such terms and conditions as may be deemed necessary by such
Board, and shall include an agreement by the property owner to waive any and all right to challenge any
future attempted annexation of the subject property by the City, and shall provide for the payment of sewer
user, connection, and inspection fees in accordance with Article X.
PRIVATE WELLS
50.145 REGISTRATION OF WELLS.
Every owner or occupant of real estate within the corporate limits of the City of Auburn, or real estate from
which there is a building sewer or other means or path of direct or indirect flow into the municipal wastewater
system, shall, on a form provided by the Board, report the existence of any well on the real estate to the City
Engineer. The information furnished on such form by the owner or occupant shall include, among other
items, the name of the owner and occupant of such real estate, the location on said real estate of such well,
the size of the well pipe, the size (voltage, amperage and horsepower) of the well pump motor, and the
purpose for which the well water is used by the owner, occupant or others.
50.146 METERING OF WELL WATER.
The Board shall determine by any reasonable means, including, but not limited to, the use of water meters
and timing devices, the flow of such well in order to determine the amount of wastewater entering the
sewage system. The owner or occupant of such real estate shall pay for such metering device, which shall
be of a type approved by the Board, and which shall remain the property of the owner but shall be under the
exclusive control of the Board and shall not under any circumstances be tampered with by the owner,
occupant or any other person. It shall further be a violation of this Ordinance for any person to tamper with
or modify any pump on any such well so as to render inaccurate the meter on such well. In the case of wells
for household use only, the Board may, in lieu of metering or timing the use of the well, provide for use of
reasonable estimates regarding water volume.
50.147 INSPECTION OF WELLS.
The Board may direct the Superintendent, inspector or any other employee to enter upon private property for
the purpose of inspecting to determine the existence of private wells, to oversee or to direct the installation
of metering or timing devices, and to read such meters and devices.
50.148 WELL DIGGING.
A person shall not hereafter dig or drive a well within the City limits without first making application therefor
to the Department of Building, Planning and Development in the form and manner prescribed in the Auburn
City Code Section 53.081 as from time to time amended. The failure to file such application shall be a
violation of this Ordinance.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 50-38
Sewer Ordinance
CHAPTER 50
WASTEWATER MONITORING
50.160 APPLICABILITY.
This Article shall apply only to Users that are subject to Industrial Pretreatment Program requirements.
50.161 SURVEILLANCE OF SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USERS.
To establish a feasible Surveillance schedule, the following self-monitoring estimated frequencies are
established:
City Monitoring:
1. Minimum of one (1) scheduled monitoring event per year to include site inspection, records
review and sampling.
2. Minimum of one (1) unscheduled monitoring event per year to include site inspection. records
review and sampling.
3. Demand monitoring to consist of site inspection, records review and seven (7) consecutive days
of sampling to be performed when warranted in the opinion of the Board in response to a known
or suspected violation discovered in a self-monitoring report, routine sampling trip, or by public
complaint or any discharge of prohibited material.
Self-monitoring:
1. As required for National Categorical Pretreatment Standard Compliance monitoring.
2. As established in Significant Industrial User Wastewater Discharge Permit, but in any case, not
less than the total minimums set forth below at 9.1 (c), unless expressly approved by the Board.
Minimum Monitoring Frequency Guidelines for Case-by-Case Permit Requirement.
Industry Flow
(average gallons per day)
Monitoring Frequency
0 – 25,000 Once every twelve months
25,001 – 50,000 Once every three months
50,001 – 100,000 Once a month
Greater than 100,000 Two times a month, at least 15 days apart
The City may conduct, for the Significant Industrial Users, some or all of the required User monitoring.
The City may require more frequent monitoring based on potential degree of impact on the POTW,
variability in types or amounts of pollutants discharged, or concentration or loading of conventional
pollutants, or to ascertain continued compliance.
50.162 SURVEILLANCE SURVEY CHARGE.
The charge for each surveillance survey shall be based on the cost of sample collection, analysis and
reporting as well as site inspection and records evaluation costs.
The Board is hereby empowered to review on an annual basis the actual costs versus charges for
surveillance and to adjust charges accordingly to achieve cost reimbursement.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 50-39
Sewer Ordinance
CHAPTER 50
50.163 MONITORING OF SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USERS.
A Significant Industrial User shall install at its own expense monitoring facilities as required hereinabove in
Section 4.5, unless said Significant Industrial User can demonstrate to the Board that compliance with this
requirement would cause undue hardship. In such cases, the Board shall provide for alternate monitoring
procedures in the Significant Industrial User's wastewater discharge permit. The City shall have the right of
full access to said monitoring station at all times to conduct tests on quantity and quality of effluent.
The City may provide metering and/or monitoring equipment during a surveillance period for control
manholes or their access means supplemental to those provided by the User.
Required monitoring equipment may, if the Board determines it to be necessary, include a device for
continuously automatically measuring and recording flow and a device for automatically taking discrete
hourly and composite samples of wastewater during each twenty-four hour period. In the event of
continuing violation of discharge limits in the permit of a Significant Industrial User, the City may also, in
addition, require monitoring equipment which shall include a real time analytical device, suitable for the
nature of the wastewater being monitored, to provide instantaneous indications of a potential discharge
incident which may cause maximum limitations of the Significant Industrial User wastewater discharge
permit to be exceeded.
Each Significant Industrial User shall measure and record the following data on a schedule
established in their permit:
1. Total daily wastewater discharge (gallons per day).
2. Concentration of each waste constituent or characteristic specified in the permit (mg/L).
3. Total daily discharge of each waste constituent or characteristic specified in the permit (lb/day).
All analyses shall be performed according to Section 4.6.2 of this Ordinance.
The City may monitor and analyze the waste stream of any Significant Industrial User on a daily basis when
just cause exists. If at any time the rate of wastewater discharge or concentration or quantity of a
constituent or characteristic exceeds the maximum limits established in the permit, the Superintendent shall
be notified as required in Section 4.3.4 (i) and (j).
50.164 LIMITATIONS ON POINT OF DISCHARGE.
No person shall discharge any substance directly into a manhole or other opening in the municipal
wastewater system other than through the approved building (or house connection) sewer, except in
accordance with the terms of this Ordinance or by express permission of the Board.
50.165 LICENSED COMMERCIAL OR INDUSTRIAL WASTE HAULING.
A person who is a licensed commercial or industrial waste hauler may discharge compatible pollutants and
those incompatible pollutants within the limits of admissibility set out in Article III to the wastewater treatment
plant at a time and place and in such amounts as permitted by the Board. The Board shall not be required
to accept any such discharge if it elects in given cases not to do so. Wastewater so received must be
preceded with a manifest of constituents and concentrations for each truckload.
50.166 SPECIAL AGREEMENTS.
Special agreements and arrangements between the City and any person may be established by the Board
within the terms and intent of this Ordinance when, in the opinion of the Board, unusual or extraordinary
circumstances compel special terms and conditions, including but not limited to consent orders and criminal
prosecutions whereby an unusual wastewater may be accepted for treatment, subject to payment of
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 50-40
Sewer Ordinance
CHAPTER 50
applicable fees. Under no circumstances will a special agreement be made, which permits the User to
violate any applicable Pretreatment Standard or Requirement.
SEWER CHARGES, SURCHARGES AND SERVICE FEES
50.175 PERSONS SUBJECT TO FEES AND SEWER CHARGES.
For the use and service rendered by the publicly owned treatment works, sewer charges shall be collected
from the respective owner(s) of each and every parcel of real estate that is connected directly or indirectly to
the City's wastewater system or otherwise discharges wastewater either directly or indirectly into the
municipal wastewater system of the City, which sewer charges shall be payable as provided in this article.
50.176 EFFECTIVE DATE: EXTENSION TO ADDITIONAL PROPERTY.
The sewer charges fixed by this article shall become effective at the time the user first discharges to the
municipal wastewater system following the effective date of this ordinance. These sewer charges shall be
extended to and cover any additional premises thereafter served, without the necessity of any hearing or
notice.
50.177 RATE BASIS.
The sewer flow charges shall be based on the quantity of water as measured by the water meter used on or
in the premises or other method of measuring approved by the City subject to such sewer charges, except
as otherwise provided in this article.
50.178 SCHEDULE OF METER READING.
Water meters shall be read once each month or, at the option of the City, at other intervals.
50.179 PROCEDURE WHEN WATER IS OBTAINED PARTIALLY OR WHOLLY FROM SOURCES OTHER THAN
CITY.
In the event a user obtains water partially or wholly from sources other than the City, the total water used
must be measured or determined as provided in Section 8.2, or by other reasonable means as the Board
may direct.
50.180 PORTION OF WATER NOT ENTERING MUNICIPAL WASTEWATER SYSTEM.
In the case of a user utilizing more than 1,000 gallons of water per average workday, who can substantiate
to the City that a portion of said water does not and cannot enter the municipal wastewater system, the
Board shall either determine the portion of the measured water to be used in determining the appropriate
sewer charges, or approve the manner and technique of flow measurement provided by the user for
determining wastewater discharged to the municipal wastewater system. Facilities utilized to accomplish
this shall be installed and maintained in a serviceable condition by the User at his expense, but shall be
under the exclusive control of the City.
50.181 BILLING PROCEDURE GENERALLY.
Sewer billings and invoices shall be rendered and collected approximately monthly. The Board shall, on
proper cause being shown by the applicant that in a singular occurrence, metered water did not reach the
municipal wastewater system, adjust the user’s sewer charge with respect to such occurrence.
In the event there is a difference in analytical results that is not explainable by normal variation in the testing
procedure, the User may, within thirty (30) days of billing, appeal to the Board.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 50-41
Sewer Ordinance
CHAPTER 50
50.182 TENANTS MAY BE BILLED: RIGHT OF OWNERS TO EXAMINE RECORDS.
The sewer charges may be billed to the tenants occupying the premises served, unless otherwise instructed
in writing by the person who owns the premises. Such billings shall in no way relieve the owner of liability in
the event payment is not made as herein required. The owners of the premises served, which are occupied
by tenants, shall have the right to examine the collection records of the City for the purpose of determining
whether such sewer charges have been paid by such tenants; provided that such examination shall be
made at the office at which the records are kept and during the hours that such office is open for business.
50.183 LIABILITY OF CITY FOR CHARGES.
For the service rendered to any department or agency of the City, except the POTW, the City shall be
subject to the sewer charges provided herein.
50.184 SURCHARGE BASED ON FLOW AND CONCENTRATION OF WASTEWATER.
All wastewater discharged shall meet the admissibility standards in Article III of this Ordinance. Wastewater,
from any User, beyond the limits of admissibility set forth in this Ordinance may be accepted and surcharged
in accordance with the schedule in Section 10.11.
Surcharges shall be based on actual quantities discharged for treatment as determined from measured
concentration and flow. Surcharge rates for wastewater characteristics not provided for herein may be set at
the reasonable discretion of the Board, taking into account all of the Wastewater Treatment Plant’s
(POTW's) significant cost factors, relating to treatment, handling, and disposal.
50.185 RATES OF SURCHARGE.
The rates of surcharge, in addition to volumetric charge, for the following constituents shall be as follows:
for biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) in excess of 250 milligrams per pound $0.41 per pound.
For suspended solids (SS) in excess of 250 milligrams per pound $0.31 per pound.
50.186 RATES OF SURCHARGE.
The rates of surcharge, in addition to volumetric charges, for the following constituents shall be as follows:
Metered Service
1.
Metered Users
Base Rate
IN-City
Phase One
IN-City
Phase Two
Out-of-City
Phase One
Out-of-city
Phase Two
5/8 – ¾ inch
meter
$8.55 $9.22 $10.69 $11.79
1 inch meter $21.38 $23.56 $26.73 $29.45
1 -1/2 inch meter $35.42 $39.02 $44.27 $48.77
2 inch meter $85.49 $94.19 $106.85 $117.72
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 50-42
Sewer Ordinance
CHAPTER 50
3 inch meter $196.63 $216.63 $245.78 $270.78
4 & 6 inch meter $341.96 $376.74 $427.76 $470.93
2. PLUS:
Flow Rate Per 1,000
Gallons
Per 1,000
Gallons
Per 1,000
Gallons
Per 1,000
Gallons
Operation &
Maintenance and
Replacement
$4.81 $5.30 $6.02 $6.62
Local Capital
Charge
$3.59 $3.96 $4.50 $4.95
3.
Per Bill Per Bill Per Bill Per Bill Per Bill
Billing Charge $3.31 $3.65 $4.14 $4.56
Unmetered Users
1.
Residential single
family
$53.90 $59.38 $67.37 $74.22
50.187 SEWER CONNECTION FEES.
The fee or charge that shall be paid to the City for the right to connect to any City sanitary sewer
shall be as follows:
1. Residential Connection: (a) In-City: $1,000.00 per dwelling unit; (b) Out-of-City: one-hundred
and twenty-five percent (125%) of the In-City charge. In all cases where multiple dwelling units
share a physical connection the connection fee shall be equal to the connection fee per dwelling
unit times each separately numbered unit for postal services.
2. Non-Residential Connection: (a) In-City: $1,000.00 per Equivalent Dwelling Unit (EDU); (b)
Out-of-City: one- hundred and twenty-five percent (125%) of the In-City charge. In all cases
the number of EDU’s shall be determined by dividing the estimated monthly water usage by the
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 50-43
Sewer Ordinance
CHAPTER 50
number of gallons of water that equals one (1) EDU, as EDU is defined herein. The estimated
water usage shall be determined by a licensed engineer for the intended use and level of use of
the proposed development, and shall be provided to the City by and at the expense of the party
requesting a service connection.
3. Beginning January 1, 2003 and each January 1 thereafter the In-City fees listed in (i) and (ii)
above shall increase by $200.00 each year until it reaches $2,600.00. This increase shall be
subject to the review requirements in Article XI.
4. Beginning January 1, 2003 and each January 1 thereafter the Out-of-City fees listed in (i) and
above shall increase so as to be one-hundred and twenty-five percent (125%) of the adjusted
In-City fees. This increase shall be subject to the review requirements in Article XI.
Inspection Fee. In addition to the connection fee in (A) above, the fee or charge that shall be paid
to the City for inspection of the physical connection to the City’s sanitary sewer main shall be
$30.00 for a single-family residential inspection, $50.00 for a multi-family residential inspection, and
$120.00 for a commercial or industrial inspection.
50.188 BASIC SEWER CHARGES.
For the use and the service rendered by said sewage works, volumetric sewer charges shall be paid as
hereinafter provided and shall be in an amount determined as follows:
Minimum Charge per month for Metered Service
The appropriate Base Monthly Rate for the meter size, plus 1,000 gallons of monthly flow rate charges,
plus the billing charge. For example, a customer with a 5/8 – 3/4 –inch meter will pay a minimum charge
of $20.26 for in-city service and $25.35 for out-of-city service.
Minimum charge per month for unmetered service
The minimum charge shall be the rate established in 50.186 “Rates of surcharge.”
50.189 PRETREATMENT PROGRAM CHARGES.
Permit Fee
• New - $500
• Renewal - $250 (every 5 years unless required sooner by State or Federal Agencies)
Annual Permit Review
• $50 (1 time per year) / (none on years of permit renewal)
Program Administration Charge
• $0.020/1000 gal for Significant Industrial Users only (Subject to Annual Review)
Monitoring Setup/Teardown Fee
• $60 per event (minimum 2/year)
Site Inspection Fee
• $30 per visit (minimum 1/year)
Sample Analysis & Reporting Fees (minimum 2 samplings per year)
• Charges based on cost per sample per parameter analyzed. Fee Schedule to be as follows;
subject to annual review:
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 50-44
Sewer Ordinance
CHAPTER 50
Test Group Fees
Test Name Fee
AMMONIA-N $14.00
CADMIUM 10.00
cBOD $10.00
CHROMIUM $10.00
COD $9.00
COPPER $10.00
CYANIDE $20.00
E.COLI $25.00
FECAL COLIFORM $30.00
LEAD $10.00
NICKEL $10.00
OIL & GREASE $25.00
PH $2.00
PHOSPHORUS $8.50
TBOD $10.00
TSS $13.00
ZINC $10.00
DISSOLVED SOLIDS $15.00
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 50-45
Sewer Ordinance
CHAPTER 50
PHENOL $12.00
The City Wastewater Utility reserves the right to require additional parameters at a unit charge to be
based on the City's cost of providing the service. Additional monitoring and/or analytical costs to the
City may be charged to the respective User.
50.200 RATES FOR LICENSED, COMMERCIAL OR INDUSTRIAL WASTE HAULING
The Board is empowered to determine rates, charges, and fees for septic tank, industrial wastes, and other
disposable wastewater and wastes delivered to the wastewater treatment plant, as provided in Section 9.6,
and to collect such charges and fees.
50.201 CHARGES FOR SPECIAL AGREEMENTS
The Board is empowered to determine and to collect such charges as it may reasonably provide for under
special agreements and arrangements entered into by the Board, on behalf of the City, under Section 9.7.
50.202 GOVERNMENTAL EXEMPTION TO SURCHARGE
Local, State and Federal government entities and their subdivisions shall pay fees and charges listed in
Article X as if they are located within the City limits of the City whether or not the connection is located within
the City limits.
50.203 DELINQUENT ACCOUNTS.
Charges for wastewater service levied pursuant to this Ordinance shall be due and payable on or before the
due dates shown on the bills. Any service charge not paid by the due date (approximately seventeen (17)
days after the bill is rendered) shall be considered delinquent. The delinquent charge shall be ten (10%)
percent of the delinquent amount and shall be added to the next statement rendered unless by then paid.
Delinquent sewage charges together with delinquent penalties, costs and other expenses of collection may
be collected by any lawful remedy, including, where applicable, the placing of and foreclosure of liens on
real estate as provided by state law.
50.204 BUDGET PAYMENTS.
If and when the City installs and has operating appropriate software, any users of utilities furnished by the
city may elect to pay their monthly statements for utilities at a flat, prearranged budget rate for 11 months.
The twelfth month, which shall be July of each year, shall be the balancing month during which any
overcharge shall be credited and any undercharge shall be added to the user’s July statement. The Clerk-
Treasurer shall periodically review budget accounts and shall have the responsibility to adjust budget rates
during any of the 11 months upon a finding that the budget rate is either at a substantially excessive or
deficient charge.
50.999 PENALTY
This penalty section shall apply only to users that are subject to industrial pretreatment program
requirements.
Administrative/civil penalties. Any user who is found to have violated an order of the Board or failed
to comply with any provision of this chapter, and the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued
hereunder, may be fined not less than $500 nor more than $2,500 for each offense. Each day on
which a violation shall occur or continue shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense. In
addition to the penalties provided herein, the city may recover reasonable attorneys’ fees, court
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 50-46
Sewer Ordinance
CHAPTER 50
costs, court reporters’ fees and other expenses of litigation by appropriate suit at law against the
person found to have violated this chapter or the orders, rules, regulations, and permits issued
hereunder.
Falsifying Information. Any person who makes any false statements, representation or certification
in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained
pursuant to this chapter, or wastewater discharge permit, or who falsifies, tampers with, or renders
inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this chapter, shall, upon judgment, be
punished by a fine of not less than $500 nor more than $2,500 for each violation.
BI-ANNUAL REVIEW
The Board shall file with the Mayor and Common Council of the City of Auburn during the first calendar quarter of
each year an annual report for the previous calendar year showing the financial condition of the Wastewater
Treatment Utility (POTW) and the following additional information, as well as other information the Board may deem
useful or appropriate: (a) the amount of volumetric charges collected, (b) the amount of surcharges collected, (c) the
activities of the Board and Water Pollution Control Department with respect to industrial surveillance and
pretreatment, (d) plant, and treatment facilities, (e) technical and other personnel, and (f) combined overflows. Such
report shall contain, where appropriate, recommendations to the Council for amendments to this Ordinance regarding
rates, surcharges, industrial surveillance, limitations on pollutants and concentrations thereof, and all other matters
either within the scope of this Ordinance or pertaining to collection and treatment of wastewater.
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Prohibition Against
Smoking by Individuals in
City Owned Building,
Facilities, Structures, or
Vehicles
CHAPTER 44
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 44-2
Prohibition Against Smoking by Individuals in City Owned
Building, Facilities, Structures, or Vehicles
CHAPTER 44
Table of Contents
44.01 APPLICATION OF SUBCHAPTER TO CITY-OWNED FACILITIES
44.02 WHERE SMOKING IS NOT REGULATED
44.03 POSTING OF SIGNS
44.04 VIOLATIONS
44.05 ENFORCEMENT
44.06 PARKS DEPARTMENT
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 44-3
Prohibition Against Smoking by Individuals in City Owned
Building, Facilities, Structures, or Vehicles
CHAPTER 44
This section prohibits smoking by any person in all indoor buildings, indoor facilities, indoor structures, or vehicles
owned or used by the Municipal City of Auburn, Indiana.
44.01 APPLICATION OF SUBCHAPTER TO CITY-OWNED FACILITIES
All indoor places owned or used by the City of Auburn, including cars, trucks, movable pieces of machinery,
and other vehicles and enclosed areas and indoor facilities and indoor structures owned or used by the City
of Auburn shall be subject to the provisions of this subchapter.
44.02 WHERE SMOKING IS NOT REGULATED
Notwithstanding any other provision of this subchapter to the contrary, any area that is not used as
or designated as a City building, facility, structure, or vehicle as defined by this subchapter shall not
be subject to this ordinance.
To the extent that any sections of this subchapter conflict with any state or federal statute or
regulation or with any regulation of the City Fire Department, this section shall not apply.
44.03 POSTING OF SIGNS
“No Smoking” signs or the international “No Smoking” symbol (consisting of a pictorial
representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it) shall be
clearly, sufficiently, and conspicuously posted in every building or other place where smoking is
regulated by this subchapter, by the City, operator, agent, employee, or other person having control
of such building or other indoor facility, structure, or space. All letters in any such sign shall be at
least one inch in height and three-quarters of one inch in width.
Every place where smoking is prohibited by this subchapter shall have posted at every entrance a
conspicuous sign clearly stating that smoking is prohibited.
44.04 VIOLATIONS
It shall be unlawful for any person who uses any premises subject to regulation under this
subchapter, whether they are an agent or employee of the City of Auburn, Indiana, or a member of
the general public, to fail to comply with any of its provisions.
It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in any area where smoking is prohibited by the
provisions of this subchapter.
Each violation of this subchapter shall be punishable by a fine of $50.00 per occurrence.
44.05 ENFORCEMENT
Enforcement of this subchapter shall be implemented by the City of Auburn Police Department, Fire
Department, and City of Auburn Building Inspector. Where appropriate, the Ordinance Officer of
the Auburn Police Department shall also have the authority to enforce this subchapter and assess
fines for non-compliance. The Municipal City of Auburn and any other authorized government
agency shall use any appropriate means to issue citations and collect fines.
The Police Department shall enforce this if not involved in other higher priority activities, someone
will be dispatched to investigate the complaint. All complaints regarding structural violations shall
be referred to the Fire Department or the Department of Building, Planning and Development for
investigation.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 44-4
Prohibition Against Smoking by Individuals in City Owned
Building, Facilities, Structures, or Vehicles
CHAPTER 44
This ordinance may be enforced by any means allowed under the civil laws of the State of Indiana,
including fine, civil suit, request for injunctive relief, or other applicable requests made in a Court of
competent jurisdiction in DeKalb County, Indiana.
The Ordinance Violation Bureau of the City of Auburn shall be further charged with the collection
and processing of fines and payment of fines.
44.06 PARKS DEPARTMENT
The City of Auburn Park and Recreation Board shall establish and publish to the general public, rules and
policies related to the regulation of smoking in the outdoor areas within the municipal park system.
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Auburn Essential
Services
CHAPTER 49
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 49-2
Auburn Essential Services
CHAPTER 49
Table of Contents
49.01 AUBURN ESSENTIAL SERVICES
49.02 COUNCIL APPROVAL OF RATES
49.03 AES CATALOG
49.04 MANAGEMENT OF RATES
49.05 OUTSIDE CONTRACTS AND SERVICES
49.06 AES INFORMATION SERVICES PRIVACY POLICY AND PRIVACY NOTICE
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 49-3
Auburn Essential Services
CHAPTER 49
49.01 AUBURN ESSENTIAL SERVICES
The Auburn Essential Services Department provides internet services, cable television services,
telecommunication services, and other related services and products that are provided through optical fiber
network technology located and available to businesses and residents of the City of Auburn and the
surrounding community.
Auburn Essential Services maintains, repairs, and expands the optical fiber services available to the
community with the assistance of the City of Auburn, Indiana.
Auburn Essential Services is a Department within the City of Auburn, Indiana and the Department Head of
said Department is appointed by the Mayor of the City of Auburn, Indiana.
49.02 COUNCIL APPROVAL OF RATES
The Common Council of the City of Auburn, Indiana shall be responsible for approving a range of charges
that may be assessed for services provided by the City of Auburn’s Essential Services Department (also
known as and referred to as AES).
The Auburn Essential Services Department shall maintain a rate schedule which shall be approved by the
Common Council of the City of Auburn, Indiana. This rate schedule shall set a range of rates for services
offered by the Department, by way of data services, phone services, data center co-location services,
security services, hosted and/or managed information services, television services, technical consulting or
contracting services, professional consulting or contracting services, and any other fiber, information, or
telecommunication based services or products officially offered by the Department.
The services and costs of services shall be set forth in the rate schedule and shall be consistently applied to
all individuals who receive services from the Department.
The rates charged by Auburn Essential Services Department shall be set based upon the following guiding
principles:
1. Competitive Pricing: Products and services shall be priced competitively with other similar
products offered by incumbent or other fiber optic providers.
2. Sustainability: Products and services shall be priced such that Auburn Essential Services is
independently sustainable, and will not require significant subsidies from the City of Auburn.
3. Community Value: Products and services shall be provided that offer quality and value to
community subscribers.
4. Rates and charges shall be fair and equitable among users within the same class.
49.03 AES CATALOG
The residential rate schedule and business rate schedule as approved by the Council shall be made
available to the general public and any subscribers who are customers of AES, and an original copy of the
range of rates to be charged by Auburn Essential Services shall be maintained by AES and the Clerk-
Treasurer of the City of Auburn and published in a manner that provides access to the general public. The
Auburn Essential Services Department shall make said rates available for review by the general public upon
request. In addition, the residential and business rate schedules shall be prepared by the Auburn Essential
Services Department and published on the City of Auburn, Indiana’s municipal website. Auburn Essential
Services shall establish the specific rates within said range established and authorized by the Common
Council.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 49-4
Auburn Essential Services
CHAPTER 49
49.04 MANAGEMENT OF RATES
Changes to the rate schedule may be made and implemented by the AES Manager from time to time to
properly support demand in the local information serviced markets. Said changes to the rates shall be made
under the guiding principle set forth in this Ordinance.
49.05 OUTSIDE CONTRACTS AND SERVICES
Auburn Essential Services may furnish services outside the municipal corporate limits of the City of Auburn,
Indiana. Intergovernmental contracts between municipal corporations as allowed by Indiana law may be
used to establish service relationships to community members outside the Municipal City of auburn, Indiana.
Said contracts shall be entered into and approved by the appropriate governing body as established by
Indian Code.
Auburn Essential Services may contract and provide services to corporate entities and other individuals in
the business arena, when said service will be beneficial to the growth and sustainability of the Department.
Contracts associated with AES shall be approved by the Auburn Board of Public Works.
The budget and claims associated with AES shall be approved by the Common Council.
49.06 AES INFORMATION SERVICES PRIVACY POLICY AND PRIVACY NOTICE
Commitment to Confidentiality
It is the policy of the City of Auburn, Indiana to maintain a services privacy policy and privacy notice. Said
policy is available to the public and is incorporated herein by reference.
AES and its associated Information Service Offerings strive to honor the confidentiality of its customers. The
AES Information Services Privacy Policy and AES Information Service Internet Access Privacy Notice
("Privacy Policy") is designed to explain the commitment to user privacy and the monitoring activities of AES.
Independent contractors and agents of AES that are acting on behalf of AES in providing the AES
Information Services are also bound by the AES Privacy Policy.
Communications regarding this Privacy Policy
If you have any questions concerning the AES Privacy Policy, you may contact AES at
http://www.AuburnEssentialServices.net. 260.333.0100 phone | 260.920.3354 fax | 210 S. Cedar St., 3rd
Floor, Auburn, IN 46706 | aes@ci.auburn.in.us
Revisions to the Privacy Policy
AES reserves the right to update or modify the AES Privacy Policy at any time. Modifications to said Privacy
Policy will be given by posting such changes to AES website at http://www.AuburnEssentialServices.net and
select the “AES Privacy Policy” link, by e-mail, or by postal mail, and clients shall be notified on billing
statements. For the most current user policy please contact AES directly or view said policy on the AES
internet web-site.
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Cemeteries
CHAPTER 52
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 52-2
Cemeteries
CHAPTER 52
Table of Contents
52.01 BURIAL GROUNDS
52.02 INTERMENT OF DEAD BODIES
52.99 PENALTY
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 52-3
Cemeteries
CHAPTER 52
52.01 BURIAL GROUNDS
All grounds within the limits of the city which have been previously laid out and used as cemeteries or burial
grounds, shall continue to be used for such purposes, consistent with I.C. 23-14-33-1, et seq.
52.02 INTERMENT OF DEAD BODIES
No interment of dead bodies shall be made within the city, except in burial grounds established or hereafter
established by authority of the appropriate legal authority.
52.99 PENALTY
Any person violating this section may be subject to a fine up to $100.00 per day.
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Electric Service
CHAPTER 51
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 51-2
Electric Service
CHAPTER 51
Table of Contents
GENERAL REGULATIONS
51.01 CASH DEPOSIT FOR USE OF ELECTRIC CURRENT
51.02 WIRING BUILDINGS
51.03 SCHEDULE OF RATES
51.04 MUNICIPAL STREET LIGHTING
51.05 [RESERVED]
51.06 UTILITY SERVICES PROVIDED TO AREAS NOT ANNEXED
ELECTRIC DEPARTMENT RULES AND REGULATIONS
51.10 RATE, RULES AND REGULATIONS
51.11 WRITTEN APPLICATION OR CONTRACT MAY BE REQUIRED
51.12 STANDARD TERM CONTRACT
51.13 SHORT TERM CONTRACT - TEMPORARY SERVICE
51.14 SPECIAL CONTRACT
51.15 CHANGE OF CONTRACT TERM; CHANGE OF LINE EXTENSION CONTRACT
51.17 DEPOSIT TO INSURE PAYMENT OF BILLS
51.18 CHANGES OF ADDRESS, DISCONTINUANCE, AND THE LIKE
51.19 ASSIGNMENT OF CONTRACT
51.20 RESALE OF ENERGY
51.21 OVERHEAD LINE EXTENSIONS
51.22 INSTALLATION OF UNDERGROUND LINES
51.23 DESCRIPTION OF EQUIPMENT TO BE SERVED
51.24 RIGHT-OF-WAY PERMITS
51.25 SPACE FOR AUBURN'S METERS, TRANSFORMERS AND APPLIANCES
51.26 CUSTOMER'S WIRING
51.27 MOTOR INSTALLATIONS, ETC
51.28 NOTICE TO AUBURN BEFORE INCREASING LOAD
51.29 METERS TO BE INSTALLED BY AUBURN
51.30 INCORRECT REGISTRATION OF METER
51.31 TRANSFORMERS
51.32 CONTINUITY OF SUPPLY
51.33 RELEASE OF AUBURN FROM LIABILITY
51.34 AUBURN RESERVES THE RIGHT TO DISCONTINUE SUPPLY
51.35 BILLS, PAYMENT OF BILLS
51.36 ESTIMATED BILLS
51.37 DISCONNECTION OF METER AFTER CONTINUED NON-READING
51.38 RESIDENTIAL SERVICE
51.39 SERVICE TO MULTIPLE DWELLING UNITS
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 51-3
Electric Service
CHAPTER 51
51.40 EXCLUSIVE SUPPLY OF INSTALLATION CONNECTED
51.41 THREE PHASE SERVICE - MINIMUM INSTALLATION
51.42 DETERMINATION OF CUSTOMER'S DEMAND
51.43 EXTENSION OF CUSTOMER'S LINES BEYOND THE POINT OF SUPPLY
51.44 VOLTAGE OF MEASUREMENT AND BILLING
51.45 SERVICE LINES INSTALLED BY CUSTOMER
51.46 CANCELLATION OF PRIOR RULES AND REGULATIONS
EMERGENCY CURTAILMENT AND LOAD REDUCTION PLAN
51.50 COMPANY LOAD REDUCTION
51.51 CUSTOMER VOLUNTARY LOAD REDUCTION
51.52 MANDATORY LOAD REDUCTION
51.53 MANDATORY CURTAILMENT OF SERVICE
51.54 DEFINITIONS
51.55 EMERGENCY CURTAILMENT WITHOUT REGARD TO PRIORITY
51.56 PRIORITY OF SERVICE
51.57 MANDATORY CURTAILMENT PROCEDURE
51.58 CURTAILMENT BY SHORT-TERM SERVICE INTERRUPTION
51.59 RESTORATION OF SERVICE
51.60 APPLICABILITY
51.70 AUBURN ELECTRIC SMART GRID CUSTOMER RIGHTS
51.71 OVERVIEW
51.72 THE RIGHT TO BE INFORMED
51.73 THE RIGHT TO PRIVACY
51.74 THE RIGHT TO OPTIONS
51.75 THE RIGHT TO DATA SECURITY
51.76 IMPLEMENTATION
51.99 PENALTY
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 51-4
Electric Service
CHAPTER 51
GENERAL REGULATIONS
51.01 CASH DEPOSIT FOR USE OF ELECTRIC CURRENT
The Superintendent of Utilities of the Electric and Water Department shall demand and receive a cash
deposit to be based upon estimated monthly consumption before the use of electric current in any dwelling
house or commercial establishment is permitted. The deposit shall be set by Council and may be obtained
from the Superintendent of Utilities. The cash deposit shall, upon discontinuance of the service and
payment in full of all bills for electric current, be returned to the depositor by the office manager.
51.02 WIRING BUILDINGS
No alterations or changes shall be made in the wiring of any building nor shall any building be wired
for the placing of electric lights, motors, heating devices, or any other purpose, without securing
from the office manager of the Electric and Water Department a permit therefore on printed blanks
to be provided by the office manager. No change shall be made in any plant after inspection
without notifying the office manager and securing his permit therefore.
Upon the completion of the wiring of any building or the completion of any outside construction
work, it shall be the duty of the company, firm, or individual doing the work to notify the office
manager, who shall at once cause the work to be inspected, and, if approved, he shall issue a
certificate of satisfactory inspection which shall contain the date of the inspection and an outline of
the results of such examination. No certificate shall be issued unless the electric light, power, or
heating installation and all apparatus connected with it are in strict conformity with the rules and
regulations of the National Electrical Code, and no current shall be turned on until a certificate is
issued. All wires hidden from view shall be inspected before concealment and all parties installing
such wires must notify the office manager so that he will have ample time in which to provide the
inspection.
51.03 SCHEDULE OF RATES
Schedule "C" Nonresidential and Commercial Single and Three Phase Service, and schedule "R",
Residential Single Phase Electric service, are adopted for use by the Auburn electric utilities, subject to
approval by the Public Service Commission of the State of Indiana. These schedules were prepared by J. S.
Sawvel, public utility consultant, under date of June 13, 1968, and June 5, 1968, respectively.
Rate for outdoor lighting
For each lamp with luminaire and an upsweep arm not over six feet in length, controlled by photoelectric
relay, where service is supplied from an existing pole and secondary facilities of the Auburn Electric
Department, the rate shall be #4 per month per lamp with 7,000-lumen mercury. When other new
facilities are to be installed by the Auburn Electric Department the customer will, in addition to the
monthly charge, pay in advance the installation cost of such new overhead facilities extending from the
nearest or most suitable pole of the Auburn Electric Department to the point designated by the customer
for the installation of the lamp.
Payment
Bills are due and payable at the main office of the Auburn Electric Department within 15 days of the
mailing date.
Contracts
Contracts under this rate will be for not less than one year for residential or farm customers, not less
than three years for commercial or industrial customers, or not less than five years for other customers.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 51-5
Electric Service
CHAPTER 51
In the case of customers contracting for four or more lamps apiece, the Auburn Electric Department
reserves the right to include in the contract such other provisions as it may deem necessary to insure
payment of bills throughout the term of the contract.
Hours of lighting
All lamps shall burn from one-half hour after sunset until one-half hour before sunrise, every night and all
night, or approximately 4,000 hours per year.
Ownership of facilities
All facilities necessary for service including fixtures, controls, poles, transformers, secondaries, lamps,
and other appurtenances shall be owned and maintained by the Auburn Electric Department. All
services and necessary maintenance will be performed only during the regular scheduled working hours
of the Auburn Electric Department. Burned-out lamps will normally be replaced within 24 hours after
notification by the customer.
51.04 MUNICIPAL STREET LIGHTING
The following provisions shall govern municipal street lighting.
Applicability
The municipal street lighting rate shall apply to all street lighting service furnished to the city.
Type of service furnished
The type of fixture to be installed shall conform to the standards established by the City Electric Utility
Department, and may, at its option, consist of either incandescent or mercury-vapor fixtures.
1. The rated size in lumens of the fixture shall normally be determined by the Auburn Electric
Utility Department, and shall be adequate to provide an intensity of illumination that is in
accordance with the generally accepted standards for the location and use involved, taking into
consideration all factors such as the width of the street, traffic conditions, and the spacing of
lamps.
2. The Auburn Electric Utility Department shall install, operate, and maintain, at its expense, all
street lighting equipment and appurtenances, including lamp replacements.
Request for additional lamps
Additional lamps shall be installed by the Auburn Electric Utility Department upon written authorization
from the Common Council of the city and the request of the Board of Public Works and Safety.
Net rate for all street lighting services
All service shall be metered. The rate for all street lighting service shall be $.015 per kwh.
Terms of payment
All street lighting service meters shall be read monthly and the total kwh furnished shall be billed to the
city in accordance with the rate in (D) above. The city shall pay the Auburn Electric Utility Department
for such service in the manner specified by Indiana law.
51.05 [RESERVED]
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 51-6
Electric Service
CHAPTER 51
51.06 UTILITY SERVICES PROVIDED TO AREAS NOT ANNEXED
No city utility service, including electric, will be provided outside of the territorial limits of the city without:
A title search or letter from a title company certifying the owner of the real estate and providing a
copy of the title deed;
The execution and recording of a Consent to and Waiver of Notice for Annexation by the titleholder;
and
Payment of the costs of the title search and recordation of the Consent and Waiver by the
titleholder.
ELECTRIC DEPARTMENT RULES AND REGULATIONS
51.10 RATE, RULES AND REGULATIONS
A copy of all rates, rules and regulations under which electric service will be supplied, is on file with
the Indiana Utility Regulatory Commission, hereinafter referred to as Commission and may be
inspected by the public in the Clerk-Treasurer's office at Ninth and Cedar Streets or the Auburn
Municipal Electric Department, hereinafter referred to as Auburn.
All of the electric service furnished by Auburn shall be subject to said rates, rules and regulations,
which are by reference made a part of all standard contracts (both oral and written) for service,
(except when modified by special contract approved by the Commission), and are at all times
subject to the approval of the Commission. The failure of Auburn to enforce any of the terms of
these rules and regulations shall not be deemed a waiver of its rights to do so.
Auburn shall supply, free of charge, a copy of the rate schedules applicable to the types of service
available to new applicants for, and existing customers of, residential service, upon request by the
applicant or customer. Where more than one rate is applicable to the service taken, the customer
shall designate which rate is desired.
Where applicable, the customer, upon written application, may change from one rate to another
once during the first contract year, effective retroactively to the date of connection, and once at the
end of each 12-month period thereafter, but not effective retroactively.
51.11 WRITTEN APPLICATION OR CONTRACT MAY BE REQUIRED
A written application or contract properly executed may be required before Auburn is obligated to
supply service. Application for residential service, including residential heating service, or
commercial service for loads of 49 KVA or less, need not be in writing unless a written line
extension agreement is required under these rules. Auburn may reject any application, whether
written or otherwise, on account of unpaid charges or any other valid reason authorized by
Commission or Auburn rules.
Contracts for residential service, and for commercial service under Rate Codes 30 or 35 with less
than 49 KVA or connected load, shall be for no definite term, other than what is called for in the
rate, unless a line extension agreement is also involved. Contracts for all other customers shall be
categorized as follows: standard term - not less than three years; short term - not less than three
years; temporary service or special contract.
An exception to the immediately preceding paragraph will be made for those agencies of
government that, ordinarily, have prospect of using electric service at the premises for three years
or more, but are limited by statute or by appropriation of funds to making regularly recurring short
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 51-7
Electric Service
CHAPTER 51
term contracts, as, for example, for not more than one year. Where the authority of such agencies
is so limited, contracts may be made for such period less than three years as the agency's authority
may require with provision for renewal of successive like terms. Where, however, there is no
prospect that an agency of government will use electric service at the premises three years or more,
contract will only be made under the conditions of a Short Term contract or a Special contract.
Auburn reserves the right to require that all applications for service be in the name of the property
owner who shall be responsible for the payment of all bills. All applications involving the initial
establishment of service to premises not previously served, must be made by the property owner.
Where the premises are occupied by a tenant, and without in any manner relieving the property
owner of his responsibility for payment of all bills, Auburn reserves the right to bill the tenant directly
for electric service and require tenant to make a suitable advance deposit to secure the payment of
all bills.
51.12 STANDARD TERM CONTRACT
The initial term shall begin when Auburn first supplies electricity under the contract, unless some
other beginning date is stated specifically in the contract. At the expiration of the initial term, the
contract shall be renewed automatically for successive like terms unless either party shall have
given the other written notice of its desire to terminate the agreement at least 60 days prior to the
expiration of the initial term or of any renewal thereof.
Rate changes may be elected by the customer from time to time, during the life of such contract, as
provided in 51.10(D).
51.13 SHORT TERM CONTRACT - TEMPORARY SERVICE
Service to mobile homes, house trailers, mobile field offices, sales trailers, service trailers, portable
tools, etc. shall normally be considered as temporary in character and temporary service rules and
regulations shall apply which, in general, require that the applicant pay the cost of establishing and
disconnecting the service, including construction and dismantling of service facilities, as well as the
cost of energy at the applicable rate and customer charges.
Service for a term less than three years and for temporary service will be supplied under the
conditions of a short term contract, which are:
1. That Auburn has adequate transmission and distribution facilities available.
2. If any extension of facilities is required, the customer shall make advance deposit of the net
cost, in accordance with the provisions for Line Extensions - Plan B.
3. Service bills and the conditions for any such supply will be according to Rate Code 30 or to
either Rate Codes 35, 39, 41, 42, 43, 44 or 45.
51.14 SPECIAL CONTRACT
A special contract may be made in case of unusual capacity requirements or load characteristics,
unusual investment required or other abnormal conditions. Such contract term shall be
commensurate with the conditions and shall be subject to the approval of the Indiana Utility
Regulatory Commission.
Contracts for budget billing shall be available only to electrically heated residential customers and
shall be renewed automatically unless previously cancelled by either Auburn or the customer.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 51-8
Electric Service
CHAPTER 51
51.15 CHANGE OF CONTRACT TERM; CHANGE OF LINE EXTENSION CONTRACT
In the event the customer's use of energy changes from the use contemplated at the time of making the
contract, so that it is in the interest of both the customer and Auburn to do so, either or both the term of the
service contract and the line extension contract (if any) may be changed to another term conforming to
Auburn's rules and regulations, provided all the conditions of initial service or line extension contract have
been fulfilled to date of such change. The effective date of the contract change shall be the date it is
executed, unless some other date is stated.
51.17 DEPOSIT TO INSURE PAYMENT OF BILLS
Residential
1. The utility may require from each new customer for utility service a cash deposit equal to the
customer’s estimated billing for a period of one-sixth (1/6th) of the estimated annual billings of
the property being serviced, but not less than $50.00, as a deposit and guarantee against
nonpayment of bills for service for those who fail to establish creditworthiness. For newly
constructed homes, the estimated annual billing shall be based on a home with similar square
footage as determined by the Clerk-Treasurer. Applicants for residential service shall establish
creditworthiness by a criterion that is established without regard to economic character of the
area which the applicant resides; and solely upon the credit risk of the individual without regard
to the collective credit reputation of the area in which he or she lives.
2. Each new applicant for residential utility service shall be deemed creditworthy and shall not be
required to make a cash deposit as a condition of receiving service if the applicant satisfies the
following criteria:
a. Owes no outstanding bills for service rendered within the past four (4) years by any such
utility;
b. During the last twelve (12) consecutive months that the service was provided, did not have
more than two (2) bills that were delinquent to any utility or, if service was rendered for a
period for less than twelve (12) months, did not have more than one (1) delinquent bill in
such period; and
c. Within the last two (2) years did not have a service disconnected by a utility for nonpayment
of a bill for services rendered by that utility.
3. If the applicant has not been a customer of a utility during the previous two (2) years, any two
(2) of the following criteria are met:
The applicant either:
a. Has been employed by his or her present employer for two (2) years;
b. Has been employed by his or her present employer for less than two (2) years, but has been
employed by only one (1) other employer during the past two (2) years; or
c. Has been employed by the present employer for less than two (2) years and has no
previous employment due to recently graduating from a school, university, or vocational
program or being discharged from military service.
d. Either owns or is buying his or her home or is renting a home or an apartment and has
occupied the premises for more than two (2) years.
e. The applicant has credit cards, charge accounts, or has extended credit by a bank,
commercial concern, or individual unless a credit check shows that the applicant has been
in default on any such account more than twice within the last twelve (12) months.
4. If the applicant fails to establish that he or she is creditworthy, the applicant may be required to
make a cash deposit. Such deposit shall not exceed one-sixth (1/6th) of the estimated annual
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 51-9
Electric Service
CHAPTER 51
cost of service to be rendered to the applicant. A utility may require a present customer to
make such deposit when:
a. The customer has been mailed disconnect notices for two (2) consecutive months;
b. The customer has been mailed disconnect notices for any three (3) months within the
preceding twelve (12) month period; or
c. The service to the customer has been disconnected within the past four (4) years pursuant
to 170 IAC 4-1-16.
5. The amount of such deposit may not exceed an amount equal to one-sixth (1/6th) of the
expected annual billings for the customer at the address at which service is rendered. Deposits
may be held more than twelve (12) months and shall not earn interest. Requirements for
refunds shall be as follows: Deposits will be refunded to the customer with or without the
customer’s request when the customer submits satisfactory payment for a period of twelve (12)
consecutive months
6. Following customer –requested termination of service, the utility shall apply the deposit to the
final bill.
The Utility shall maintain a record of each applicant or customer making a deposit that shows
the following:
a. The name of the customer.
b. The current address of the customer so long as he or she maintains an active account with
the utility in his or her name.
c. The amount of the deposit
d. The date the deposit was made.
e. A record of each transaction affecting said deposit.
7. Each customer shall be provided with a receipt from the utility at the time his or her deposit is
paid. or he or she makes a partial payment. The utility shall provide a reasonable method by
which a customer who is unable to locate his or her receipt may establish that he or she is
entitled to a refund of the deposit.
8. Any deposit made by the applicant, customer or any other person to the utility (less any lawful
deductions), or any sum the utility is ordered to refund for utility service that has remained
unclaimed for one (1) year after the utility has made diligent effort to locate the person who
made such deposit or the heirs of such person, shall be presumed abandoned and may be
transferred to the utility’s operating fund.
9. A deposit may be used by the utility to cover any unpaid balance following disconnection of
service.
10. In no event shall services be provided to any customer who is a renter or contract purchaser,
unless the owner of the real estate signs the application and agrees to be responsible for any
service rendered to the property in the event that the renter or contract purchaser fails to pay
the charges rendered for service. The owner of a property may require a co-signor on utility
accounts for renters, who shall sign the application and provide name and contact information to
the Clerk-Treasurer’s Office of the City of Auburn. The co-signor shall sign the appropriate
forms with the City of Auburn that shall jointly bind the individual for any past due accounts on
said property. The City shall make efforts to pursue collection of past due accounts from the
customer and the co-signor before pursuing the owner of the property. Notice of the past due
account shall also be made to the owner of the property being served before taking legal action.
All demands for payments for past due accounts made shall be copied to the property owner
and the owner shall be made aware that failure by the customer and/or co-signor to pay the
account may result in legal action against the customer, co-signor and the owner jointly in a
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 51-10
Electric Service
CHAPTER 51
Court of competent jurisdiction. The owner of the real estate shall have ultimate responsibility
for all past due accounts.
11. The utility shall require current customers to maintain a deposit equivalent to one-sixth (1/6th) of
the properties annual billing but not less than $50.00 if the customer has been mailed a
disconnect notice for two (2) consecutive months or any three (3) months within the preceding
twelve (12) month period, or when the service has been disconnected. In cases where the
deposit is required as a result of a disconnection for nonpayment, full payment of the deposit
will be required prior to restoration of service.
12. Any deposit will be refunded promptly, along with a statement accounting for each transaction
involving the deposit, upon successful termination of services between the customer and the
City of Auburn.
13. The procedure following a customer request for termination of service is as follows:
a. The utility will require payment of any past due balance currently billed and owed.
b. The utility will apply the deposit to the final billing.
c. Any portion of the deposit remaining after the application will be forwarded to the customer.
14. The utility will maintain a record of each applicant or customer making a deposit which will
indicate the following:
a. The name of the customer.
b. The current address of the customer so long as there exists an active account with the utility
in the same name.
c. The name of the owner of the property.
d. The current address of the owner of the property.
e. The name of the co-signor.
f. The current address of the co-signor so long as there exists a current account with the
customer and the utility department.
g. The amount of the deposit.
h. The date of the receipt of the deposit.
15. Each customer shall be provided a receipt from the utility at the time the deposit is paid.
16. Any deposit made by the applicant, customer, or any other person to the utility (less any lawful
deductions) or any sum which the utility is ordered to refund for utility service, which has
remained unclaimed for one (1) year after the utility has made diligent efforts to locate the
person who made the deposit or the heirs of the person, will be presumed abandoned and may
be transferred to the utility’s operating fund.
17. A deposit may be used by the utility to apply toward any unpaid balance following
disconnection of service provided, however, any surplus may be returned to the customer. In
instances where the deposit is used to pay arrearages, the utility shall require a new deposit to
replace that applied to the unpaid balances before service is restored.
18. The procedure for taking legal action on past due accounts shall be as follows:
a. At all times, owners, customers and co-signors shall have access to all account information
upon request.
b. Upon a disconnect notice being issued a duplicate of said notice shall be sent by regular
U.S. Mail to the co-signor and/or owner of the property involved. No disconnection shall
take place until proper notice has been given to all relevant parties.
c. After disconnection and before any legal action is taken a demand letter shall be sent
requesting that the account be made current within ten (10) days.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 51-11
Electric Service
CHAPTER 51
d. Should the account not be made current within ten (10) days, the City of Auburn shall then
take action against the customer, the co-signor, and the property owner in a competent
court of law in an effort to recover the unpaid utility services.
e. Any judgment rendered shall act as a judgment on the real estate until said time that the
amount is paid by the account holder.
19. Utility deposits shall only be released to a third party upon written agreement between the
owner of the deposit and the third party being presented to the City of Auburn Utility
Department.
20. The City of Auburn shall develop a form that will be signed by all customers, co-signors, and
owners regarding the provisions continued in this chapter.
Non-Residential
All new non-residential customers may make a cash deposit to assure payment of such customer’s
bill for utility services. Such deposit shall be required as a condition for obtaining service. Deposits
taken shall not exceed one-sixth (1/6th) of the estimated annual billings for the property being
serviced. Deposits received shall be refunded after a period of twelve (12) months, if said customer
has made timely payments for said period. If timely payments have not been made the deposit
shall be held until said time as timely payments have been made for twelve (12) consecutive
months
As amended Ordinance 2017-01, passed 2/7/2017
51.18 CHANGES OF ADDRESS, DISCONTINUANCE, AND THE LIKE
Customers must make application to the office of Auburn Municipal Electric Department before they
commence using electric energy from the Auburn system. A customer will be subject to disconnect
without notice if service is used without application.
A customer shall notify Auburn at least three days prior to the date such customer desires service
to be disconnected and Auburn shall have three working days thereafter to make such
disconnection. A customer after so notifying Auburn, shall not be responsible for any service
rendered after such three working days, except that any customer who fails to request
disconnection of service as provided herein shall be responsible for the payment for all service
rendered by Auburn while the account remains in such customer's name.
Should a business being served be suspended or discontinued, due to fire or other causes beyond
the control of the customer, the service contract, upon written request by the customer, shall
become inoperative until business is resumed, except for unbilled amounts due Auburn for service
theretofore rendered by it thereunder, at which time the contract and all its conditions shall become
operative for the remainder of the term of the contract.
When a customer requests that service be disconnected at a given location, Auburn may, at its
election, discontinue service by either making a physical disconnection of the service at such
location, or obtaining an actual meter reading and leaving the service connected with the account in
the name of another customer.
51.19 ASSIGNMENT OF CONTRACT
The benefit and obligation of any service contract (except budgeting contract) shall begin when Auburn
commences to supply electrical service thereunder, and shall inure to the benefit of and be finding upon the
respective heirs, personal representatives, successors and assigns of the original parties thereto; provided,
that no assignment shall be made by the customer without first obtaining Auburn's written consent.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 51-12
Electric Service
CHAPTER 51
51.20 RESALE OF ENERGY
The electrical energy furnished under any service contract is for the sole use of the customer. No energy
shall be resold by the customer except in cases of a temporary nature where it is impractical or inexpedient
for Auburn to render service to the ultimate consumer, and then only upon written permission obtained from
Auburn stating the specific use and period of use covered in each request.
51.21 OVERHEAD LINE EXTENSIONS
Where there is a reasonable prospect that the capital expenditure is warranted, Auburn will extend
its overhead lines and service facilities upon the conditions outlined below, subject to such
municipal approval as may be required.
The term "overhead line extension" will be construed to include any or all of the following changes
of facilities, other than those made by Auburn at its initiative and at its expense in the normal growth
of its business, for example: an increase of the length or current carrying capacity of an existing
single phase or three phase line, a change from a single to a three phase line or an increase of the
number or capacity of transformers.
Plan A
Overhead extension of single phase and three phase line of any capacity. Applicable with standard term
contracts only.
1. An extension of Auburn's service facilities, including changes from single phase to three phase,
will be made at Auburn's expense if, in the judgment of Auburn, the return on the investment
and the stability and credit of the customer justify it, provided the customer will guarantee
payment, if required, in each of 30 consecutive months or until 30 service bills have been paid,
of not less than one-thirtieth of the cost of such extension, including transformers and service
connection (but not the metering equipment), but in any case, not less than the minimum bill
provided for in the applicable rate. After 30 consecutive monthly extension charges have been
paid as agreed, the regular minimum bill provision of the applicable rate will apply.
2. Subject to the approval of Auburn, one or more customers of a group may assume more than
the average share of the minimum monthly extension guarantee, if it will be more equitable to
do so.
3. Plan A is restricted to agreements with existing customers at present locations at the effective
date hereof.
Plan B
Overhead extension of single phase or three phase line of any capacity. Applicable with all contracts for
less than the standard term (including temporary service) and with standard term contracts which may
have an uncertain or insufficient return (including supply to welding, x-ray or other apparatus which may
have inherently low load-factor and may require relatively high investment per unit of capacity).
1. There shall be a determination of the entire cost of the line extension, including transformers,
but excluding metering equipment. Such cost will be called the gross cost of the extension.
There shall be also an estimate of the entire cost of the extension (including transformers but
not the metering equipment) plus the cost of removing it to Auburn's storeroom less any salvage
in its removal. Such estimated cost, which represents "out-of-pocket" expense to Auburn, will
be called the net cost of the extension.
2. The customer shall deposit the net cost of the extension with Auburn in advance of construction.
Said deposit will be returned to customer, as a credit on his bills for electric service, payable at
the end of each 12 months after the effective date of the contract, or when the service is
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 51-13
Electric Service
CHAPTER 51
discontinued, if prior to termination of the contract, at the rate of one-thirtieth of the net
cost of the extension, in each month in which his net bill for electric service is equal to or
greater than one-thirtieth of the gross cost of the extension. Said return of the advance deposit
will be continued as long as service is taken, during the first five years after completion of the
extension, but the total amount refunded shall not exceed the amount deposited. In case of
temporary construction, no refund will be made if service is used less than one year.
3. If the extension is to provide increased facilities for an existing customer, then the provision
stated in 51.21(D)(2) for advance deposit and for refunding it, will apply only to the increase of
revenue with respect to the increase of investment required. Accordingly, the amounts refunded
by Auburn shall be one-thirtieth of the net cost of the extension, in each month in which the net
bill for electric service equals or exceeds the revenue in an agreed "base" month (preferably the
average of the net bills in the immediately preceding year) by one-thirtieth of the gross cost of
the extension.
4. A special contract may be required by Auburn before it will make extensions involving
transformers in excess of 100 KVA single phase (or 300 KVA total) or where unusually large or
expensive switching or control equipment will be required.
Service Connection
Auburn will designate the point at which the overhead service connection will be brought to the
Customer's building. The point of service contact on the building shall be readily accessible and shall be
at the closest point to Auburn's pole from which service wires are to be run without contact of such wires
with the building at another point. The Customer's service entrance conductors shall, if possible,
terminate so that the service drops will not cross adjacent property, and will not require the use of an
extra pole or poles. Service conductors protruding from the service head for connection to Auburn's
service drop should be at least 24 inches for sizes up to No. 4. Larger sizes should extend a minimum of
36 inches.
Service to additional customers for an existing line extension
Each overhead line extension shall be considered as a unit in determining the monthly minimum
guarantee and the basis for advances and refunds. Additional customers may be connected to an
overhead line extension already built at the time the additional customers are connected, provided the
inclusion of the new customers will not increase the cost to the existing customers. Otherwise, an
extension to serve such additional customers will be treated as a new separate extension. When
additional customers are connected within six years of the completion of such overhead line extension,
initial applicants for said extension may be entitled to a refund, in proportion to their respective
contributions toward the cost of such extension, an amount equal to two and one-half time the estimated
annual revenue from such additional customers, less the cost to serve such additional customers;
provided, that the total of all refunds to such applicant shall not exceed such applicant's total
contribution.
Right-of-way - Tree Trimming
The above plans for overhead line extensions are contingent upon assistance by the applicant for
service in securing the necessary right-of-way and tree trimming permits or other necessary permits.
Auburn shall be under no obligation to start construction in the event such rights-of-way or permits
cannot be so obtained.
Title to Line Extensions
Notwithstanding any payments made by the customer to Auburn covering the cost of an overhead line
extension under either of the above plans, the title to the facilities and equipment making up such line
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 51-14
Electric Service
CHAPTER 51
extension, shall be and remain in the Auburn Municipal Electric Department. The customer shall not be
entitled to interest on any amount advanced to assist in financing such extensions.
51.22 INSTALLATION OF UNDERGROUND LINES
Underground distribution lines will be installed only where, in the opinion of Auburn, such
installation is necessary or where it is required by the rules and regulations of the Commission. The
decision whether such lines shall be installed underground or overhead shall be made by the
Auburn Municipal Electric Department where the matter rests in Auburn's discretion.
Underground line installations will be made in accordance with the Underground Practices and
Procedures (hereinafter referred to as the UPP) set forth below or by special contract approved by
the Commission; provided, however, that the UPP shall not be construed as requiring Auburn to
make any underground installation that in the judgment of Auburn, cannot be technologically or
economically justified.
UPP Definitions
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates
or requires a different meaning.
• DEVELOPER
One or more natural or artificial entities that own, improve or remodel real estate.
• ELECTRIC LINES
Primary, secondary or service wires exclusively used or intended for the distribution of electric
energy within a Residential Development or Commercial Complex at nominal voltages of not more
than 15,000 volts, but excluding, without limitation, main feeder lines used or intended for the
distribution of electric energy beyond a Residential Development or Commercial Complex at any
nominal voltage, and such other wires that are necessarily or customarily located at or above ground
level in an underground system.
• RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT
Five or more contiguous single-family, two-family or mobile home dwellings, either proposed or
existing; 18 contiguous units for multi-family use, either proposed or existing; or a combination of the
two, which may be treated by Auburn as a unit for all purposes incident to the underground
installation electric lines within the developer's project.
• COMMERCIAL COMPLEX
Any proposed or existing non-residential development in which one or more businesses are
conducted of the type falling within Standard Industrial Classifications 501 through 999 as set forth
in the current edition of the Standard Industrial Classification Manual prepared by the Office of
Management and Budget of the Executive Office of the President of the United States.
• DEVELOPER'S PROJECT
The specific Residential Development or Commercial Complex for which the developer has made
application to Auburn for the installation of underground electric lines.
• COST OF INSTALLATION
The total expenditure Auburn will incur for labor, material, overhead and supervision in the
installation of electric lines and associated facilities that are required to serve the developer's
project.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 51-15
Electric Service
CHAPTER 51
• REVENUE
The sum of the net billing for 30 consecutive monthly periods, such as two and one-half years,
resulting from the application of Auburn's applicable rate for electric service to the total number of
kilowatt-hours consumed by the developer's project for such periods.
• NET LOSS
The cost of removal, plus the reproduction cost new depreciated, less the salvage value of electric
lines, including associated facilities.
Terms and Conditions of UPP
1. Application Required
The developer shall make application to Auburn for the type underground installation desired
designating the location of the developer's project affected. Such application shall be reviewed by
Auburn to determine if the underground installation contemplated is consistent with these terms and
conditions; Auburn shall require the developer to execute an agreement as to any or all of the
matters set forth herein if the developer is required to participate in the cost of such underground
installation.
2. Payment Required in Advance of Construction
Any payment required to be made to Auburn by the developer pursuant to these terms and
conditions shall be made in advance of any construction work required by these Terms and
Conditions to be performed by Auburn.
3. New Projects
Where the Developer's application involves installation of underground electric lines in a developer's
project not having had electric utility service previously, the Developer shall pay to Auburn the
amount, if any, by which the estimated cost of installation as computed by Auburn exceeds
estimated revenue of such project as computed by Auburn.
4. Conversion of Existing Projects
Where the developer's application involves the replacement of overhead electric lines with
underground electric lines of like electrical capacity rating, the developer shall pay the estimated Net
Loss of the overhead electric lines so replaced; in addition, the developer shall pay Auburn the
amount, if any, by which the estimated cost of installation as computed by Auburn exceeds
estimated revenue of such project as computed by Auburn; the developer also shall assume the
responsibility for, and pay the cost of, the trenching and backfilling necessary to the installation of
the underground electric lines; provided, that the extent to which such overhead electric lines may
be replaced with underground electric lines shall be within the sole discretion of Auburn to
determine, consistent with sound engineering and economic principles.
5. Upgrading of Existing Projects
Where the developer's application involves the replacement of overhead electric lines with
underground electric lines having a greater electrical capacity rating, the developer shall pay Auburn
the amount, if any, by which the estimated cost of installation, as computed by Auburn exceeds
estimated revenue of such project as computed by Auburn; in addition, the developer shall assume
responsibility for, and pay the cost of trenching and backfilling necessary to install the underground
electric lines; the developer also shall pay the estimated Net Loss of only those overhead electric
lines which are replaced with underground electric lines of a like electrical capacity rating; provided,
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 51-16
Electric Service
CHAPTER 51
that the extent to which overhead electric lines may be replaced with underground electric lines shall
be within the sole discretion of Auburn determine, consistent with sound engineering and economic
principles.
6. Data Required of Developer
The developer shall furnish Auburn with building plans, site plans, building layouts, electrical load
information, street addresses and other such data sufficiently in advance for Auburn to meet service
requirements, and in sufficient detail to enable Auburn to determine the type, capacity and extent of
the electric lines to be installed.
7. Functions Comprising Auburn Municipal Electric Department Work
Work to be performed by Auburn in the underground installation of electric lines may include, without
limitations, all or any part of the following functions: planning, engineering, scheduling,
material purchasing, construction, metering and connection. Should the developer make any
changes in the plans or other data to be filed with Auburn pursuant to 51.22(C)(6) which necessitate
revisions in any such functions, the developer shall pay all costs incurred by Auburn as a result
thereof.
8. Developer to Furnish Easements
The developer shall furnish, at no cost to Auburn, all easements and rights-of-way in, on, over and
through private real estate for the installation of the electric lines to serve the developer's project.
Auburn reserves the right to specify the routes, locations and conditions of such easements and
rights-of-way.
9. Developer to Furnish Conduit
The developer shall furnish and install all conduit for those electric lines running from the meter
facility or junction box away from the permanent structure either to the point where all paved patios,
pools, sidewalks, driveways and other paved areas are cleared by at least two feet, or to such other
point as Auburn may designate in writing to the developer; the developer shall be responsible for,
and pay the cost of, all trenching and backfilling that is required to install such conduit, irrespective
of the type of developer's project involved, and the cost of such trenching and backfilling as
originally estimated by Auburn shall be deducted from the estimated cost of installation; provided,
that in the event there are no such paved areas to be cleared, the developer shall install all conduit
from the meter facility or junction box down the outside surface of permanent structures to a depth of
18 inches below grade level.
10. Developer's Responsibility as to Trench Routes
With respect to the trench routes which Auburn is required by these terms and conditions to trench
and backfill the developer shall stake all property corners, permanent structures and all underground
facilities which are the developer's responsibility to locate within the developer's project; grade such
trench routes to within four inches of final grade; clear therefrom all surface and subsurface
obstructions, which prevent the use of standard trenching equipment, to a depth of 36 inches below
final grade; and be responsible for maintaining the grade and clearance of such trench routes during
and subsequent to Auburn's work in installing the electric lines underground. Any damage to
persons or property resulting from the failure of the developer, or to the successors or assigns
thereof responsible for such failure. Provided, nothing in 51.22(C)(10) shall preclude the developer
from doing all the trenching and backfilling required for the installation of electric lines underground
at his own cost and expense, and the cost of such trenching and backfilling as originally estimated
by Auburn shall be deducted from the estimated cost of installation. If Auburn, at the request of the
developer, employs nonstandard methods or equipment not contemplated in 51.22(C)(10), the
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 51-17
Electric Service
CHAPTER 51
developer shall pay the difference in cost between the standard method as estimated by Auburn and
such nonstandard method. Auburn reserves the right at any time, to postpone any part of the work
of installing electric lines underground due to excess moisture, frozen ground or any other condition
beyond its control.
11. Developer to Protect Landscaping
The developer assumes all responsibility for the protection of landscaping during Auburn's
underground installation of electric lines and for any replanting or reseeding of the trench routes that
may be required as a result of such installation.
12. Developer's Work Subject to Auburn Standards
Any work required by these terms and conditions to be performed by the developer shall be done in
accordance with the most recent issue of Auburn's "Construction Standards", copies of which are on
file with and are available for examination at the Auburn Municipal Electric Department's main office.
The timely completion of such work by the developer shall be prerequisite to Auburn's obligation to
perform the work required of it hereunder and to render electric utility service to the developer's
project.
13. Auburn's Work Limited to its Standards
The utilization of voltages and configurations for underground installation of electric lines are limited
to those set forth in the most recent issue of Auburn's "Electric Service and Meter Manual". The
electric lines and other equipment installed by Auburn and the manner in which they are installed,
shall be in accordance with the most recent issue of Auburn's "Construction
Standards". Deviations from such "Electric Service and Meter Manual" and such "Construction
Standards" may be permitted; provided, the developer agrees, in advance, to pay the cost thereof
and Auburn has given its prior written consent. Any provision of the "Electric Service and Meter
Manual" or of the "Construction Standards" of Auburn which is in conflict with these terms and
conditions shall be deemed amended to conform to these terms and conditions.
14. Connection Points Determined by Auburn
Auburn shall install the underground electric lines for the developer's project from the nearest point
of connection with Auburn's existing and unaltered primary or secondary service lines to each of the
meter facilities or junction boxes located outside on permanent structures comprising the
developer's project. Auburn reserves the right to determine the location of all connection points,
including, without limitation, termination and metering points.
15. Auburn Secondary Network Excluded
Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, these terms and conditions shall not apply to any
underground secondary network that is now or may be hereafter established by Auburn in areas of
high load density located within Auburn's service area.
16. Underground Installation to Less than Five Dwelling Units
Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, Auburn may install underground electric lines:
a. To less than five existing single-family, two family or mobile home dwelling units in areas
predominantly served with overhead electric lines, upon agreement that the developer
thereof shall do all trenching and backfilling required for such installation; install a conduit,
together with fitting, conforming to Auburn's specifications, running from the meter facility
away from permanent structures either to the point where all paved patios, pools, sidewalks
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 51-18
Electric Service
CHAPTER 51
and driveways and other paved areas are cleared at least two feet or to such other point as
Auburn may designate in writing to the developer; pay to Auburn $40 for the first 60 feet
of trench for the electric cable to be furnished and installed by Auburn, plus $.30 per foot for
each additional foot of such trench in excess of 60 feet; and comply with any other
provisions of these terms and conditions not inconsistent with 51.22(C)(16)(a) and the net
loss provisions of 51.22(C)(4) or (5), whichever is applicable.
b. To less than five new or proposed single-family, two-family or mobile home dwelling units in
accordance with 51.22(C)(3) and all other applicable provisions of these terms and
conditions.
Underground Extensions in Underground Transmission Districts
In the district in which electrical energy is supplied from underground secondary network, Auburn will,
when necessary for its convenience, extend its underground service wires to the outside walls of the
customer's basement at a point adjacent to Auburn's existing manhole. All other expenses will be paid
for by the customer.
51.23 DESCRIPTION OF EQUIPMENT TO BE SERVED
The customer shall, upon request of Auburn, present in writing to Auburn a list of the devices which are to
be served by Auburn's lines and the location of the premises to be served: and Auburn will then inform the
customer as to the voltage and other characteristics of the service it will furnish.
51.24 RIGHT-OF-WAY PERMITS
The customer shall obtain, on forms provided by or approved by Auburn, all necessary rights-of-way
in, on, over or through private property for the installation and maintenance of all poles, wires,
transformers, conduit or other equipment necessary or convenient for supply of service to such
customer.
Auburn shall have the right to install, construct and operate such poles, wires, fixtures and other
equipment (overhead and underground) on customer's property and shall have the right to maintain
such poles, wires, fixtures and other equipment including the right to trim and remove trees located
on customer's property, as, in Auburn's judgment, are reasonably necessary to the operation and
maintenance of such facilities.
The properly authorized agents of Auburn shall have the right, at all reasonable times, to enter upon
the premises of the customer for the purpose of installing, meter reading, inspecting, repairing or
replacing appliances used in connection with the supply of service contract, for the purpose of
obtaining a meter reading prior to physical disconnection and for removal of Auburn's property.
Failure of any customer to comply with 51.24(A) and (B) hereof shall be sufficient cause for Auburn
to refuse, withhold or disconnect service to such customer until compliance therewith has been
obtained.
51.25 SPACE FOR AUBURN'S METERS, TRANSFORMERS AND APPLIANCES
When the character of service requires it, the customer shall provide, free of expense to Auburn, and near
the service entrance, a suitable and dry space or room for the necessary meter, any and all auxiliary
apparatus, distribution transformers or other appliances which may be furnished by Auburn. Such spaces or
rooms shall be kept easily accessible at all times, shall not be used for storage purposes and shall be kept
free of foreign materials of any nature.
51.26 CUSTOMER'S WIRING
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 51-19
Electric Service
CHAPTER 51
The applicant for electrical service shall provide and install the necessary wiring and service
entrance equipment at his own expense. All such wiring and equipment shall be constructed and
maintained entirely in accordance with the current meter service rules of Auburn and shall be
subject to the approval of any inspectors authorized by law. All subsequent installations or changes
shall also be inspected and approved before connection to Auburn's system.
Auburn reserves the right to seal all meters, metering equipment and fused or un-fused switches,
together with any enclosures, gutters or raceways containing un-metered circuits, whether any of
such equipment has been furnished by the customer or Auburn; and to keep all of the foregoing
sealed to the exclusion of all other parties.
No radio, wireless telegraph, wireless telephone or any other equipment may be connected to
Auburn's lines, poles, crossarms or structures, except in accordance with the requirements of
Auburn and upon written permission obtained from Auburn for each installation.
When, in its judgment, it is expedient to do so, Auburn shall have the right to install at its expense
outdoor type "inverted sequence" meters upon the premises of the customer.
All neon, fluorescent or other types of lighting or luminous display equipment installed after the
effective date hereof shall include, if necessary, auxiliary power factor corrective devices, as a part
of or in connection with it, so that each unit of such equipment, or each group of such equipment
that is controlled as a unit, will operate with a power factor of 90% (lagging) or higher. Such power
factor corrective auxiliaries shall be so installed as to be de-energized when the equipment it
corrects is not in operation. Any such equipment installed prior to the above date will be considered
as a new installation and be subject to the above regulation in case it is rearranged, replaced or
removed to a new location subsequent to the date.
In multiple tenancy buildings where each tenant is to be separately served as a customer of Auburn,
the wiring in such buildings shall be arranged and provisions shall be made for the setting of
Auburn's meters so that the consumption of electric energy by one customer will not register on the
meter of another and disconnection of service to one customer will, in no way, interfere with service
to another. No customer on such premises may interfere with or interrupt service to another
customer. Auburn may withhold service from any such multiple tenancy building until this rule is
complied with, and for violations of this rule, Auburn shall have the right to discontinue service to all
customers on the premises, after seven days written notice, without liability to any of them.
51.27 MOTOR INSTALLATIONS, ETC
The customer shall install only motors or other apparatus of appliances that have the approval of
Auburn as being suitable for operation with the character of service designated and supplied by
Auburn, and the electrical energy must not be used in any manner to cause unreasonable voltage
fluctuations in Auburn's distribution system, or in the premises of other customers. Auburn may
require the customer to make such changes in his equipment, or of his use of the equipment, or to
install such corrective equipment as may be necessary to eliminate unbalanced loads and limit any
and all fluctuation of voltage at the point of delivery not to exceed 2% above or below the impressed
voltage at that point.
All apparatus used by the customer shall be of such a type as to secure the highest practicable
commercial efficiency and power factor and the proper balancing of phases. With three wire, single
phase systems, the load must be balanced so that the current flowing in the neutral wire shall not at
any time exceed the current flowing in either outer wire by more than 4%. With three phase
systems the energy flow must be balanced so the variations between any two phases shall not at
any time exceed 20%.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 51-20
Electric Service
CHAPTER 51
Motors started frequently or motors arranged for automatic control must be of a type to give
maximum starting torque with minimum current and, together with their controlling equipment, must
be subject to the approval of Auburn.
Elevator installations, cranes, hoists or other equipment subject to damage because of phase failure
or reversal should be equipped with reverse phase relays or other devices for automatically locking
the circuits open in case of such contingencies.
The customer shall pay the cost of any special installation necessary to meet his requirements for
service at other than standard voltages, phase or frequency, or for the supply of closer voltage
regulations than is required by standard practice.
51.28 NOTICE TO AUBURN BEFORE INCREASING LOAD
The service connections, transformers, meters and appliances supplied by Auburn have a definite capacity
which must not be exceeded, and no substantial increase of the customer's equipment or its electrical
requirements will be permitted except upon written request to and consent by Auburn. Auburn reserves the
right to disconnect service, upon 14 days written notice, to any customer upon violation of this rule.
51.29 METERS TO BE INSTALLED BY AUBURN
All electrical energy, unless specified otherwise, shall be measured by a meter or meters (which
includes all auxiliary and supplemental measuring instruments) of standard manufacture, installed
by Auburn upon the customer's premises in accordance with Commission Rule 5, as amended from
time to time, and the meter and service rules of Auburn in force at the time of installation. If said
meters or other appliance belonging to Auburn are willfully tampered with, damaged or destroyed
due to negligence or misuse by the customer, or any member of his family, or by any officer, agent
or employee of the customer, then the cost of the necessary repair or replacement shall be paid by
the customer.
If, after reasonable investigation, Auburn determines that a customer has tampered with seals on
any metering equipment, a property owner will be fined $25 for the first offense and be subject to
disconnection of service for a second offense. If after reasonable investigation, Auburn determines
that a licensed electrician has tampered with seals on any metering equipment without proper
notice to Auburn, the electrician will be subject to a fine of $25 for the first offense and be subject to
Auburn revoking his electrician's license for a second offense.
Auburn will furnish one main watt-hour meter (including such auxiliary meters and instruments that
may be required to supplement it) to enable the measurement of and billing for all energy of like
character supplied to the customer for each service classification on the same premises. A
separate bill will be rendered for the energy passing through and measured by each separate
metering installation. An exception to the above may be made where three phase four wire supply
is available. In such cases three phase and single phase energy will be measured and billed
through one meter, whenever practicable.
When the customer requires, for his own use and convenience, more than one main watt-hour
meter as described in 51.30(C) for each supply of like character on the same premises, any and all
expense of installation and operation of the added equipment shall be borne entirely by the
customer.
When, in the judgment of Auburn, it is necessary to furnish more than one meter for each supply
of like character on the same premises, because of practical conditions of measurements,
engineering, safety, legal or other reasons, Auburn will furnish such additional equipment that it
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 51-21
Electric Service
CHAPTER 51
considers necessary, and will render the bills for such services as if the energy were supplied
through a single meter.
When the convenience of Auburn requires more than one watt-hour meter to be installed in one
building or more than one building, on the same premises for one customer under one contract, the
KWH readings of said meters shall be taken collectively in determining the rate to which the
customer is entitled. Under no conditions shall the KWH meter readings be taken collectively.
Auburn shall make a test on the accuracy of registration of a single phase meter at least every ten
years, or at five year intervals if Auburn deems necessary. Three phase commercial network and
self-contained meters shall be tested on a 48-month basis. Three-phase industrial demand and
reactive metering units shall be tested on a 12-month interval.
If on test of any meter at the request of the customer, it is found to be more than 2% fast, Auburn
shall refund to the customer an amount equal to the excess charged for the electricity incorrectly
meters, for a period equal to one-half of the time elapsed since the previous test, but not to exceed
12 months.
If on test of any meter at the request of the customer, it is found to be more than 2% slow, Auburn
may charge the customer for the electricity incorrectly metered, for a period equal to one-half of the
time elapsed since the previous test, but not to exceed six months. If a meter is found not to
register for any period, Auburn shall estimate the charge for the electricity used by averaging the
amounts registered over corresponding periods in previous years.
51.30 INCORRECT REGISTRATION OF METER
Whenever it is discovered that a meter is not registering correctly, adjustments covering such
inaccuracy shall be made in accordance with Commission Rule 14(A), as amended from time to
time.
Any other determinable billing error, including incorrect rate application, shall be adjusted to the
known dates of error, date of connection of current customer, or one year, whichever is shorter.
Auburn will test the accuracy of registration of a meter upon written request of a customer and upon
payment of a deposit of $18.50. If the meter to be tested is found to be outside limits, the deposit
will be refunded. The customer will be responsible for all costs incurred in the performance of such
tests if the customer requires them to be performed outside of normal working hours.
51.31 TRANSFORMERS
Auburn will own, install and maintain the necessary distribution transformers unless otherwise expressly
provided for.
51.32 CONTINUITY OF SUPPLY
Auburn will use reasonable diligence in providing a regular and uninterrupted supply of energy; but,
if the supply should be interrupted or fail by reason of accidents, strikes, acts of God, legal process
or procedure, federal, state or municipal action or interference, extraordinary repair or for any cause
whatsoever not within the control of Auburn, Auburn shall not be held liable for damage, and such
interruptions or failures shall invalidate any of the covenants of the contract.
In any case of deficiency of supply or any trouble with the electric service, notice shall be given
promptly to the office of the Auburn Municipal Electric Department or the Auburn Police Department.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 51-22
Electric Service
CHAPTER 51
51.33 RELEASE OF AUBURN FROM LIABILITY
Auburn shall not be liable for any interruption of service caused by defective wiring or customer's
appliances on the customer's premises.
Auburn shall not be liable for damages resulting to the customer, or to third persons, from the use of
electricity or the presence of Auburn's property on the customer's premises, unless due to willful
default or neglect on the part of Auburn.
51.34 AUBURN RESERVES THE RIGHT TO DISCONTINUE SUPPLY
Auburn shall have the right, subject to any provision of Commission Rule 16 to the contrary, to
discontinue service without notice and remove any of its property from the customer's premises
without legal process, for any of the following reasons:
1. To facilitate energy repairs;
2. For want of supply of electric energy;
3. Where tampering or the fraudulent or unauthorized use of electricity is detected, or where
Auburn's regulating or measuring equipment or other facilities have been tampered with and
Auburn has reasonable grounds to believe the affected customer is responsible for such use or
tampering;
4. Where a condition dangerous or hazardous to life, physical safety or property exists;
5. By order of any court, the Indiana Utility Regulatory Commission, or other duly authorized public
authority.
Auburn may discontinue service after 14 days prior written notice to a customer for any of the
following reasons:
1. For nonpayment of delinquent bill.
2. For violation of any Auburn Municipal Electric Department Rule.
3. For breach of the service contract or line extension contract.
If, for any reason, Auburn has issued a notice of disconnection of service but because of a medical
postponement or bill payment extension agreement such service was not disconnected pursuant to
such notice, Auburn may disconnect such service without further notice, upon the expiration of such
postponement or any breach of such extension agreement.
Such discontinuance, provided for in 51.35(A),(B) and (C), shall not, however, invalidate any of the
covenants of the contract of Auburn Rules; and Auburn shall have the right to enforce any contract
notwithstanding such discontinuance.
If for any reason sufficient amounts of electric power, in the judgment of Auburn, are not available to
Auburn to meet all existing and reasonably anticipated demands for service or to protect the
integrity and stability of the system, Auburn reserves the right to restrict, limit or curtail electric
service to any of its customers. Under these conditions appeals for voluntary curtailments of load
will be initiated.
If supplies of electric power are not sufficient after the above named appeals for voluntary
curtailment of load, Auburn reserves the right to order further electric service curtailment either by a
priority of service system or interruption of selected circuits. Priority of service will be as follows
(the highest priority as Class 1 and the lowest as Class 5):
1. human needs;
2. residential and living quarters;
3. commercial and industrial customers;
4. schools, colleges, universities and other educational institutions;
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 51-23
Electric Service
CHAPTER 51
5. dispensable users and surplus capacity power.
Auburn reserves the right to order electric service curtailment without regard to priority of service
when in its judgment such curtailment is required to forestall imminent and irreparable injury to life,
property or the electric system. In the event mandatory curtailment is imposed, as above provided,
Auburn, in addition may employ, for not more than two hours duration at any one time, selective
short term service interruptions by operation on a rotational basis of distribution switching
equipment to effect the necessary electric power curtailment.
51.35 BILLS, PAYMENT OF BILLS
Electric service bills, including budget bills, are issued each month as net bills. The net amount, as
indicated on the bill, is due and payable upon receipt. If payment of the net amount is not received
by Auburn or a bank duly authorized as a collection agent within 17 days after the bill is mailed to
the customer, the bill is delinquent. The net amount plus the late payment charge then becomes
due. If the bill remains unpaid, a separate disconnect notice will be mailed to the customer 20 days
after the due date, requiring payment of the delinquent amount within 14 days of the mailing date. If
such payment is not received by the expiration of such 14 day period, service is thereafter subject
to disconnection. Partial payments and payments on bills with disconnect notices will not be
accepted by banks authorized as collection agents. When the due date falls on Saturday, Sunday
or any legal holiday, the first business day thereafter shall be the due date. Failure to receive a bill
shall not entitle the customer to the net bill if he fails to make payment within the said 17 day prompt
payment period, nor shall it affect the right of Auburn to discontinue service as provided above.
The billing as determined by the most recent rates as approved by the Commission is net as shown
and is payable on or before the final payment date specified on the bill. If all accounts are not so
paid, a penalty for late payment shall be added which will be 10% higher than the stated rates for
the first $3 of billing plus 3% higher for all net billing in excess of $3.
If Auburn is justified in discontinuing service to a customer at one location, Auburn shall have the
right, subject to any provisions of Commission Rule 16 to the contrary, to transfer unpaid charges to
the same customer at any other location at which Auburn is rendering service to such customer,
notwithstanding separate service contracts as may be in effect for each location. Furthermore,
Auburn, upon 14 days advance written notice, shall have the right, subject to any provision of
Commission Rule 16 to the contrary, to discontinue its service to a customer at any location to
which the charges have been transferred because of such customer's failure to pay such charges
within the time prescribed in 51.36(A).
All bill payments must be received in the office of the Auburn Municipal Electric Department or by a
bank duly authorized as a collection agent on or before the stated due dates to avoid late payment
charges and interruption of service.
When service is disconnected for nonpayment of a bill, or whenever for any reason beyond the
control of Auburn, except acts of God, a reconnection of service is required by any customer, a
minimum charge of $35, if reconnection is reasonably done between the regular business hours of
8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., Monday through Friday (holidays excluded), and $75 if done at other
times, or if reconnection must be done at the pole, will be made by Auburn to cover a part of the
cost of disconnection and reconnection of the service. Disconnects shall not normally be made on
Fridays or on days immediately preceding a holiday. This charge together with any arrears due
Auburn and any service deposit required by Auburn must be paid before the service is reconnected.
When a customer issues a check to Auburn which is not honored by the bank, the maximum charge
allowed by law will be billed to the customer for each such dishonored check.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 51-24
Electric Service
CHAPTER 51
All bills involving a consideration of the customer's demand shall show the demand and energy
used, and any other modifying conditions, necessary in their calculation.
When Auburn detects fraudulent or unauthorized use of electricity, or Auburn's regulations,
measuring equipment of other service facilities have been tampered with, Auburn may reasonably
assume that the customer or other user has benefited by such fraudulent or unauthorized use or
tampering and, therefore, is responsible for payment of the reasonable cost of the service used
during the period such fraudulent or unauthorized use or tampering occurred or is reasonably
assumed to have occurred and for the cost of field calls and the cost of effecting repairs
necessitated by such use and/or tampering; provided, that Auburn may make a minimum charge of
$25 per occurrence for such field calls and repairs. Under such circumstances Auburn may, subject
to any provision of Commission Rule 16 to the contrary, disconnect service without notice and
Auburn is not required to reconnect the service until a deposit and all the above enumerated
charges are paid in full.
Where single phase service is furnished, the applicable monthly customer charge shall apply for
not less than 4 consecutive months each time that service is established, in any given name.
Where 3-phase service is furnished, the applicable monthly customer charge shall apply on a year
round basis of not less than 12 consecutive months (or longer as may be specified in the electric
service agreement). Therefore, seasonal disconnection of 3-phase service shall not avoid the
applicable monthly customer charge.
51.36 ESTIMATED BILLS
An estimated bill may be issued when an actual meter reading cannot be obtained for any reasons
permitted under Commission Rule 13(c)(1). Any difference between the estimated bill and the
customer's actual usage will be adjusted in accordance with the next meter reading.
At the request of the customer who is using or plans to use electricity as the principal means of
heating a dwelling, and upon the approval of Auburn, a budget plan for the payment of electric
service bills may be used. Based on actual experience (or estimated KWH consumption where
there is no actual experience) Auburn will compute the annual electric service bill for all purposes
and divide same by 12. The result shall be the amount to be paid by the customer as the "average
monthly budget bill".
1. All budget plans shall commence with the bill payable in July of each year and end with the bill
payable in June of the following year.
2. At the end of each annual billing period, terminating with the bill payable in June, the difference
between the amount payable for all of the KWH actually used by customer plus customer
charges, during the first 11 months of said annual billing period and the actual amount paid
under the budget plan shall be determined and shall be the balance due Auburn. Said balance
plus the actual bill for the 12th month of said annual billing period, shall be payable in June on
or before the date specified on the bill. Any overpayment shall be refunded in cash or, at the
option of the customer, will be credited to future billing of customer's account.
3. If a meter is tampered with or found not to register accurately for any period, Auburn shall
estimate the charges for service used by averaging the amounts registered on the meter over
similar periods, preceding or subsequent thereto, or over corresponding periods in previous
years.
51.37 DISCONNECTION OF METER AFTER CONTINUED NON-READING
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 51-25
Electric Service
CHAPTER 51
When Auburn's agents are unable to have safe and reasonable access during Auburn's normal business
hours to any meter, for continuous period of three months, Auburn may disconnect after fourteen days
written notice, until suitable arrangements can be made for the regular reading of such meter.
51.38 RESIDENTIAL SERVICE
Residential service is only applicable for service supplied to what is ordinarily designated and
recognized as individual single family, residential, home or farm house use, including apartments,
mobile homes and other individual single family dwelling quarters or units. Where service is
supplied through one meter to more than a single family dwelling unit or living quarters or
apartment, see elsewhere under "multiple dwelling units" as to billing and other requirements.
The term "residential service" includes service to:
1. The separate dwelling-units in an apartment house, but not the halls, basement or other
portions of such building common to more than one such unit;
2. The premises occupied as the living-quarters of five persons or less who unite to establish a
common dwelling-place for their own personal comfort and convenience on a cost-sharing
basis;
3. The premises owned by a church, and primarily designated or set aside for, and actually
occupied and used as, the dwelling-place of a priest, rabbi, pastor, rector, nun or other
functioning Church Divine;
4. Private dwellings in which space is occasionally used for the conduct of business by a person
residing therein.
The term does not include service to:
1. Premises institutional in character including clubs, fraternities, orphanages or homes;
2. Premises defined as a rooming or boarding house in the Auburn Municipal Code;
3. The space in an apartment or other residential building primarily devoted to a professional or
other office, studio or other gainful pursuit.
In borderline cases, in which the principal use of energy will be for residential purposes, but it is
desired to utilize a small amount of energy for non-residential purposes, such non-residential use
will be permitted only when the equipment for such use is within the capacity of one 120 volt, 30
ampere branch circuit (or less than 3,000 watts capacity) and the non-residential consumption is
less than the residential use on the premises. When the non-residential equipment exceeds the
above stated maximum limit the entire non-residential wiring must be separated from the residential
wiring, so that it may be metered separately, and the non-residential load will be billed under the
appropriate commercial service rate.
Residential heating service is applicable under Rate Code 16 for house heating service where the
house heating service installation conforms to the specifications and conditions hereinafter set forth.
1. All electric space heating equipment shall consist of a permanent installation to be approved by
Auburn with maximum connected KVA explicitly stated. The electric heating equipment may
consist of either individual room resistance space heating units installed in each room, or
reversed cycle refrigeration "heat pump" units, or central "furnace type" units, not to exceed 25
KVA.
2. The entire heating installation (including heating units, wiring, ducts, controls, building
insulation, etc) shall be installed strictly in accordance with Auburn's Standards available at the
Auburn Municipal Electric Department Office. Said Standards specify, among other things, that
the minimum approved insulation for any electrically heated home shall have a thickness of not
less than eight inches for outside ceiling areas, four inches
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 51-26
Electric Service
CHAPTER 51
for outside walls and three inches for floors next to unheated areas, same to be installed with an
approved vapor barrier. For concrete slab floor construction next to earth, two inches of
effective edge and water proof perimeter insulation shall be installed, extending not less than 24
inches below the floor slab.
3. Where the home is heated by means of individual resistance heating units (ceiling or
baseboard) the temperature of each room shall be controlled by means of individual thermostats
installed in each room.
4. Where the home is heated by means of a circulation hot water heating system, using a centrally
located electric resistance operated hot water heating unit and if the aggregate rated capacity of
said hot water heating unit that can be in operation at any time exceeds 10 kW with a maximum
limit of 25 kW, the charges as set forth in Rate Code 16 shall apply.
If a customer uses an average of more than 2,000 kilowatt hours per month during the months of
October, November, December, January, February, March and April, the customer shall be billed
under Rate Schedule R-AES (Rate Code 16). If a customer verifies in advance that he expects his
usage to average more than 2,000 kilowatt hours per month for said months, the customer shall be
billed under Rate Schedule R-AES (Rate Code 16). In May of each year a computation shall be
made for said customer to determine if his average kilowatt hour consumption for said months is
less than 2,000 kilowatt hours per month. In such event, the customer shall be re-billed for those
months under Rate Schedule R (Rate Code 10) and shall be billed under Rate Schedule R (Rate
Code 10) prospectively as well.
51.39 SERVICE TO MULTIPLE DWELLING UNITS
Where electrical energy is supplied through one meter and billed to one customer and serving two
but not more than three separate dwelling units, and when the entire use of the service is for
residential purposes, the customer shall, by written application to Auburn, elect whether:
1. The service will be classified as residential, in which case, for billing purposes, the customer
charge of the residential rate shall be multiplied by the number of living quarters served through
the meter; or
2. The service shall be classed as commercial, in which case, for billing purposes, the applicable
commercial rate shall be applied on the basis of a single customer.
The election made by the customer shall continue for a period of 12 months and thereafter until the
customer shall notify Auburn, in writing, of his election to have the selected classification changed.
Each such election subsequent to the initial election shall continue for a 12 month period and
thereafter until the customer again notifies Auburn in writing, of his election to change his selection
of the classification of such service. This rule has no application to rooming houses, which will be
served only under the commercial service rate.
51.40 EXCLUSIVE SUPPLY OF INSTALLATION CONNECTED
No other source of electric light or power supply shall be used by the customer on the same installation in
conjunction with Auburn's supply. Exceptions to the above may be made for auxiliary power supply covered
under special contract or for emergency generating units to be used only in the event of failure of Auburn's
power supply and only through suitable switches to insure that the customer's emergency generation is
isolated form Auburn's lines at all times.
51.41 THREE PHASE SERVICE - MINIMUM INSTALLATION
Three phase service will be supplied only where Auburn has the lines available, but no connection will be
made for less than five horsepower, nor will the bill be based upon less than four kilowatts.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 51-27
Electric Service
CHAPTER 51
51.42 DETERMINATION OF CUSTOMER'S DEMAND
The monthly KVA billing demand shall be normally determined by measurement by taking the
highest 15-minute integrated or equivalent thermal kW capacity and by dividing same by the
average monthly power factor occurring at the time of the maximum capacity or by the average
monthly power factor as may be determined by a ratcheted RKvah meter or by the power factor as
may be determined by Auburn by means of periodic tests made by suitable metering equipment.
The monthly KVA billing demand may also be determined by means of other suitable indication or
recording metering equipment. All KVA billing demand shall be determined to the nearest whole
KVA.
The billing demand may be adjusted where highly fluctuating or intermittent loads (such as welding
machines, electric furnaces, hoists, cranes, elevators, x-rays and the like) are in operation by the
customer. Auburn reserves the right to determine the billing capacity by averaging customer's total
load over a 2-minute period.
The customer's demand upon Auburn's facilities will be determined by permanently installed meters
of suitable design. Any demand resulting from unusual conditions, not conductive to practical or
accurate metering, will be estimated and added, for billing purposes, to the measured demand.
When more than one demand meter is used to determine the customer's demand upon Auburn's
facilities, the kilowatts of demand that are used in computing the bill shall be based upon:
1. The sum of the maximum demands of the several meters, without any consideration of their
time of occurrence in the month, when the use of more than one meter is required by the
customer; or
2. The sum of the simultaneous demands of the several meters, as near as can be determined
practically, when the use of more than one meter is required by Auburn.
The billing demand applicable for all customers using firm service shall be based upon the total
demand established by the customer in the month being considered, but with the further provision
that the demand charge shall not be based upon less than 60% of the highest demand established
in any of the immediately preceding 11 months, or less than the minimum demand provided for in
the applicable rate.
The billing demand applicable for reserve, auxiliary or stand-by service shall be determined as is
stated in the rate available for that service.
51.43 EXTENSION OF CUSTOMER'S LINES BEYOND THE POINT OF SUPPLY
All cost of extending the customer's lines beyond the point of supply on his premises shall be at the
expense of the customer. Service will not be supplied to the customer if any part of such extension
is along or across any public highway, street or alley or across the property of any other person or
corporation.
It is recognized that in some instances an industrial, commercial or institutional establishment
operating as an integrated unit, extends to both sides of street or streets and would comprise a
single area were it not for the intervening street. In such case, the rule above (with respect to an
extension along or across a public street) shall not apply, provided the customer shall not have
made written request for and Auburn shall have agreed in writing to supply such premises as an
integrated unit. This exception is not to be constructed to permit the extension of a line between
two or more integrated but separate premises, or an extension of a customer's line across or along
a public street to supply two or more residential, commercial or other non-industrial premises.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 51-28
Electric Service
CHAPTER 51
In no case will Auburn be responsible for the maintenance or safety of service lines extended
beyond the point of supply regardless of the fact that they may be located on a public thoroughfare,
nor will Auburn assume any responsibility with respect to obtaining consent of municipal, county or
state authorities for the construction and location of such lines.
51.44 VOLTAGE OF MEASUREMENT AND BILLING
All measurements will be made at the voltage stated in the rate, unless it is necessary and practical that
Auburn measure at some other voltage. All bills will be computed at the voltage stated in the rate.
51.45 SERVICE LINES INSTALLED BY CUSTOMER
Service lines (conductors and equipment for delivering energy, not to exceed 600 volts, from the electric
supply system to the wiring system of the premises served) may be installed by a customer subject to
Auburn specifications and inspections. Customer must either submit a satisfactory design or plan to Auburn
or reimburse Auburn for its design or plan before proceeding with any work. Auburn may refuse to energize
such line unless the same is adequately inspected by Auburn. Auburn has no responsibility or liability for any
service lines installed by a customer with respect to any property damage or personal injury directly or
indirectly resulting from such line, notwithstanding an inspection thereof by Auburn.
51.46 CANCELLATION OF PRIOR RULES AND REGULATIONS
These Auburn Municipal Electric Department Rules are intended to and do supersede and cancel all former
rules and regulations now on file with respect to the matters included herein.
EMERGENCY CURTAILMENT AND LOAD REDUCTION PLAN
51.50 COMPANY LOAD REDUCTION
The following steps shall be taken by the Utility when its fuel supplies are decreasing and the remaining fuel
supplies are sufficient in its opinion for not more than approximately 50 days' operation of its generation
facilities:
Utility use of electric energy will be reduced in any way that will not jeopardize essential operations.
Fuel supply levels at the Utility's generating stations will become a determinant in economic
dispatch decisions in the effort to maintain a reasonable supply of fuel at all generating stations.
The Utility will partially or fully terminate the avail-ability of electric energy under the surplus
capacity provisions of rates for industrial and commercial power service. This shall not apply to
cooperative or municipal utilities with generation.
51.51 CUSTOMER VOLUNTARY LOAD REDUCTION
If fuel supplies continue to decrease and the Utility's remaining fuel supply is sufficient in its opinion
for not more than 50 days' operation of its generating facilities, appeals to users will be made for the
voluntary curtailment of load. Efforts should be made to obtain a decrease in usage of
approximately 25%, except that a lesser amount would be the goal for specific customers if the 25%
reduction would result in situations where health and safety are not adequately protected.
Public appeals will be made by the Utility through appropriate news media asking customers to
reduce their use of electric energy by approximately 25% because of the impending fuel shortage.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 51-29
Electric Service
CHAPTER 51
Direct appeals will be made by the Utility to major industrial and commercial customers and to
wholesale customers requesting them to shut off nonessential loads and curtail usage in an effort to
obtain a 25% reduction.
51.52 MANDATORY LOAD REDUCTION
If fuel supplies continue to decrease and the Utility's remaining fuel supply is sufficient in its opinion for not
more than 40 days' operation of its generating facilities, mandatory curtailment will commence pursuant to
51.53 through 51.59.
51.53 MANDATORY CURTAILMENT OF SERVICE
When fuel supplies are sufficient for not more than 40 days' operation of the Utility's generating facilities or
when for any reason sufficient amounts of electric power, in the judgment of the utility, are not available to
the company to meet all existing and reasonably anticipated demands for service or to protect the integrity
and stability of the system, the Utility shall have the right to restrict, limit, or curtail electric service within any
of its systems so affected in accordance with any of the provisions of 51.50 through 51.59.
51.54 DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of 51.54 through 51.60 and 51.99 the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
• BASE MONTHLY CONSUMPTION
The customer's average billing month usage based upon the 3-month period in the prior 12 months
which corresponds to the billing month being curtailed and the immediately preceding and succeeding
months. Adjustments may be made for customers with changed circumstances that have caused the
prior year's usage during the period to be non-representative of current usage during the period.
• COMMERCIAL CUSTOMERS
Customers engaged primarily in whole-sale or retail trade and services including clubs, institutions, and
local, state, and federal governmental agencies, except educational institutions.
• DISPENSABLE USES
1. The following and similar types of uses of electric energy shall be considered
"DISPENSABLE USES";
a. Outdoor flood and advertising lighting except for the minimum level necessary to protect life
and property and a single illuminated sign identifying commercial facilities that are open
after dark.
b. General lighting levels in stores and offices greater than minimum functional levels.
c. Show window and display lighting.
d. Greater number of elevators operating in office buildings during non-peak hours than is
necessary.
e. Parking lot lighting above minimum functional levels.
f. Energy use greater than that necessary to maintain a temperature of no less than 78°F
during operation of cooling equipment and no more than 65°F during operation of heating
equipment.
g. Greater than minimum work schedules, such as for building cleaning and maintenance or
restocking, which would require office or industrial facilities to be illuminated, cooled, or
heated beyond normal hours.
h. Nighttime sports and recreational activities.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 51-30
Electric Service
CHAPTER 51
i. Public museums, art galleries, and historic buildings requiring illumination, cooling, or
heating.
2. Any dispensable use shall be provided the minimum amount of electricity to protect and
maintain the dispensable use facilities.
• HUMAN NEEDS CUSTOMERS
Includes hospitals, medical centers, nursing homes, and customers where curtailment would adversely
affect public health and safety such as the Municipal Fire Department, Police Departments, Civil
Defense, and emergency Red Cross services, and any other facility whose use of electric energy is vital
to public health and safety as determined by the Utility.
• INDUSTRIAL CUSTOMERS
Customers who are engaged primarily in a process that creates or changes raw or unfinished materials
into another form or product.
• LIVING QUARTERS
As used in Service Priority Class II, hotels, motels, dormitories, and similar dwelling places.
• RESIDENTIAL CUSTOMERS
Customers living in residential dwellings, mobile homes, apartments, or condominiums.
• SERVICE OBLIGATION
The largest metered demand, the peak demand for customers served on industrial and commercial
rates, in the previous 12 months. If no such demand information is available, an estimate shall be used
determined by dividing the kwh in the maximum usage month in such previous 12 months by 200 hours.
51.55 EMERGENCY CURTAILMENT WITHOUT REGARD TO PRIORITY
The Utility reserves the right to order electric service curtailment without regard to the priority of service
when in its judgment such curtailment is required to forestall imminent and irreparable injury to life, property,
or the electric system. Curtailment may include interruption of selected circuits. A curtailment pursuant to
51.50 through 51.59 shall not exceed 72 consecutive hours without approval of the Public Service
Commission of Indiana.
51.56 PRIORITY OF SERVICE
Priority of service, in the event of mandatory curtailment, shall be as set forth below. The highest priority is
Service Priority Class I and the lowest priority of service is Service Priority Class V.
Service Priority Class
1. Human needs
2. Residential and living quarters
3. Commercial and industrial customers Service Priority
4. Schools, colleges, universities, and other educational institutions.
5. Dispensable users and surplus capacity power.
51.57 MANDATORY CURTAILMENT PROCEDURE
Curtailment, unless pursuant to 51.55, shall begin with Service Priority Class V and continue as
necessary through Service Priority Classes IV, III, II, and I as follows:
1. When the Utility's fuel supply reaches 40 days, public notice, by press release, shall be given to
Service Priority Class V customers to fully (100%) curtail such service.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 51-31
Electric Service
CHAPTER 51
2. When the Utility's fuel supply reaches 40 days, public notice shall be given to Service Priority
Class IV to curtail service to a service level of not more than 50% of service obligation or base
monthly consumption, whichever is applicable as determined by the Utility, Service Priority
Class III to curtail service to a service level of not more than 75% of service obligation or base
monthly consumption, whichever is applicable as determined by the Utility, and Service Priority
Class II to curtail service to a service level of not more than 85% of service obligation or base
monthly consumption, whichever is applicable as determined by the Utility.
3. When the Utility's fuel supply reaches 30 days, public notice shall be given to Service Priority
Class IV to curtail service fully to a service level that is necessary to protect and maintain
Service Priority Class IV facilities, Service Priority Class III to curtail service to a service level of
not more than 50% of service obligation or base monthly consumption, whichever is applicable
as determined by the Utility, and Service Priority Class II to curtail service to a service level of
not more than 75% of service obligation or base monthly consumption, whichever is applicable
as determined by the Utility.
4. After Service Priority Classes IV, III and II are curtailed to a level of not more than indicated in
division (3) above of service obligation or base monthly consumption, Service Priority Classes
IV through II shall be further curtailed by equal percentages until full (100%) curtailment occurs.
5. After Service Priority Classes IV, III and II are in full (100%) curtailment, curtailment shall
commence in Service Priority Class I as necessary.
Except as provided in division (A) (1), the Utility will give notice of curtailment in the most effective
manner possible and as much in advance as possible with regard to the exigencies and the number
of customers to be notified. The curtailment shall be effective as of the time and date specified in
the notice.
51.58 CURTAILMENT BY SHORT-TERM SERVICE INTERRUPTION
In the event mandatory curtailment is imposed, the Utility may employ, for not more than two hours' duration
at any one time, selective short-term service interruptions by operation on a rotational basis of distribution
switching equipment to effect the necessary curtailment in one or more service priority classes.
51.59 RESTORATION OF SERVICE
Service shall be restored in the reverse order of the original curtailment.
51.60 APPLICABILITY
The terms and provisions of 51.50 through 51.59 shall control notwithstanding any terms and provisions of
rate schedules, general rules and regulations of the Utility, or any contract or agreement between the Utility
and any customer to the contrary.
51.70 AUBURN ELECTRIC SMART GRID CUSTOMER RIGHTS
The City of Auburn has established certain rights for customers associated with the Electric Smart Grid
Initiative.
51.71 OVERVIEW
The City of Auburn has outlined the core rights of utility customers as it relates to the Auburn Smart Grid
Initiative (ASGI). The City developed these rights based on customer feedback and input, the goals of the
overall ASGI, and current national and state guidelines and policies for smart grid projects.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 51-32
Electric Service
CHAPTER 51
Customers of the Auburn Electric Utility are entitled to responsible and transparent utility operations that
include the right to be informed, the right to privacy, the right to options, and the right to data security.
51.72 THE RIGHT TO BE INFORMED
Customers will have access to customer information that helps explain available billing rate structures and
options, outage information, peak demand, and the impact of energy
consumption habits on electric bills.
Customers will be informed and be able to view electricity consumption from a convenient user interface.
Customers will be informed of electric system enhancements that will support current and future tools (such
as home area networks (HAN), electric vehicle charging, distributed generation, etc.) that empower them to
actively control electricity consumption. The decision to install a device will be at the customer’s expense if
they choose to participate in the optional energy control programs.
51.73 THE RIGHT TO PRIVACY
Personal information / personal data will not be released to any third parties.
Customers will be informed of the available choices and consent options regarding the collection, use, and
disclosure of energy consumption data.
Disclosure of energy usage data to any third party, such as in the case of a court order, is subject to federal,
state, and local laws.
Customers will retain control of all in home devices and appliances. Customers may voluntarily participate in
a utility managed energy control program and to include devices that the utility can adjust as a part of a
Demand Response program. This includes programmable thermostats, jacuzzi/pool pumps and heaters,
and energy storage systems.
Customers who wish to file a privacy violation complaint have the right to petition the Board of Public Works
and Safety for a resolution.
51.74 THE RIGHT TO OPTIONS
Customers can select a billing rate structure that meets their needs. This includes the traditional fixed-rate
pricing and time of use pricing programs when available. Customers may have the ability to change
programs.
The City will not alter an individual’s customer-selected rate program unless the customer is made aware of
and consents to this change. Existing policy curtailment schedules will remain in effect.
Customers can choose how they will receive information from the utility.
Customers may purchase and use compatible devices, technologies and appliances that augment the
understanding of, visibility into, and control of electricity consumption at their discretion.
51.75 THE RIGHT TO DATA SECURITY
All customers have the right to a functioning electric meter and customer web portal that will provide secure,
confidential, and accurate electricity consumption data.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 51-33
Electric Service
CHAPTER 51
A utility cyber security plan, designed to protect the smart grid’s critical computer infrastructure that may be a
potential target of criminal threats, terrorism acts, industrial espionage, and/or politically motivated sabotage,
will guide and govern all security policies and practices that apply to user energy information. A summary of
this plan can be provided upon request.
51.76 IMPLEMENTATION
By January 1, 2014, the City of Auburn shall complete and implement the smart metering system for the
purpose of data collection systems of the Auburn Electric Department.
51.99 PENALTY
Customers who fail to comply with a curtailment pursuant to 51.50 through 51.59 for more than seven days
will be subject to disconnection for the duration of the emergency. Energy use by industrial and large
commercial customers in excess of that permitted under curtailment shall be subject to a $.10 per kwh
penalty, in addition to normal billing charges, for all electric energy taken in excess of mandatory curtailment
limitations. Penalty charges collected hereunder shall be aggregated in a separate account, and shall be
applied to reduce the fuel cost adjustment charges of industrial and large commercial customers who, during
the existence of a fuel emergency, have not used electric energy in excess of mandatory curtailment
limitations.
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
General Utility Provisions
CHAPTER 54
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 54-2
General Utility Provisions
CHAPTER 54
Table of Contents
54.01 WATER AND SEWAGE CONNECTIONS REQUIRED
54.02 WATER SERVICE ATTACHMENTS
54.03 UTILITY SERVICES PROVIDED TO AREAS NOT ANNEXED
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 54-3
General Utility Provisions
CHAPTER 54
54.01 WATER AND SEWAGE CONNECTIONS REQUIRED
No person shall erect any structure on any land within the corporate limit of the city or move onto
any land within the corporate limits of the city any existing structure which is to be used as a
dwelling or place of abode for one or more persons unless the structure is connected with the
sanitary sewage system of the city and connected with a city water main.
No person shall convert an existing structure heretofore used for other than residential purposes to
a residence or place of abode for one or more persons unless it is connected to the sanitary sewer
system of the city and to a water main of the water system of the city.
No person shall use as a residence or a place of abode any structure which after the effective date
of this section is constructed upon or moved upon any real estate, or any existing structure in the
city which has not prior to the effective date of this section been used as a place of residence or
abode, unless the structure is connected with a sewer of the sanitary sewage system of the city and
a water main of the water system of the city.
54.02 WATER SERVICE ATTACHMENTS
All applications for service attachments to the water distribution pipes for the purpose of introducing
water into any premises, as well as applications for the use of water, must be made at the Electric
and Water Department office by the owner of the premises into which water is proposed to be
introduced. The application shall be upon forms prescribed by the Department and signed by the
applicant or his authorized agent.
The applicant shall pay in advance the following water tap charges, which shall include a
corporation stop, curb stop, service box, copper line, back hoe, an operator service, labor, and
remote reader:
5/8 – ¾ inch $650
1 inch $750
1 – ½ inches $850
2 inches $900
4 inches $1500
6 inches $1550
8 inches $1750
Plus $200 for each inch over 8 inches
54.03 UTILITY SERVICES PROVIDED TO AREAS NOT ANNEXED
No city utility service, including sanitation and storm sewer, will be provided outside of the territorial limits of
the city without:
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 54-4
General Utility Provisions
CHAPTER 54
A title search or letter from a title company certifying the owner of the real estate and providing a
copy of the title deed;
The execution and recording of a Consent to and Waiver of Notice for Annexation by the titleholder;
and
Payment of the costs of the title search and recordation of the Consent and Waiver by the
titleholder.
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Credit Card Provisions
CHAPTER 55
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 55-2
Credit Card Provisions
CHAPTER 55
Table of Contents
55.01 METHODS OF PAYMENT
55.02 SERVICE CHARGE
55.03 CREDIT CARDS
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 55-3
Credit Card Provisions
CHAPTER 55
55.01 METHODS OF PAYMENT
The City of Auburn may accept payment for municipal services by any of the following methods:
1. Cash
2. Check
3. Bank Draft
4. Money Order
5. Bank Card or Credit Card
6. Electronic Funds Transfer
55.02 SERVICE CHARGE
The Clerk-Treasurer of the City of Auburn, Indiana is authorized to recover any fees, charges, or
administrative costs associated with payments made by bank credit card, electronic funds transfer or any
other similar method. The Clerk-Treasurer shall add said charges to the invoice and shall inform the
customer of the additional charge for said service prior to it being made. Said charges shall be implemented
to off-set the direct costs incurred for said service and payment. The implementation of processing of credit
card payments shall be consistent for all payments made, either in person, electronically, or in person.
55.03 CREDIT CARDS
The Clerk-Treasurer is authorized to contract with a bank card or credit card vendor for acceptance of bank
cards or credit cards.
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Control of Municipally
Owned Utilities
CHAPTER 56
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 56-2
Control of Municipally Owned Utilities
CHAPTER 56
Table of Contents
56.01 CONTROL OF CITY OWNED UTILITIES
56.02 SUBMISSION OF BUDGETS
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 56-3
Control of Municipally Owned Utilities
CHAPTER 56
56.01 CONTROL OF CITY OWNED UTILITIES
Pursuant to Indiana Code 8-1.5-3-3(a), as from time to time amended, the control of all of the City’s
municipally owned utilities shall be with the Municipal Works Board, known as the Auburn Board of Works
and Public Safety.
56.02 SUBMISSION OF BUDGETS
The budgets of the municipally owned utilities shall be submitted to the legislative body for approval in
accordance with Indiana Code 8-1.5-3-4, as from time to time amended. The budgets of the municipally
owned utilities shall be submitted for Common Council consideration no later than the second council
meeting in November each year. The submission of the municipal utility budgets does not have to be
simultaneous with the city civil budget.
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
TRAFFIC RULES
CHAPTER
71
SPEED REGULATIONS
71.01 STATE SPEED LAWS APPLICABLE
71.02 SPEED IN ALLEYS
TURNING MOVEMENTS
71.05 AUTHORITY TO PLACE DEVICES ALTERING NORMAL COURSE FOR TURNS
STOP AND YIELD INTERSECTIONS
71.10 INTERSECTIONS WHERE STOP OR YIELD REQUIRED
71.11 YIELD RIGHT-OF-WAY AT ALLEY EXIT
DRIVING RULES
71.15 STOP WHEN TRAFFIC OBSTRUCTED
71.16 DRIVING THROUGH FUNERAL OR OTHER PROCESSION
71.17 DRIVERS IN A PROCESSION
71.18 FUNERAL PROCESSIONS TO BE IDENTIFIED
71.19 PERMITS REQUIRED FOR PARADES AND PROCESSIONS; EXCEPTIONS
71.20 BOARDING OR ALIGHTING FROM VEHICLES
71.21 UNLAWFUL RIDING
71.22 DRIVING UPON A SIDEWALK
71.23 CONTAINMENT OF LOADS
71.24 UNATTENDED MOTOR VEHICLE
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
TRAFFIC RULES
CHAPTER
71
SPEED REGULATIONS
71.01 STATE SPEED LAWS APPLICABLE
The state traffic laws regulating the speed of vehicles shall be applicable upon all streets within the city,
except as this traffic code, as authorized by state law, hereby declares and determines, upon the basis of an
engineering and traffic investigation, that certain speed regulations shall be applicable upon specified streets
or in certain areas, in which event it shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle at a speed in excess
of any speed so determined when signs are in place giving notice thereof.
The entire municipal boundaries of the City of Auburn, Indiana is hereby declared as an urban area by
definition and all said areas not marked by speed sign are controlled by state law setting forth speed limits
for urban areas.
71.02 SPEED IN ALLEYS
Except when a special hazard exists that requires lower speed for compliance with state law, the maximum
lawful speed limit in an alley shall be 15 miles per hour and no person shall drive a vehicle in an alley in
excess of the limit.
TURNING MOVEMENTS
71.05 AUTHORITY TO PLACE DEVICES ALTERING NORMAL COURSE FOR TURNS
The City Council is authorized to place official traffic-control devices, within or adjacent to intersections,
indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections. The course to be traveled as
so indicated may conform to, or be other than as prescribed by law.
STOP AND YIELD INTERSECTIONS
71.10 INTERSECTIONS WHERE STOP OR YIELD REQUIRED
The City Council is hereby authorized to determine and designate intersections where a particular hazard
exists and to determine the following.
1. Whether vehicles shall stop at one or more entrances to any such intersection in which event it
shall have erected a stop sign at every place where a stop is required.
2. Whether vehicles shall yield the right-of-way to vehicles on a different street at the intersection,
in which event it shall have erected a yield sign at every place where obedience thereto is
required.
71.11 YIELD RIGHT-OF-WAY AT ALLEY EXIT
The driver of a vehicle about to enter a street from an alley shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicles or
pedestrians approaching on the street.
DRIVING RULES
71.15 STOP WHEN TRAFFIC OBSTRUCTED
No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side
of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage
of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic-control signal indication to proceed.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
TRAFFIC RULES
CHAPTER
71
71.16 DRIVING THROUGH FUNERAL OR OTHER PROCESSION
No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral or other authorized procession
while they are in motion and when such vehicles are conspicuously designated. This provision shall not
apply at intersections where traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals or police officers.
71.17 DRIVERS IN A PROCESSION
Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the right-hand edge of the roadway as
practicable and shall follow the vehicle ahead as close as is practicable and safe.
71.18 FUNERAL PROCESSIONS TO BE IDENTIFIED
A funeral composed of a procession of vehicles shall be identified as such by the display upon the outside of
each vehicle of a pennant or other identifying insignia or by such other method as may be determined and
designated by the Chief of Police.
71.19 PERMITS REQUIRED FOR PARADES AND PROCESSIONS; EXCEPTIONS
No procession or parade except funeral processions, the United States Armed Forces, the military forces of
this state, and the forces of the Chief of Police and Fire Department shall occupy, march, or proceed along
any street, except in accordance with a permit issued by the Chief of Police and such other regulations as
are set forth which may apply.
No procession or parade except funeral processions, the United States Armed Forces, the military forces of
this state, and the forces of the Chief of Police and Fire Department shall occupy, march, or proceed along
any street, except in accordance with a permit issued by the Chief of Police and such other regulations as
are set forth which may apply.
71.20 BOARDING OR ALIGHTING FROM VEHICLES
No person shall board or alight from any vehicle while the vehicle is in motion.
71.21 UNLAWFUL RIDING
No person shall ride on any vehicle upon any portion thereof not designed or intended for the use of
passengers. This provision shall not apply to an employee engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty or
to persons riding within truck bodies in space intended for merchandise.
71.22 DRIVING UPON A SIDEWALK
No person shall drive any vehicle upon a sidewalk or sidewalk area, except upon a permanent or duly
authorized temporary driveway.
71.23 CONTAINMENT OF LOADS
Any person hauling stone, oil, rubbish, or any other material shall see that the vehicle shall be of adequate
dimensions and height, so that none of the material shall fall from the vehicle. Any material falling from a
vehicle shall be promptly removed from the street by the driver who shall be responsible for any damage
done.
71.24 UNATTENDED MOTOR VEHICLE
No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit the motor vehicle to stand unattended without
first stopping the engine, locking the ignition, and removing the key from the ignition.
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER
70
GENERAL PROVISIONS
70.01 SHORT TITLE
70.02 DEFINITIONS
70.03 APPLICATION
70.04 UNIFORMITY OF INTERPRETATION
70.05 PROVISIONS NOT RETROACTIVE
70.06 EFFECT OF HEADINGS
TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION
70.10 DUTY OF THE CHIEF OF POLICE
70.11 RECORDS OF TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS
70.12 POLICE DEPARTMENT TO INVESTIGATE ACCIDENTS
70.13 TRAFFIC ACCIDENT STUDIES
70.14 TRAFFIC ACCIDENT REPORTS
70.15 EMERGENCY TRAFFIC CONTROL
70.16 CITY CIVIL ENGINEER TO BE TRAFFIC ENGINEER
ENFORCEMENT OF AND OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
70.17 AUTHORITY OF CHIEF OF POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENT OFFICIALS
70.18 OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC CODE REQUIRED
70.19 CERTAIN NONMOTORIZED TRAFFIC TO OBEY TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
70.20 USE OF COASTER AND SIMILAR DEVICES RESTRICTED
70.21 PUBLIC EMPLOYEES TO OBEY TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
70.22 AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES
70.23 WRITTEN REPORTS OF ACCIDENTS
TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES
70.24 AUTHORITY TO INSTALL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES
70.25 MANUAL AND SPECIFICATIONS FOR TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES
70.26 OFFICIAL TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES ARE REQUIRED FOR ENFORCEMENT PURPOSES;
EXCEPTIONS
70.27 INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES
70.28 OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES, PRESUMPTION OF LEGALITY
70.29 CHIEF OF POLICE TO DESIGNATE CROSSWALKS AND ESTABLISH SAFETY ZONES
70.30 TRAFFIC LANES
VIOLATION PROCEDURES
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER
70
70.40 CITATION OF ILLEGALLY PARKED VEHICLE
70.41 FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH TRAFFIC CITATION ATTACHED TO PARKED VEHICLE
70.42 PRESUMPTION IN REFERENCE TO ILLEGAL PARKING
70.43 DISPOSITION OF TRAFFIC FINES AND FORFEITURES
70.44 SECTION REMOVED FEBRUARY 20, 2017.
70.45 DUTIES OF CITY ATTORNEY
70.46 IMPOUNDING VEHICLES OF SCOFFLAWS
70.99 PENALTY
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER
70
GENERAL PROVISIONS
70.01 SHORT TITLE
Title VII may be known and cited as the "Auburn Traffic Code."
70.02 DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this traffic code the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning. Whenever any words and phrases used herein are not defined herein, but are
defined in the state laws regulating the operation of vehicles, any such definition therein shall be deemed to
apply to such words and phrases used herein, except when the context otherwise requires.
? ALLEY
A street intended to provide access to the rear or side of lots or buildings in urban districts and not
intended for the purpose of through vehicular traffic.
? AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE
Vehicles of the Fire Department, police vehicles and such ambulances as are operated by or for health
and hospital corporations; provided, however, that ambulances and other vehicles which are owned by
persons, firms, or corporations other than hospitals and are used in emergency services, may be
designated as emergency vehicles, if the vehicles are authorized to operate as such by the State Public
Service Commission.
? AUTOMOBILE WRECKER
An automobile wrecking and parts business.
? BICYCLE
Any foot-propelled vehicle, irrespective of the number of wheels in contact with the ground, including but
not limited to skateboards, roller skates, and in-line skates.
? BUREAU
The Bureau of Motor Vehicles of the state.
? BUSINESS DISTRICT
The territory contiguous to and including a street when 50% or more of the frontage thereon for a
distance of 500 feet or more is occupied by buildings in use for business.
? COMMISSIONER
The Commissioner of the Bureau.
? CROSSWALK
That part of a roadway at an intersection included within the connections of the lateral lines of the
sidewalks on opposite sides of the street measured from the curbs, or, in the absence of curbs, from the
edges of the traversable roadway, regardless of the presence of pavement markings.
Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by
lines or other markings on the surface.
? DISPOSAL AGENT
Any firm or individual engaged in business as a scrap metal processor or automobile wrecker.
? DRIVER
Every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a vehicle.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER
70
? HOLIDAY
The following days of the year shall be designated as holidays: the first day of January, commonly
known as New Year's Day; the last Monday of May, commonly known as Memorial Day; July fourth,
commonly known as Independence Day; the first Monday of September, commonly known as Labor
Day; the fourth Thursday of November, commonly known as Thanksgiving Day; and December 25,
commonly known as Christmas Day.
? INTERSECTION
The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral curb lines, or, if none, then the
lateral boundary lines of the roadways of two streets which join one another at, or approximately at, right
angles of the area within which vehicles traveling upon different streets joining at any other angle may
come in conflict.
The junction of any alley with a street shall not constitute an intersection.
? LOADING ZONE
A space reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or
property.
? OFFICER OR POLICE OFFICER
Every officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations.
? OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD
Eastern Standard Time.
? OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES
All signs, signals, markings, and devices not inconsistent with this traffic code placed or erected, by
authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating, warning, or guiding
traffic.
? OWNER
The last known record title holder to a vehicle according to the records of the Bureau under the
provisions of IC 9-14-1 et seq.
? PARK or PARKING
The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily, for the purpose of and
while actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or passengers.
? PARKING SPACE or PARKING PLACE
A designated portion of the surface of a street of sufficient length and depth to accommodate a vehicle
of reasonable dimensions to be parked. The designated portion shall be specified and marked off as
provided in this traffic code.
? PARTS
All component parts of a vehicle which are in a state of disassembly, or are assembled with other
vehicle component parts, but which in their state of assembly do not constitute a complete vehicle.
? PEDESTRIAN
Any person afoot.
? PERSON
Every natural person, firm, co-partnership, association, or corporation.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER
70
? PRIVATE PREMISES
All privately owned property which is not classified within the definition of public premises.
? PUBLIC AGENCY
The city Police Department, which is assigned the local responsibility for removal, storage, and disposal
of abandoned vehicles by ordinance of the City Council.
? PUBLIC PREMISES
Any public right-of-way, street, highway, alley, park, or other state, county, or municipally owned
property.
? RESIDENCE DISTRICT
The territory contiguous to and including a street not comprising a business district when the property on
the street for a distance of 500 feet or more, is, in the main, improved with residences or residences and
buildings in use for business.
? RIGHT-OF-WAY
The privilege of the immediate use of the street.
? ROADWAY
That portion of a street improved, designed, or ordinarily used for vehicular travel.
? SCRAP METAL PROCESSOR
An establishment having facilities for processing iron, steel, or nonferrous scrap and whose principal
product is scrap iron and scrap steel or nonferrous scrap for sale for re-melting purposes.
? SIDEWALK
That portion of a street between the curb lines or the lateral lines of a roadway and the adjacent property
line, intended for use by pedestrians.
? STAND or STANDING
The halting of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of, and
while actually engaged in, receiving or discharging passengers.
? STATE LAW
Indiana laws regulating and relating to motor vehicles and their operation.
? STOP
When required, "stop" means complete cessation from movement.
? STOP or STOPPING
When prohibited, "stop" or "stopping" means any halting, even momentarily, of a vehicle, whether
occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the
directions of a police officer or traffic- control sign or signal.
? STREET
The entire width between boundary lines of every way publicly maintained, when any part thereof is
open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel.
? TOWING SERVICE
A business organized for the purpose of moving or removing disabled motor vehicles and once
removed, to store or impound the motor vehicles.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER
70
? TRAFFIC
Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, streetcars, and other conveyances, either singly or
together, while using any street for purposes of travel.
? TRUCK
Every motor vehicle designed, used, or maintained primarily for the transportation of property.
? VEHICLE
Every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a
street, excepting devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
70.03 APPLICATION
The provisions of this traffic code relating to the operation of vehicles refer exclusively to the operation of
vehicles upon streets and municipally operated parking lots except where a different place is specifically
referred to in a given section.
70.04 UNIFORMITY OF INTERPRETATION
This traffic code shall be so interpreted and construed as to effect its general purpose to make uniform the
laws of the city.
70.05 PROVISIONS NOT RETROACTIVE
This traffic code shall not have a retroactive effect. It shall not apply to any traffic accident, cause of action
arising out of a traffic accident or judgment arising therefrom, or violation of the traffic code of this city
occurring prior to the effective date of this traffic code.
70.06 EFFECT OF HEADINGS
Article and section headings contained herein shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify, or in any manner
affect the scope, meaning, or extent of the provisions of any chapter or section hereof.
TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION
70.10 DUTY OF THE CHIEF OF POLICE
It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police and officers to enforce the street traffic regulations of the city and all
of the state laws, enforce traffic violations, investigate accidents, cooperate with officials of the city in the
administration of the traffic laws and in developing ways to improve traffic conditions, and carry out those
duties specially imposed upon the Chief of Police and deputies by the traffic code of the city.
70.11 RECORDS OF TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS
The Police Department shall keep a record of all violations of the traffic code of the city or of the
state vehicle laws of which any person has been charged together with a record of the final
disposition of all such alleged offenses. The record shall be so maintained as to show all types of
violations and the total of each. The record shall accumulate during at least a five-year period and
from that time on the record shall be maintained complete for at least the most recent five -year
period.
All forms for records of violations and notices of violations shall be serially numbered. For each
month and year a written record shall be kept available to the public showing the disposal of all the
forms.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER
70
70.12 POLICE DEPARTMENT TO INVESTIGATE ACCIDENTS
It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police and deputies to investigate traffic accidents according to state
statutes and arrest and assist in the prosecution of those persons charged with violations of law causing or
contributing to the accidents.
70.13 TRAFFIC ACCIDENT STUDIES
Whenever the accidents at any particular location become numerous, the Police Department shall cooperate
with city officials in conducting studies of such accidents and determining remedial measures.
70.14 TRAFFIC ACCIDENT REPORTS
The Police Department shall maintain a suitable system of filing traffic accident reports. The reports may be
available for the use and information of city officials and law enforcement agencies at no cost. All other
parties receiving copies of reports shall pay a charge set forth by the City of Auburn Police Department.
70.15 EMERGENCY TRAFFIC CONTROL
The Chief of Police is authorized to temporarily place official traffic-control devices when required by an
emergency. The Chief of Police shall notify the Mayor of his actions as soon thereafter as practicable.
70.16 CITY CIVIL ENGINEER TO BE TRAFFIC ENGINEER
The City Civil Engineer shall serve as the Traffic Engineer in addition to his other functions.
ENFORCEMENT OF AND OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
70.17 AUTHORITY OF CHIEF OF POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENT OFFICIALS
It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police or such officers as are assigned by the Chief of Police, to
enforce all street traffic laws of this city and all of the state vehicle laws.
The Chief of Police and deputies, or such officers as are assigned by the Chief of Police, are hereby
authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand, or signal in conformance with traffic laws, provided
that, in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or safeguard pedestrians, the
Chief of Police or officers may direct traffic as conditions may require, notwithstanding the
provisions of the traffic laws.
Officers of the Fire Department, when at the scene, an emergency incident may direct or assi st the
Chief of Police or officers in directing traffic in the immediate vicinity.
70.18 OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC CODE REQUIRED
It is unlawful and a municipal ordinance violation for any person to do any act forbidden, or fail to perform
any act required, in this traffic code.
70.19 CERTAIN NONMOTORIZED TRAFFIC TO OBEY TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Every person propelling a bicycle, pushcart, riding an animal, or driving any animal-drawn vehicle upon a
roadway shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a
vehicle by this traffic code except those provisions of this traffic code which by their very nature can have no
application.
70.20 USE OF COASTER AND SIMILAR DEVICES RESTRICTED
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER
70
No person riding in or by means of any coaster, toy vehicle, child's tricycle, or similar device shall be upon
any roadway except while crossing a street on a crosswalk. When so crossing, the person shall be granted
all of the rights and be subject to all of the duties applicable to pedestrians. This section is not intended to
regulate skateboarding, roller skating, or in-line skating.
70.21 PUBLIC EMPLOYEES TO OBEY TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
The provisions of this traffic code shall apply to the drivers of all vehicles owned or operated by the United
States, this state, or any political subdivision of the state, subject to such special exceptions as are set forth
in this traffic code or in the state vehicle code. The provisions of this traffic code shall not apply to persons,
motor vehicles, and other equipment while actually engaged in work in a street, but shall apply to such
persons and vehicles when traveling to or from work.
70.22 AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES
The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an emergency call or when i n
the pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law or when responding to, but not upon
returning from a fire alarm, may park or stand, irrespective of the provisions of this traffic code.
The foregoing provision shall not relieve the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from the
duty to park or stand with due regard for the safety of all persons, nor shall the provision protect the
driver from the consequences of his reckless disregard for the safety of others.
70.23 WRITTEN REPORTS OF ACCIDENTS
The driver of a vehicle, which is in any manner involved in an accident resulting in injury to or death of any
person or property damage shall comply with IC 9-26-1 et seq. as it presently exists or is hereafter
amended.
TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES
70.24 AUTHORITY TO INSTALL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES
The City of Auburn shall place and maintain official traffic-control devices when and as required under the
traffic ordinances of the city to make effective the provisions of said ordinances. It may place and maintain
additional official traffic-control devices as it may deem necessary to regulate, warn, or guide traffic under
the traffic ordinances of the city and of the state vehicle law.
70.25 MANUAL AND SPECIFICATIONS FOR TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES
All traffic-control signs, signals, and devices shall conform to the "Indiana Manual on Uniform Traffic-Control
Devices for Streets and Highways." All signs and signals required hereunder for a particular purpose shall
be uniform as to type and location throughout the city. All traffic-control devices so erected and not
inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this traffic code shall be official traffic-control devices.
70.26 OFFICIAL TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES ARE REQUIRED FOR ENFORCEMENT PURPOSES;
EXCEPTIONS
No provisions of the traffic code for which official traffic-control devices are required shall be enforced
against an alleged violator if, at the time and place of the alleged violation, an official device is not in proper
position and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular section
does not state that official traffic-control devices are required, the section shall be effective even though no
devices are erected or in place.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER
70
70.27 INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES
No person shall without lawful authority, attempt to or in fact alter, injure, deface, knock down, or remove any
official traffic-control device or any railroad sign or signal or any inscription, shield or insignia thereon, or any
part thereof.
70.28 OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES, PRESUMPTION OF LEGALITY
Whenever official traffic-control devices are placed in positions approximately conforming to the
requirements of this traffic code, the devices shall be presumed to have been so placed by the
official act or direction of lawful authority, unless the contrary shall be established by competent
evidence.
Any official traffic-control device placed pursuant to the provisions of this traffic code and purporting
to conform to the lawful requirements pertaining to the devices shall be presumed to comply with
the requirements of this traffic code, unless the contrary shall be established by competent
evidence.
Traffic Control Signs shall be placed and updated upon annexation of property within the City of
Auburn. Traffic speeds shall be governed by State Statute in those areas that are newly annexed
and not identified by this Chapter. All newly annexed areas, as well as, the entire City of Auburn,
Indiana shall be considered an urban area and or district as defined by State Traffic Code.
All newly created streets shall be enforced as if a part of this ordinance, until such time as this
ordinance is amended. In the alternative, newly created streets not identified in this ordinanc e shall
be controlled by Indiana State Statute.
70.29 CHIEF OF POLICE TO DESIGNATE CROSSWALKS AND ESTABLISH SAFETY ZONES
The Chief of Police is hereby authorized at the direction of the Board of Works, to designate, by appropriate
devices, marks, or lines upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections to be maintained by
the Street Department, where in its opinion there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway
and at other places it may deem necessary.
70.30 TRAFFIC LANES
The Street Department, at the direction of the Board of Works and Public Safety, to mark traffic lanes upon
the roadway of any street or highway under the jurisdiction of the city.
VIOLATION PROCEDURES
70.40 CITATION OF ILLEGALLY PARKED VEHICLE
Whenever any motor vehicle without a driver is found parked, standing, or stopped in violation of any of the
restrictions imposed by ordinance of this city or by state law, the officer finding such vehicle shall take its
registration number, take any other information displayed on the vehicle which may identify its user, and
conspicuously affix to the vehicle a traffic citation, on a form provided by the Clerk-Treasurer, for the driver
to answer to the charge against him within thirty days, during the hours and at a place specified in the
citation. Tickets may only be dismissed for good cause by the Chief of Police.
70.41 FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH TRAFFIC CITATION ATTACHED TO PARKED VEHICLE
If a violator of the restrictions on stopping, standing, or parking under the traffic laws does not appear in
response to a traffic citation affixed to the motor vehicle within a period of five days, the Clerk-Treasurer or a
representative of the Auburn Police Department shall send to the owner of the motor vehicle to which the
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER
70
traffic citation was affixed a letter informing him or her of the violation and warning him or her that, in the
event the letter is disregarded for a period of 30 days, a suit may be filed to collect the monies owed in
accordance with Section 70.99.
70.42 PRESUMPTION IN REFERENCE TO ILLEGAL PARKING
If any prosecution charging a violation of any law governing the standing or parking of a vehicle,
proof that the particular vehicle described in the complaint was parked in violation of any such law
together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was, at the time of the parking, the
registered owner of the vehicle, shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the
registered owner of the vehicle was the person who parked or placed the vehicle at the point where,
and for the time during which, the violation occurred.
The foregoing presumption shall apply only when the procedure prescribed in this traffic code has
been followed.
70.43 DISPOSITION OF TRAFFIC FINES AND FORFEITURES
All fines or forfeitures collected upon conviction - of any person charged with a violation of any of the
provisions of this traffic code shall be paid the city and deposited in the General Fund.
70.44 SECTION REMOVED FEBRUARY 20, 2017.
70.45 DUTIES OF CITY ATTORNEY
The City Attorney or the Assistant City Attorney is duly authorized to prosecute all charges of violation of this
traffic code.
70.46 IMPOUNDING VEHICLES OF SCOFFLAWS
Whenever a police officer has knowledge that a person has failed to satisfy five or more parking or
traffic citations and judgments have been rendered, for such persons for these citations, and
whenever the officer finds any vehicles registered in the name of the person upon any street, he
may impound or immobilize the vehicle.
Immobilization of a vehicle under this section shall be in a manner as to prevent its operation by
means of a device, which will cause no damage to the vehicle unless the vehicle is moved. Notice
of immobilization shall be attached to the vehicle in a conspicuous manner.
After impounding or immobilizing a vehicle under this section, notice shall be given in writing to its
owner.
70.99 PENALTY
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by law, every person convicted of a violation of any
provision of this traffic code except Chapter 74 shall be punished by a fine of $50.
Any person or entity cited under 70.40 and 70.41 shall pay a fine to the Clerk-Treasurer of the City.
Said fine shall be $10.00 paid within 30 days of the citation and shall increase to $40 after 30 days.
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Public Purchases
CHAPTER 57
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 57-2
Public Purchases
CHAPTER 57
Table of Contents
57.01 PUBLIC PURCHASES
57.02 CONTRACTING WITH THE CITY OF AUBURN
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 57-3
Public Purchases
CHAPTER 57
57.01 PUBLIC PURCHASES
The City of Auburn Municipal Code is hereby amended to create a new chapter, which shall be codified as
Chapter 57 and entitled “Public Purchasing”.
Said Chapter shall read as follows:
The City of Auburn shall comply with and hereby adopts the purchasing procedures set forth in Indiana
Code Sections 5-22-1 through 5-22-18, as amended from time to time.
All purchases of the City of Auburn, between $10,000.00 and $50,000.00, shall require the affected City
Department to obtain at least two (2) quotes from a reputable vendor or supplier. The Purchasing Agent
shall approve the most responsive and responsible quote. If two (2) quotes cannot be obtained, the
Purchasing Agent may use the procedures set forth under I.C. 5-22-10 for making said purchase and shall
identify the reason for using the procedure set forth under I.C. 5-22-10 as my be amended from time to time.
Purchases under $50,000.00 shall not require approval of the Auburn Board of Works and Public Safety.
Those purchases that are expected to be over $50,000.00 in cost shall be made by the purchasing agent or
a designee of the purchasing agent inviting quotes from at least three (3) persons known to deal in the lines
or classes of supplies, as defined by I.C. 5-22, to be purchased.
The purchasing agent or the purchasing agent’s designee shall mail an invitation to quote to the persons
dealing in the lines or classes of supplies to be purchased.
If a satisfactory quote is received as determined by the purchasing agent or designee, the contract shall be
awarded by the purchasing agent or designee to the lowest responsible and responsive bidder for each line
or class of supplies required.
The purchasing agent or designee may reject all quotes.
If the purchasing agent or designee does not receive a quote from a responsible and responsive offeror, the
purchasing agent may purchase supplies under the procedures set forth under Indiana Code 5-22-10 as
from time to time amended.
The Board of Works must approve purchases over $50,000.00 prior to said purchase being made by any
division or department of the City of Auburn, Indiana (including the Auburn Parks Department). There is a
duty to obtain the best, most competitive prices.
57.02 CONTRACTING WITH THE CITY OF AUBURN
As used in this chapter, “elected official” means:
1. The executive or a member of the executive body of the City of Auburn;
2. A member of the legislative body of the City of Auburn; or
3. A member of the fiscal body of the City of Auburn.
As used in this chapter, “relative” means any of the following:
1. Spouse.
2. A parent or stepparent.
3. A child or stepchild.
4. A brother, sister, stepbrother, or stepsister.
5. A niece or nephew.
6. An aunt or uncle.
7. A daughter-in-law or son-in-law.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 57-4
Public Purchases
CHAPTER 57
8. A brother-in-law or sister-in-law
For purposes of this section, an adopted child of an individual is treated as a natural child of the
individual.
For purposes of this section, the terms “brother” and “sister” include a brother or sister by the half
blood.
An annual report must be filed by the City of Auburn with the state board of accounts under IC 5-11-
13-1 and must include a statement by the executive of the unit stating whether the unit has
implemented a policy in accordance with applicable Indiana law.
The City of Auburn, Indiana may enter into a contract or renew a contract for the procurement of
goods and services or a contract for public works with:
1. An individual who is a relative of an elected official; or
2. A business entity that is wholly or partially owned by a relative of an elected official; only if the
requirements of this section are satisfied and the elected official does not violate Indiana Code
Section 35-44-1-3.
The City of Auburn, Indiana may enter into a contract or renew a contract with an individual relative
or business entity owned by a relative if the elected official files with the City of Auburn a full
disclosure, which must:
1. Be in writing;
2. Describe the contract or purchase to be made by the City of Auburn;
3. Describe the relationship that the elected official has to the individual or business entity that
contracts or purchases;
4. Be affirmed under penalty of perjury;
5. Be submitted to the legislative body of the City of Auburn and be accepted by the legislative
body in a public meeting of the unit prior to final action on the contract or purchase, with:
a. The state board of accounts;
b. The clerk of the circuit court in the county where the unit takes final action on the contract or
purchase.
6. The City of Auburn Board of Public Works shall also:
a. Make a certified statement that the contract amount or purchase price was the lowest
amount or price bid or offered; or
b. Make a certified statement of the reasons why the vendor or contractor was selected; and
c. Certify unit satisfies any other requirements under IC 5-22 or IC 36-1-12.
An elected official shall also comply with the disclosure provisions of IC 35-44-1-3, if applicable.
This section does not affect the initial term of a contract in existence at the time the term of office of
the elected official of the unit begins.
Each elected officer of the unit shall annually certify in writing, subject to the penalties for perjury,
that the officer is in compliance with this chapter. An officer shall submit the certification to the
executive of the unit not later than December 31 of each year.
If the state board of accounts finds that the City of Auburn has not implemented a policy under this
chapter, the state board of accounts shall forward the information to the department of local
government finance.
If the City of Auburn not implemented a policy under this chapter, the department of local
government finance may not approve:
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 57-5
Public Purchases
CHAPTER 57
a. The City of Auburn’s budget; or
b. Any additional appropriations for the City of Auburn;
c. For the ensuing calendar year until the state board of accounts certifies to the department of
local government finance that the unit adopted a policy under this chapter.
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Auburn Essential
Services Billing
Procedures
CHAPTER 58
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 58-2
Auburn Essential Services Billing Procedures
CHAPTER 58
Table of Contents
58.01 RESIDENTIAL APPLICATION FOR SERVICE
58.02 NON-PAYMENT DISCONNECT
58.03 CUSTOMER INFORMATION
58.04 MULTIPLE CANCELLATIONS OF SERVICE
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 58-3
Auburn Essential Services Billing Procedures
CHAPTER 58
58.01 RESIDENTIAL APPLICATION FOR SERVICE
Auburn Essential Services (AES) shall establish internal policies in an effort to mitigate bad debt and prevent
risk of loss for failure to pay accounts.
A credit check shall be required for new residential accounts. A credit check shall be conducted by
reviewing the delinquency history of their municipal utilities account. Those individuals without a municipal
account history would be required to submit a credit report. A credit check shall determine the prepayment
requirement for a new customer. Prepayment would be required as follows:
No Prepayment Required
1. Those individuals with a history of no late payments in the last twelve (12) billing cycles of their
municipal utilities account would be considered in “good standing” and would not require
advance payment.
2. Those individuals without a municipal account history would be required to submit a credit
report. Those individuals with a score of 600 or higher would be considered in “good standing”
and would not require advance payment.
One (1) Month Prepayment Required
1. Those individuals with a history of 1-5 late payments in the last 12 billing cycles of their
municipal utilities account would be required to pay in advance the value of their estimated first
bill, including any taxes, fees and one (1) time charges.
2. Those individuals without a municipal account history would be required to submit a credit
report. Those individuals with a score of 500 to 599 would be required to pay in advance the
value of their estimated first bill, including any taxes, fees and one time charges.
Three (3) Months Prepayment Required
1. Those individuals with a history of six (6) or more late payments in the last twelve (12) billing
cycles of their municipal utilities account would be required to pay in advance the value of their
estimated first bill plus two (2) additional billing cycles, including any taxes, fees and one time
charges.
2. Those individuals without a municipal account history would be required to submit a credit
report. Those individuals with a score below 500 would be required to pay in advance the value
of their estimated first bill plus two (2) additional billing cycles, including any taxes, fees and one
time charges.
58.02 NON-PAYMENT DISCONNECT
Auburn Essential Services will issue billing in coordination with the City of Auburn Utility Billing Office.
Payment Due Date
1. Payment for billed services shall be due and owed to the City of
2. Auburn, Indiana within nineteen (19) days of the issuance of said invoice (if the 19th day falls on
a day in which the billing office is closed, the invoice will be due the next business day).
Late Payment Penalty
1. A ten (10%) percent penalty shall be applied one (1) day after due date for an invoice that
remains unpaid.
2. Customers shall be eligible for one (1) penalty waiver every thirty-six (36) months of service.
Customers that experience service payment hardship after falling victim to a crime, serious illness
or accident, or natural disaster can request special payment arrangements with the AES Billing
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 58-4
Auburn Essential Services Billing Procedures
CHAPTER 58
Office. Upon the definition of payment terms, the customer may be exempt from penalty during the
life of said terms.
Notice of Late Payment / Disconnect
1. AES, by and in coordination with the City of Auburn Municipal Utility Office, shall issue a Late
Payment / Disconnect Notice two (2) days after due date for an invoice that remains unpaid.
Service Disconnect
1. The customer shall have fourteen (14) days after original due date to make said account
current, and if the customer fails to make the account current, the services shall be
disconnected.
2. A disconnect fee of $35 shall be charged at the time of disconnect.
3. Customers shall be eligible for one (1) disconnect fee waiver every thirty-six (36) months of
service.
58.03 CUSTOMER INFORMATION
AES customers shall provide their full name, current address, phone number, date of birth, driver’s license
number, and social security number upon registering for services. Said information shall be kept confidential
and only be used in the regular course of AES business services. Applicants that do not own the home or
building that is to receive service must acquire approval from the landlord before AES will perform
installation.
58.04 MULTIPLE CANCELLATIONS OF SERVICE
For any customer who has previously cancelled Auburn Essential Services (AES) with less than 24 months
of service provided, and thereafter requests to reconnect, AES will charge up to a $600.00 early cancellation
fee for any future cancellation that takes place within two (2) years of the most recent reconnection.
However, each month that the reconnected customer remains connected to AES, this cancellation fee shall
be reduced at the rate of $25.00 per month for each month the customer remains connected. After 24
months, the cancellation fee will not apply.
At the time of the reconnection, AES must advise the customer of the possible cancellation fee. The
cancellation charges shall be required for the purpose of recovering the cost of installation, materials,
equipment, and other dedicated investments made for the benefit of the customer. This cancellation charge
shall not apply to individuals who move out of the AES service area.
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
PEDESTRIANS
CHAPTER 73
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 73-2
PEDESTRIANS
CHAPTER 73
Table of Contents
73.01 CROSSWALKS
73.02 CROSSING AT RIGHT ANGLES
73.03 OBEDIENCE OF PEDESTRIANS TO RAILROAD SIGNALS
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 73-3
PEDESTRIANS
CHAPTER 73
73.01 CROSSWALKS
No pedestrian shall cross a roadway, other than in a crosswalk in any business district.
73.02 CROSSING AT RIGHT ANGLES
Except where otherwise indicated by a crosswalk or other official traffic-control devices, a pedestrian shall
cross a roadway at right angles to the roadway or by the shortest route to the opposite side.
73.03 OBEDIENCE OF PEDESTRIANS TO RAILROAD SIGNALS
No pedestrian shall pass through, around, over, or under any crossing gate or barrier at a railroad grade
crossing while such gate or barrier is closed or is being opened or closed.
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
STOPPING, STANDING,
AND PARKING
CHAPTER 72
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 72-2
STOPPING, STANDING, AND PARKING
CHAPTER 72
Table of Contents
72.01 APPLICATION OF ARTICLE
72.02 PARKING SIGNS REQUIRED
72.03 PARKING NOT TO OBSTRUCT TRAFFIC
72.04 PARKING RESTRICTED IN ALLEYS
72.05 PARKING FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES PROHIBITED
72.06 OBEDIENCE TO PARKING SIGNS OR MARKINGS
72.07 TRUCK AND BUS PARKING RESTRICTED
72.08 STANDING OR PARKING PROHIBITED OFF ROADWAY
72.09 STANDING OR PARKING PROHIBITED AT ALLEYS
72.10 PARKING RESTRICTED IN BUSINESS DISTRICT
72.11 NO LEFT-OF-CENTER PARKING; EXCEPTION
72.12 STANDING IN LOADING ZONE
72.13 STANDING OR PARKING WITHIN 20 FEET OF FIRE HYDRANT
72.14 HANDICAP PARKING
72.15 YELLOW LINE PARKING OR STANDING PROHIBITED
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 72-3
STOPPING, STANDING, AND PARKING
CHAPTER 72
72.01 APPLICATION OF ARTICLE
The provisions of this chapter and Chapter 76 prohibiting the standing or parking of a vehicle shall
apply at all times or at those times herein specified or as indicated on official signs, except when it
is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions
of a police officer or official traffic-control device.
The provisions of this chapter and Chapter 76 imposing a time limit on parking shall not relieve any
person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions prohibiting or limiting the
stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified times.
72.02 PARKING SIGNS REQUIRED
Whenever, by this traffic code or any other ordinance of the city, any parking time limit is imposed or parking
is prohibited on designated streets, it shall be the duty of the City Council to approve appropriate signs
giving notice thereof and for the Street Department to erect the signs. No such regulations shall be effective
unless the signs are erected and in place at the time of any alleged offense. The City may supplement
parking signage by keeping a master list of new signs. The list shall be periodically codified in this code.
72.03 PARKING NOT TO OBSTRUCT TRAFFIC
No person shall park a vehicle upon a street, other than an alley in such a manner or under such conditions
as to leave available less than ten feet of the width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic. No
person shall block the private driveway of a resident in the City of Auburn. No person shall obstruct a public
sidewalk with any vehicle and/or trailer. Individuals parking shall park within 12 inches of the curb or edge of
pavement, in accordance with Indiana Code.
72.04 PARKING RESTRICTED IN ALLEYS
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stop, stand, or park a vehicle in any alley for a period of
time longer than is necessary for the loading or unloading of passengers or freight. No vehicle shall stand or
park in any alley for any such purpose so as to leave available less than eight feet of the width of the alley
for the free movement of traffic or if less than eight feet of the width of the alley is available, the operator of
the parked or standing vehicle shall immediately move it upon the approach of another vehicle.
72.05 PARKING FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES PROHIBITED
No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway for the principal purpose of displaying the vehicle for sale,
greasing, or repairing the vehicle except repairs necessitated by an emergency.
72.06 OBEDIENCE TO PARKING SIGNS OR MARKINGS
In those locations that have been officially signed or marked for parking on the streets or in municipal
parking lots, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than within any parking space and at the
orientation indicated by the signs or markings.
72.07 TRUCK AND BUS PARKING RESTRICTED
Residential district
1. No person owning, leasing, possessing, or operating a truck larger than a pickup truck, any type
of detached trailer, bus, recreational vehicle, tractor, tractor-trailer, or boat shall be permitted to
park the same upon any street or alley within the residential district of the corporate limits of the
city. However, the vehicles may park for a sufficient time to make deliveries or pick up
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 72-4
STOPPING, STANDING, AND PARKING
CHAPTER 72
merchandise, provided such parking does not interrupt the regular flow of traffic and does not
create a hazard for the safety of others.
Business District
1. In the business district, no truck larger than a pickup truck, any type of detached trailer, bus,
recreational vehicle, tractor, tractor-trailer, or boat shall park upon any street or alley within the
corporate limits of the city longer than one hour. However, the vehicles may park for sufficient
time to make deliveries or pick up merchandise in the regular course of business provided such
parking does not interrupt the regular flow of traffic and does not create a hazard for the safety
of others and provided such parking complies with all other parking regulations in force in the
city.
72.08 STANDING OR PARKING PROHIBITED OFF ROADWAY
No person shall stand or park a vehicle on a street other than on the roadway or paved shoulder.
72.09 STANDING OR PARKING PROHIBITED AT ALLEYS
No person shall stand or park a vehicle on a street in any manner which would restrict full access to any
alley.
72.10 PARKING RESTRICTED IN BUSINESS DISTRICT
No person shall park a vehicle for a period longer than 12 consecutive hours in a business district without
authorization of the Chief of Police or a designee of the Chief of Police.
72.11 NO LEFT-OF-CENTER PARKING; EXCEPTION
No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle left of the center of the roadway except where parking space
is provided on a one-way street.
72.12 STANDING IN LOADING ZONE
No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle for any purpose or period of time other than for the expeditious
loading or unloading of passengers or materials, in any place marked as a loading zone during hours and
days when the regulations applicable to the curb loading zone are effective and then only for a period not to
exceed three minutes for passengers or 20 minutes for materials.
72.13 STANDING OR PARKING WITHIN 20 FEET OF FIRE HYDRANT
No person shall park or stand any vehicle within 20 feet of a fire hydrant except for emergency vehicles.
72.14 HANDICAP PARKING
On-street handicap parking spaces shall not be less than State of Indiana standards and statutes or
Federal ADA Title II or Title III standards. The number of places in a parking district shall be
determined by the Board of Public Works and Safety and the Street Commissioner and they will
determine the placement of the parking places within the parking district. The Street Department
will place signage and paint places clearly identifying the handicap parking spaces.
No person shall park or stand any vehicle in a designated handicap parking space except with a
handicap place card or handicap license plate issued by the State of Indiana or any other State of
the Union Authority. A Violation of this provision is punishable by either Indiana Code as a Class C
Infraction / and or by the Ordinance in a fine of no less than $100
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 72-5
STOPPING, STANDING, AND PARKING
CHAPTER 72
72.15 YELLOW LINE PARKING OR STANDING PROHIBITED
No person shall park or stand any vehicle at any location designated with a yellow curb marking or
painting.
The Street Department, with approval of the Board of Works, shall so designate those areas to be
marked as no parking-yellow line.
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
BICYCLES
CHAPTER 74
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 74-2
BICYCLES
CHAPTER 74
Table of Contents
74.01 EFFECT OF REGULATIONS
74.02 BICYCLE DEALERS
74.03 TRAFFIC RULES APPLY TO PERSONS RIDING BICYCLES
74.04 PARKING
74.05 RIDING ON SIDEWALKS
74.06 RIDING ON ROADWAYS, TRAILS, AND BICYCLE PATHS
74.07 ATTACHING BICYCLE TO POLES
74.99 PENALTY
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 74-3
BICYCLES
CHAPTER 74
74.01 EFFECT OF REGULATIONS
(Repealed, Ord. 2010-03, passed 2-16-10)
74.02 BICYCLE DEALERS
(Repealed, Ord. 2010-03, passed 2-16-10)
74.03 TRAFFIC RULES APPLY TO PERSONS RIDING BICYCLES
Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be granted all of the rights and be subject to all of the
duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by this traffic code, except as to special regulations in this chapter
and except as to those provisions of this traffic code which, by their nature, can have no application.
74.04 PARKING
No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon the roadway against the curb, or upon the
sidewalk in a rack to support the bicycle, or against a building, or at the curb in such a manner as to afford
the least obstruction to pedestrian traffic.
74.05 RIDING ON SIDEWALKS
No person shall ride a bicycle, skateboard, roller skates, or in-line skates upon a sidewalk within an
area zoned as downtown commercial, except for on designated trails or paths.
Whenever any person is riding a bicycle, skateboard, roller skates, or in-line skates upon a
sidewalk, trail, or path, the person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and give an audible
signal before overtaking and passing the pedestrian.
74.06 RIDING ON ROADWAYS, TRAILS, AND BICYCLE PATHS
Every person operating a bicycle, skateboard, roller skates, or in-line skates upon a roadway shall
ride as near to the right side of the roadway as practicable, exercising due care when passing a
standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction.
Wherever a usable path for bicycles has been provided adjacent to a roadway, bicyclists,
skateboarders, roller skaters, or in-line skaters shall use the path and shall not use the roadway.
A person operating a bicycle, skateboard, roller skates, or in-line skates upon a roadway may not
ride more than two abreast except on paths or parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of
bicycles.
Any bicycle operated on a public street or highway one-half hour before sunup until one-half hour
after sundown must be equipped with the following:
1. A lamp on the front exhibiting a white light visible from a distance of at least 500 feet to the
front.
2. A lamp on the rear exhibiting a red light visible from a distance of at least 500 feet to the rear or
a red reflector visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear.
Any skateboarder, roller skater, or in-line skater on a public street or highway from one-half hour
after sunset until one-half hour before sunrise must wear light-colored or reflective clothing visible
from all directions.
74.07 ATTACHING BICYCLE TO POLES
Any person may park near and secure to any publicly owned pole or post for a period of not more than 12
consecutive hours, unless an official traffic-control device or any applicable law or ordinance prohibits
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 74-4
BICYCLES
CHAPTER 74
parking or securing bicycles at that location. No bicycle shall be secured to any tree, fire hydrant. No
bicycle shall be secured in any manner so as to impede the normal and reasonable movement of pedestrian
or other traffic.
74.99 PENALTY
Every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punished by a fine of not more
than $5 or by impounding of the person's bicycle for a period not to exceed 30 days or by any combination
thereof.
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 75
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 75-2
TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 75
Table of Contents
SCHEDULE I. ALTERING STATE SPEED LIMITS ON CERTAIN STREET SEGMENTS
SCHEDULE II. LIMITATIONS ON TURNING AROUND
SCHEDULE III. ONE- WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS
SCHEDULE IV. MULTI- WAY STOP INTERSECTIONS
SCHEDULE V. STOP STREETS
SCHEDULE VI. TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNALS
SCHEDULE VII. YIELD STREETS
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 75-3
TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 75
SCHEDULE I. ALTERING STATE SPEED LIMITS ON CERTAIN STREET SEGMENTS
It is hereby determined, upon the basis of a traffic engineering investigation that the speed permitted by state law on
the following streets or portions thereof is different than is reasonable and safe under the conditions found to exist
upon such segments. It is hereby declared that the maximum speed limit on these segments herein designated shall
be as herein stated, which speeds so declared shall be effective at the times specified herein when signs are erected
giving notice.
Street Location Maximum
Speed
When Applicable
Auburn Dr. I-69 Bridge to East City Limits 35 mph All Times
Auburn Dr. Co Rd 19 to I-69 Bridge 45 mph All Times
Center St. South City Limits to Old Brick Rd. 35 mph All Times
Eckhart St. Essex Dr. to 7th St. 20 mph When Children Present
(School)
Grandstaff Dr.
North
7th St. to North St. 30 mph All Times
Grandstaff Dr.
South
7th St. to Auburn Dr. 30 mph All Times
South Indiana
Ave.
11th St. to 15th St. 20 mph When Children Present
(School)
North Indiana Ave Betz Rd. to City limits 45 mph All Times
Main St. Betz Rd. to City Limits 45mph All Times
Main St. Van Buren St. to Betz Rd. 35 mph All Times
Morningstar East Cedar Creek to County Rd.
35
30 mph All Times
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 75-4
TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 75
North St. Indiana Ave to North
Grandstaff Dr.
35 mph All Times
Van Buren St. 11th St. to 15th St. 20 mph When Children Present
(School)
12th St. Indiana Ave. to Van Buren St. 20 mph When Children Present
(School)
14th St. Van Buren St. to Indiana Ave. 20 mph When Children Present
(School)
15th St. Hazel St. to Touring Dr. 30 mph All Times
SCHEDULE II. LIMITATIONS ON TURNING AROUND
The City Council is hereby authorized to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a
right, left, or U-turn, and shall place proper signs at such intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited
between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event the same shall be plainly indicated on
the signs, or they may be removed when such turns are permitted. The restricted maneuvers listed as follows:
Street Direction Cross Restricted When
Cedar St. Northbound Carlin St. No Left Turn All Times
Cedar St. Northbound 2nd St. No Left Turn All Times
Cedar St. Northbound W 4th St. No Left Turn All Times
Cedar St. Northbound 5th St. No Right Turn All Times
Cedar St. Northbound 6th St. No Left Turn All Times
Cedar St. Southbound Carlin St. No Right Turn All Times
Cedar St. Southbound 2nd St. No Right Turn All Times
Cedar St. Southbound 4th St. No Right Turn All Times
Cedar St. Southbound 5th St. No Left Turn All Times
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 75-5
TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 75
Cedar St. Southbound 6th St. No Right Turn All Times
Indiana Ave. Northbound 14th St. No Right Turn All Times
Indiana Ave. Southbound 14th St. No Left Turn All Times
Jackson St. Northbound 4th St. No Left Turn All Times
Jackson St. Northbound 5th St. No Right Turn All Times
Jackson St. Northbound 6th St. No Left Turn All Times
Jackson St. Southbound 4th St. No Right Turn All Times
Jackson St. Southbound 5th St. No Left Turn All Times
Jackson St. Southbound 6th St. No Right Turn All Times
Main St. Northbound 4th St. No Left Turn All Times
Main St. Northbound 5th St. No Right Turn All Times
Main St. Northbound 6th St. No Left Turn All Times
Main St. Southbound 4th St. No Right Turn All Times
Main St. Southbound 5th St. No Left Turn All Times
Main St. Southbound 6th St. No Right Turn All Times
Union St. Northbound Carlin St. No Left Turn All Times
Union St. Northbound 4th St. No Left Turn All Times
Union St. Northbound 6th St. No Left Turn All Times
Union St. Southbound Carlin St. No Right Turn All Times
Union St. Southbound 4th St. No Right Turn All Times
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 75-6
TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 75
Union St. Southbound 6th St. No Right Turn All Times
Van Buren St. Northbound 5th St. No Right Turn All Times
Van Buren St. Southbound 5th St. No Left Turn All Times
SCHEDULE III. ONE- WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS
The City Council is hereby authorized to determine and designate one-way streets or alleys and
shall place and maintain official traffic-control devices giving notice thereof. No such designation
shall be effective unless such devices are in place.
The following street or alley segments shall be designated as one-way.
Street or Alley Location Direction of Travel
Carlin St. Main St. to Union St. Eastbound
2nd St. From Main St. to Cedar St. Eastbound
4th St. From Van Buren St. to Union St. Eastbound
5th St. From Van Buren St. to Union St. Westbound
6th St. From Van Buren St. to Union St. Eastbound
12th St. From Indiana Ave. to McKenney-Harrison
parking lot
Eastbound
14th St. From Indiana Ave. to McKenney-Harrison
parking lot
Westbound
SCHEDULE IV. MULTI- WAY STOP INTERSECTIONS
When signs are erected giving notice thereof, all streets at the following intersections shall be stop streets. Drivers of
all vehicles shall stop, as required by state law, before entering the described intersection.
Multi-way Stop Intersections
• Allison Dr. and Duesenberg Dr.
• Auburn Dr. and Center St.
• Auburn Dr. and Old Brick Rd.
• Cedar St. and 9th St.
• Center St. and 19th St.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 75-7
TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 75
• Cleveland St. and 1st St.
• Dewey St. and Duesenberg Dr.
• Duesenberg Dr. and Ashwood Dr.
• Ensley Ave., Cedar St., Park Dr.,and to Private St.
• Ensley Ave and Van Buren St.
• Indiana Ave. and 11th St.
• Indiana Ave. and 15th St.
• Iwo St. and McIntyre Dr.
• North St. and Indiana Ave
• North St. and Van Buren St.
• North St. and Grandstaff Dr.
• Olmstead and Smaltz Way
• Superior Dr. and Eckhart Ave
• Touring Dr. and 15th St.
• Union St. and 18th St.
• 1st St. and Union St.
• 7th St. and County Rd. 35
• Chandler Way and Greyson Dr.
• Shook Dr. and Lenora Ln.
All other intersections as accepted by the City and approved by the appropriate development plan, shall be identified
with appropriate stop signage and incorporated into this Ordinance by reference. The City of Auburn shall keep a list
of said multi-way stop intersections within the records of the City of Auburn, Indiana. This Ordinance shall be updated
in the future to incorporate additional stop signs. The placement of stop signs by the City, in all cases,
whether identified by development plan or otherwise shall be considered an official notification to the public and
controlling traffic regulation, as long as it can be reasonably established that the sign was placed by a government
official.
SCHEDULE V. STOP STREETS
When signs are erected giving notice thereof, the streets at the following intersections shall be stop streets. Drivers of
all vehicles on those streets shall stop, as required by state law, before entering the described intersections.
Stop Street Cross Street
Alley between Clark and Dewey 7th St.
Allison Blvd. Dewey St
Ace Ct. Fairway Dr.
Approach Dr. Fairway Dr.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 75-8
TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 75
Ashwood Dr. (westbound) Old Brick Rd.
Ashwood Dr. (both) Elm St.
Junction Dr. (northbound) Auburn Dr.
Autumn Lane Elm St.
Baron Ct. Lakeview Dr.
Barrington Dr. Chandler Way
Baxter St. 1st St.
Baxter St. 7th St.
Baxter St. 9th St.
Bent Tree Ct. (northbound) Morningstar Rd.
Betz Rd. (eastbound) N Main St.
Betz Rd. (both) N Indiana Ave
Birch Run Dr. (northbound) Ashwood Dr.
Bogey Ct. Approach Dr.
Boxcar Ln. (northbound) Ensley Ave
Bradford Dr. Betz Rd.
Brandon St. Michigan Ave. (multiple)
Brentwood Cir. (westbound) Greenbriar Blvd.
Bunker Ct. (westbound) Virginia Lane
Canyon Dr. (eastbound) Glen Hollow Dr.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 75-9
TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 75
Canyon Dr. (westbound) Loraine Dr.
Cardinal St. (westbound) Grandstaff Dr.
Carlin St. Cedar St.
Carlin St. Union St.
Castle Ct. Dewey St.
Cedar Ct. Allison Blvd.
Cedar St. (northbound) Main St.
Cedar St. (northbound) Washington St.
Center St. 9th St.
Center St. (northbound) 7th St.
Cherokee Ct. Portage Pass
Cherry Ln. (northbound) Allison Blvd.
Chestnut Ct. Ashwood Dr.
Clark St. 1st St.
Clark St. 7th St.
Cleveland St. J.R. Watson Parking Lot
Cleveland St. 7th St.
Clinton St. (westbound) Main St.
Clinton St. Cedar St.
Clinton St. Union St.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 75-10
TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 75
Columbine Ct. (westbound) Greenbriar Blvd.
Cord Place (eastbound) Iwo St.
County Rd. 31 (northbound) Auburn Dr.
County Rd. 36 (both) N Main St.
County Rd. 36A Indiana Ave.
Coventry Ln. (westbound) C.R. 46 A
Coventry Ln. Chandler Way
Cree Ct. (southbound) Superior Dr.
Culbertson Ct. (northbound) McIntyre Dr.
Dallas St. DeKalb Ave.
Dallas St. 20th St.
Dallas St. (both) Helen St.
Dallas St. (Southbound) Auburn Dr.
Dallas St. (Southbound) Ensley Ave
Davidson Ct. Allison Blvd
DeKalb Ave. (eastbound) Indiana Ave.
Dennison Ln. (northbound) McIntyre Dr.
Depot St. (northbound) 5th St.
Depot St. (southbound) 7th St.
Desoto Ct. (westbound) Iwo St.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 75-11
TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 75
Dewey St. (northbound) Morningstar Rd.
Dewey St. Superior Dr.
Dewey St. 7th St.
Dewey St. 7th St.
Diehl Dr. (northbound) Auburn Dr.
Division St. 1st St.
Division St. 7th St.
Division St. 9th St.
Division St. (northbound) 1st St.
Division St. (southbound) 15th St.
Doris Dr. Betz Rd.
Douglas St. (northbound) North St.
Douglas St. (southbound) Michigan Ave.
Duesenberg Dr. (southbound) Auburn Dr.
Duplex Dr. (eastbound) County Rd. 35
Duryea Dr. (eastbound) Greenhaven Terr.
Eagle Lake Dr. Auburn Dr.
Eckhart Ave. (both) Phaeton Way
Eckhart Ave. (southbound) 7th St.
Elaine St. (eastbound) County Rd 35
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 75-12
TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 75
Elaine St. (westbound) Virginia Lane
Elm St. Duesenberg Dr.
Elm St. (southbound) Auburn Dr.
Ensley Ave. (eastbound) Jackson St.
Ensley Ave. (westbound) Jackson St.
Ensley Ave. (westbound) Main St.
Ensley Ave. (both) Grandstaff Dr.
Erie Pass Superior Dr.
Erie Pass (northbound) Portage Pass
Erie Pass (southbound) Wesley Rd.
Essex Dr. Eckhart Ave.
Essex Dr. Phaeton Way
Fairview (northbound) Betz Road
Fairview (southbound) Worth Road
Fairway Drive Morningstar Road
Foley Ct. Lakeview Dr.
Fox Trail Hunters Ridge
Fulton St. (both) State Road 8
Fulton St. (both) 9th St.
Fulton St. (southbound) 11th St.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 75-13
TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 75
Garwood Dr. Elm St.
Garwood Dr. (northbound) McIntyre Dr.
Gates Cove Main St.
Glen Hollow Dr. (southbound) Betz Rd.
Golden Hawk Dr. Essex Dr.
Gordon M. Buehring Pl. (westbound) Wayne St.
Grandstaff Dr. Auburn Dr.
Grandstaff Dr. (northbound) North St.
Greenbriar Blvd. 1st St.
Greenhaven Terr. 1st St.
Greenhurst Ct. (westbound) N Main St.
Griswold Ct. Old Brick Road
Greg St. Grandstaff Dr.
Hafner St. (southbound) 1st St.
Harrison St. Cedar St.
Harrison St. (eastbound) Union St.
Harrison St. (westbound) Main St.
Hawthorne Pl. Greenhaven Terr.
Hawthorne Ct. Greenbriar Blvd.
Hayden Dr (westbound) Chandler Way
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 75-14
TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 75
Hazel St. 20th St.
Hazel St. (northbound) 15th St.
Hazel St. (southbound) DeKalb Ave.
Hazel St. (southbound) Ensley Ave.
Helen Ave. (eastbound) Indiana Ave.
Hiawatha Pl. (eastbound) Erie Pass
Hickory Hollow (northbound) Ashwood Dr.
Hidden Creek Dr. Deer Ridge Crossing
Hideaway Dr. (northbound) Elaine St.
Hideaway Dr. (both) Timber Trace
Highland Ave. Dewey St.
Highland Ave. (eastbound) Duesenberg Dr.
Hillside Pl. (eastbound) Northgate Blvd.
Hunters Ct. Hunters Ridge
Hunters Cove (eastbound) CR 35
Hunters Ridge 7th St.
Huron Way (southbound) Superior Dr.
Indiana Ave. Ensley Ave.
Indiana Ave. (southbound) Auburn Dr.
Iwo St. (northbound) 7th St.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 75-15
TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 75
Iwo St. (southbound) Old Brick Rd.
Jacob St. Auburn Dr.
Allery Extension between Jacob St. and
Wayne St.
Wayne St.
Jackson St. (southbound) Ensley Ave.
Jackson St. (northbound) North St.
Jefferson St. Main St.
Jefferson St. Midway Dr.
Jefferson St. Van Buren St.
Junction Dr. (northbound) Auburn Dr.
Katherine St. (northbound) Elaine St.
Katherine St. (southbound) McNair Ln.
Kiblinger Pl. Iwo St.
La Forge Ln. (southbound) Southgate Blvd.
Lake Shore Ave. (southbound) 20th St.
Lakeshore Ensley Ave.
Lakeview Dr. Dewey St.
Lakeview Dr. (southbound) Sanders Dr.
Lincoln St. Sprott St.
Lincoln St. (eastbound) Wayne St.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 75-16
TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 75
Lincoln St. (westbound) Indiana Ave.
Loraine Dr. (northbound) Willard Dr.
Loraine Dr. (southbound) Betz R.
Lori Lea St. Elaine St.
Madison St. (westbound) Main St.
Maple Dr. Auburn Dr.
Mark Dr. (westbound) Dewey St.
Mathew Cove Main St.
Maxwell Pl. (eastbound) Iwo St.
McClellan St. 7th St.
McClellan St. 9th St.
McClellan St. (northbound) 1st. St.
McNair Ln. Virginia Ln.
McIntyre Dr. (eastbound) Duesenberg Dr.
Melony Ln. (southbound) Roger Dr.
Michigan Ave. Indiana Ave.
Michigan Ave. (eastbound) Van Buren St.
Michigan Ave. (westbound) Brandon Dr.
Midway Dr. (northbound) Van Buren St.
Midway Dr. (southbound) North St.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 75-17
TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 75
Morningstar Rd. (eastbound) CR 35
Morningstar Rd. (westbound) Main St.
Murfield Cr. (westbound) Eckhart Ave.
Naomi St. Clark St.
Naomi St. (eastbound) Dewey St.
Naomi St. (westbound) Eckhart St.
Navarre Ct. (southbound) Zona Dr.
Nicholas St. (westbound) Dewey St.
Nicholas St. (eastbound) Wesley Rd.
North entrance of mobile home park
(eastbound)
Grandstaff Dr.
North St. (eastbound) Main St.
North St. (westbound) Grandstaff Dr.
Northgate Blvd. (northbound) CR 36
Oak Chase (northbound) Ashwood Dr.
Ohio St. 20th St.
Ohio St. (northbound) 19th St.
Ohio St. (southbound) Ensley Ave.
Old Briar Trail Timber Trace
Old Briar Trail Virginia Lane
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 75-18
TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 75
Old Briar Trail McNair Lane
Katherine St. (southbound) McNair Lane
Ontario Ln. Portage Pass
Ontario Ln. Ontario Ct.
Orchard Dr. (eastbound) N Indiana Ave.
Oren Dr. Grandstaff Dr.
Packard Pl. Phaeton Way
Park Place Dewey St.
Park Ave. Ensley Ave.
Pearl St. (northbound) 19th St.
Pearl St. (southbound) 20th St.
Pearse Ave. (northbound) Prospect Ave.
Pearse Ave. (southbound) North St.
Peckart Ct. (southbound) St. Rd. 8
Pennsylvania Ave. (southbound) Ensley Ave.
Pheasant Run Ct. Portage Pass
Phaeton Way (both) Dewey St.
Phillip St. DeKalb Ave.
Phillip St. Helen Ave.
Phillip St. (southbound) Auburn Dr.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 75-19
TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 75
Phillip St. (southbound) Ensley Ave.
Phillip St. (northbound) 11th St.
Phillip St. 15th St.
Phillip St. 20th St.
Portage Pass Huron Way
Portage Pass Wesley Rd.
Power Dr. Oren Dr.
Prestwick Way (eastbound) Dewey St.
Private St. (eastbound) Touring Dr.
Private St. (northbound) Auburn Dr. / Grandstaff Dr.
Private St. (westbound) Grandstaff Dr.
Proper Pass Approach Dr.
Prospect St. Midway Dr.
Prospect St. (eastbound) Main St.
Prospect St. (westbound) Van Buren St.
Quail Run Portage Pass
Quinten Dr. (northbound) Auburn Dr.
Quinten Dr. (westbound) Greyson Dr.
Railroad St. (southbound) Michigan Ave.
Rathert Ct. Glen Hollow Dr.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 75-20
TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 75
Riviera Ct. (eastbound) Allison Blvd.
Rohm Dr. Touring Dr.
Rohm Dr. Ley Dr.
Roger Dr. (westbound) Dewey St.
Roselawn Circle (westbound) Center St.
Sanders Dr. Duesenberg Dr.
Seneca Ct. (eastbound) Huron Way
Shawnee Ct. Huron Way
Shull St. 17th St.
Shull St. (northbound) 16th St.
Shull St. (southbound) 19th St.
Shook Dr. Smaltz Way
Smaltz Way (northbound) St. Rd. 8
Smith Drive (northbound) Wesley
Southgate Blvd. (southbound) Betz Rd.
Sprott St. Walnut St.
Sprott St. (northbound) 20th St.
Sprott St. (northbound) Auburn Dr.
Sprott St. (southbound) Ensley Ave.
St. Andrews Pl. (southbound) Phaeton Way
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 75-21
TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 75
Steeple Chase Dr. (eastbound) Hunters Ridge
Steeple Chase Dr. (southbound) Thoroughbred Lane
Summerwood Circle (eastbound) Duesenberg Dr.
Summerset Ridge Dr. (westbound) County Road 46A
Summerset Ridge Dr. Chandler Way
Sycamore Cr. (eastbound) Duesenberg Dr.
Tecumseh Ct. (southbound) Superior Dr.
Thomas Park St. (westbound) Cedar St.
Timer Trace Virginia Ln.
Trail Rd. Hidden Creek Dr.
Trail Rd. Portage Pass
Trail Rd. Wood Hollow Trail
Troon Ct. (southbound) Turn Berry Ln.
Turn Berry Ln. (westbound) Dewey St.
Union St. 7th St.
Union St. 9th St.
Union St. 19th St.
Alley extension between S Union St.
and S. Cedar St. south of 19th St.
Cedar St.
Urban Ave. 20th St.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 75-22
TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 75
Urban Ave. (southbound) Ensley Ave.
Valley Park Dr. Dewey St.
Van Auken St. (southbound) 14th St.
Van Buren St. (eastbound) Main St.
Van Buren St. (southbound) Wayne St.
Virginia Ln. (northbound) Morningstar Rd.
Virginia Ln. Portage Pass
Walden Rd. (northbound) Betz Rd.
Walden Rd. (southbound) Worth Rd.
Walker Ct. (northbound) McIntyre Dr.
Walnut St. (eastbound) Van Buren St.
Washington St. Cedar St.
Washington St. (westbound) Main St.
West Edge Park St. (southbound) St. Rd. 8
West St. 7th St.
Willard Dr. (southbound) Canyon Dr.
Willard Dr. (westbound) N Indiana Ave
William St. (eastbound) Wayne St.
William St. (westbound) Sprott St.
Willow Run Dr. (northbound) Allison Blvd.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 75-23
TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 75
Wilson St. 9th St.
Wilson St. (northbound) 7th St.
Wilson St. (southbound) 11th St.
Witt Dr. (westbound) Smith Dr.
Wood Hollow Tr. Deer Ridge Crossing
Wood Hollow Tr. Portage Pass
Woods Ave. North St.
Yukon Pass LaForge Lane
Zimmerman Dr. (northbound) Iwo St.
Zona Dr. (eastbound) Allison Blvd
Zona Dr. (eastbound) Dewy St.
1st St. Cedar St.
1st St. Eckhart St.
1st St. Jackson St.
1st St. Main St.
1st St. Van Buren St.
1st St. (eastbound) Dewey St.
2nd St. Cedar St.
2nd St. Jackson St.
2nd St. (both) Union St.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 75-24
TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 75
2nd St. Van Buren St.
2nd St. (eastbound) Main St.
2nd St. (westbound) Indiana Ave.
3rd St. Baxter St.
3rd St. Cedar St.
3rd St. Cleveland St.
3rd St. Division St.
3rd St. Jackson St.
3rd St. Main St.
3rd St. Van Buren St.
3rd St. (eastbound) Eckhart St.
3rd St. (eastbound) Union St.
3rd St. (westbound) McClellan St.
3rd St. (westbound) Union St.
4th St. (eastbound) Cedar St.
4th St. (eastbound) Jackson St.
4th St. (eastbound) Main St.
4th St. (eastbound) Union St.
4th St. (eastbound) Van Buren St.
4th St. (westbound) Indiana Ave.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 75-25
TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 75
4th St. (westbound) Union St.
5th St. Baxter St.
5th St. Cleveland St.
5th St. Indiana Ave.
5th St. Van Buren St.
5th St. Eckhart St.
5th St. (eastbound) Jackson St.
5th St. (westbound) Main St.
5th St. (westbound) Brandon St.
5th St. (westbound) Cedar St.
5th St. (westbound) Division St.
6th St. (eastbound) Cedar St.
6th St. (eastbound) Jackson St.
6th St. (eastbound) Main St.
6th St. (eastbound) Union St.
6th St. (eastbound) Van Buren St.
6th St. (westbound) Union St.
Alley extension of 8th St. between Van
Buren St. and Indiana Ave. (westbound)
Indiana Ave.
Alley extension of 8th St. between Van
Buren St. and Indiana Ave. (eastbound)
Van Buren Ave.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 75-26
TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 75
8th St. (both) S Indiana Ave.
8th St. Jackson St.
8th St. Union St.
8th St. (eastbound) Main St.
8th St. (westbound) Cedar St.
8th St. (westbound) Van Buren St.
9th St. Indiana Ave.
9th St. Jackson St.
9th St. Van Buren St.
9th St. (eastbound) Cleveland St.
9th St. (westbound) West St.
10th St. Cedar St.
10th St. Jackson St.
10th St. Main St.
10th St. Union St.
10th St. Van Buren St.
11th St. Cedar St.
11th St. Jackson St.
11th St. Main St.
11th St. Van Buren St.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 75-27
TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 75
11th St. (eastbound) McClellan St.
11th St. (eastbound) Union St.
12th St. Cedar St.
12th St. Jackson St.
12th St. Main St.
12th St. (eastbound) Union St.
12th St. Van Buren St.
13th St. Cedar St.
13th St. (eastbound) Indiana Ave.
13th St. Jackson St.
13th St. Main St.
13th St. (westbound) Phillip St.
13th St. (eastbound) Union St.
13th St. (westbound) Van Auken St.
13th St. Van Buren St.
14th St. (westbound) Cedar St.
14th St. (westbound) Indiana Ave.
14th St. Jackson St.
14th St. (eastbound) Main St.
14th St. Union St.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 75-28
TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 75
14th St. Van Buren St.
15th St. Cedar St.
15th St. (westbound) Center St.
15th St. Jackson St.
15th St. Main St.
15th St. (eastbound) Union St.
15th St. Van Buren St.
Alley extension of 16th St. between
Indiana Ave. and Van Buren St.
(westbound)
Indiana Ave.
16th St. Cedar St.
16th St. Jackson St.
16th St. Main St.
16th St. / Alley Van Buren St.
16th St. (eastbound) Union St.
17th St. Cedar St.
17th St. Jackson St.
17th St. Main St.
17th St. Van Buren St.
17th St. (eastbound) Union St.
17th St. (westbound) Indiana Ave.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 75-29
TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 75
18th St. Cedar St.
18th St. Jackson St.
18th St. Main St.
18th St. (westbound) Van Buren St.
19th St. Cedar St.
19th St. Indiana Ave.
19th St. Jackson St.
19th St. Main St.
19th St. Van Buren St.
19th St. (eastbound) Phillip St.
20th St. Indiana Ave.
20th St. Van Buren St.
20th St. (eastbound) Jackson St.
21st St. Phillip St.
21st St. (eastbound) Indiana Ave.
21st St. (eastbound) Dallas St.
22nd St. (eastbound) Dallas St.
22nd St. (westbound) Hazel St.
In addition to the referenced stop streets, all streets that are adopted by the appropriate City of Auburn
authority shall be incorporated as stop street and shall be identified by appropriate development plan or
other document approved and maintained by the City of Auburn, Indiana as adopted and authorized for the
purpose of public safety and controlling proper traffic flow. Said stop signs shall be enforceable as if
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 75-30
TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 75
incorporated herein. Periodically the Common Council shall update the list set forth in this Chapter of the
Municipal Code. Failure to update said Code shall not negate the authority of the Stop sign, as long as it
can be established that the sign was installed and / or authorized by the City of Auburn, Indiana or an agent
thereof.
SCHEDULE VI. TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNALS
Traffic-control signals are installed at the following locations.
Intersection
• Auburn Dr. and Wayne St.
• Grandstaff Dr. and 15th St.
• 7th St. and Cedar St.
• 7th St. and Grandstaff Dr.
• 7th St. and Indiana Ave.
• 7th St. and Jackson St.
• 7th St. and Main St.
• 7th St. and Touring Dr.
• 7th St. and Van Buren St.
• 7th St. and Duesenberg Dr.
• 7th St. and C.R. 35 Flashing signal
• 9th St. and Main St. Flashing signal
• North Street and Indiana Ave. Flashing signal
• I-69 and St. Rd. 8 (W 7th St.) west and east
sides
All additional traffic control signals installed and not listed herein shall be incorporated by reference and shall be
considered valid traffic control signals as long as the signal is installed by a government entity.
SCHEDULE VII. YIELD STREETS
When signs are erected giving notice thereof, these streets at the following intersections shall be yield streets. Drivers
of all vehicles on these streets shall yield right-of-way, as required by state law, before entering the described
intersection.
Yield Street Cross Street
Ensley Ave. (westbound right) Grandstaff Dr.
Thomas Park St. (east) Union St.
20th St. (westbound) Lakeshore Dr.
Ordinance 2019-09, passed 07.02.2019
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
PARKING SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 76
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 76-2
PARKING SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 76
Table of Contents
SCHEDULE I. ANGLE PARKING
SCHEDULE II. LOADING ZONES
SCHEDULE III. LIMITED PARKING TIME
SCHEDULE IV. PARKING PROHIBITED DURING CERTAIN HOURS ON CERTAIN STREETS
SCHEDULE V. SNOW EMERGENCY
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 76-3
PARKING SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 76
SCHEDULE I. ANGLE PARKING
The City Council shall determine upon what streets angle parking shall be permitted and mark or
sign such streets.
The following streets shall be designated to permit angle parking.
Angle Parking Street Location Side
Cedar St. 7th St. to 9th St. West
Main St. 9th St. to 7th St. Both
4th St. South Main St. East 155 Ft.
5th St. Both Main St. to Cedar St.
5th St. South Main St. to Jackson St.
6th St. Jackson St. to Cedar St. Both
7th St. Main St. to Cedar St. South
9th St. Cedar St. to Main St. North
SCHEDULE II. LOADING ZONES
The City Council is hereby authorized to determine the location of loading zones and shall place and maintain
appropriate signs indicating the same stating the hours and days during which the provisions of this section are
applicable. Loading zones shall be established at the following locations.
Street Side Location From Center of Street When Applicable
5th St. South 124' east of Jackson St. to 148' east of Jackson St. All Times
6th St. North 105' east of Jackson St. to 163' east of Jackson St. All Times
6th St. North 100' west of Main St. to 123' west of Main St. All Times
6th St. South 98' west of Cedar St. to 116' west of Cedar St. All Times
6th St. South 115' west of Main St. to 130' west of Main St. All Times
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 76-4
PARKING SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 76
8th St. North 80' east of Jackson St. to 105' east of Jackson St. All Times
8th St. South 156' west of Main St. to 182' west of Main St. All Times
SCHEDULE III. LIMITED PARKING TIME
When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle longer than the time specified during the
times and days specified, if any, within the district or upon any of the streets described as follows.
Street Side Location Time Limit When
Restricted
Cedar St. Both 5th St. to 7th St. 2 hours 8am-5pm
Cedar St. East 7th St. to 9th St. 2 hours 8am-5pm
Cedar St. East 9th St. to 10th St. 2 hours 8am-5pm
Cedar St. West 7th St. to 10th St. 2 hours 8am-5pm
Cedar St. West North curb line of 9th St. to
75' North of 9th St.
Police Cars
Only
All Times
Duesenberg Dr. West 7th St. to Highland Dr. No Parking All Times
Indiana Ave. West 108' North of 15th St. to 24'
North
Resident
Parking Only
All Times
Jackson St. Both 6th St. to 8th St. 2 hours 8am-5pm
Jackson St. East 8th St. to 10th St. 2 hours 8am-5pm
Jackson St. Both 5th St. to 6th St. 2 hours 8am-5pm
Jackson St. West 8th St. to 9th St. 2 hours 8am-5pm
Jackson St. West 9th St. to 10th St. 2 hours 8am-5pm
Main St. Both 11th St. to 5th St. 2 hours 8am-5pm
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 76-5
PARKING SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 76
Main St. East N Curb line of 1st St. and
going N 100' beginning at
S curb line of 1st St. and
going S 75'
All Times
North St. South Between Van Buren St.
and Jackson St.
All Times
North St. South Between Van Buren and
Main St.
All Times
Peckhart Ct. Both Both Sides No Parking All Times
Touring Dr. Both From SR 8 to dead end All Times
Van Buren St. East 9th St. to 8th St. 2 hours 8am-5pm
Van Buren St. West 105' N of 7th St to 6th St. 2 hours 8am-5pm
5th St. Both Jackson St. to Main St. 2 hours 8am-5pm
6th St. Both Van Buren St. to Cedar St. 2 hours 8am-5pm
7th St. Both Jackson St. to Cedar St. 2 hours 8am-5pm
7th St. North Cedar St. to Union St. 2 hours All Times
8th St. Both Jackson St. to Main St. 2 hours 8am-5pm
8th St. South Cedar St. to Union St. Police Cars
Only
All Times
9th St. Both Jackson St. to Cedar St. 2 hours 8am-5pm
9th St. North Cedar St. to 83' E of Cedar
St.
Police Cars
Only
All Times
9th St. North 104' from East to Utility line
of Union St. to 152' from
East curb line of Union St.
Utility Workers
10 minutes
All Times
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 76-6
PARKING SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 76
9th St. South East of curb line of Cedar
St. to 109' East of Cedar
St.
Police Cars
Only
8am-5pm
9th St. South 175' East of Cedar St. to
Union St.
2 hours 8am-5pm
14th St. South 165' East of Indiana Ave to
48' South side of 14th St.
Resident
Parking Only
All Times
18th St. Both Union St. to Bridge No Parking All Times
18th St. Both Cedar St. to Union St. No Parking All Times
SCHEDULE IV. PARKING PROHIBITED DURING CERTAIN HOURS ON CERTAIN STREETS
When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle, during the hours and days specified,
within the district or upon any of the streets described as follows.
Street Side Location When Prohibited
Cedar St. West 15th St. to 145' N All Times
Division St. West 3rd to 7th St. All Times
Eckhart St. West 1st St. to Golden Hawk Dr. All Times except for bus loading
and unloading
Fulton St. Both 9th St. to 1st St. alley S of 9th
St.
All Times
Indiana Ave. East Auburn Dr. to Michigan Ave. All Times
Indiana Ave. West Michigan Ave. to North St. All Times
Jackson St. East 4th St. to 5th St. All Times
Jackson St. East 10th St. to Ensley Ave. All Times
Main St. East Carlin St. to Madison St. All Times
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 76-7
PARKING SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 76
Main St. East Ensley Ave. to 11th St. All Times
Main St. West 5th St. to Van Buren St. All Times
Main St. West 16th St. to 11th St. All Times
North St. Both Van Buren St. west to Auburn
Port Authority
All Times
North St. North Main St. to Van Buren St. All Times
Oren Dr. Both Grandstaff Dr. to Dead end All Times
Union St. Both 5th St. to 6th St. All Times
Van Buren St. East 6th St. to 8th St. All Times
Van Buren St. East 11th St. to Walnut St. All Times
Van Buren St. West 125' north of 7th St. to 6th St. All Times
Walnut St. Both Van Buren St. to Wayne St. All Times
Wayne St. Both Lincoln St. to Ensley Ave. All Times
West St. Both 1st St. to alley south of 9th St. All Times
Wilson St. West 1st St. to 9th St. All Times
2nd St. Both Main St. to Cedar St. All Times
8th St. Both Van Buren St. to 1st alley west All Times
8th St. North Cedar St. to Union St. All Times
9th St. Both Cedar Creek bridge to
Cleveland St.
All Times
9th St. North Van Buren St. to Jackson St. All Times
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 76-8
PARKING SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 76
10th St. North Jackson St. to Main St. All Times
10th St. North 101' east of Main St. to Cedar
St.
All Times
10th St. North 155' west of Union St. to Cedar
St.
All Times
11th St. South 115' west of Phillip St. to
Indiana Ave.
All Times
12th St. North Indiana Ave. to Van Auken St. All Times
12th St. (no parking for
bus stop)
South Indiana Ave. to Van Auken St. All Times except buses
15th St. Both Indiana Ave. west to Touring Dr. All Times
Nicholas Both Dewey St. to Wesley Rd. All Times
SCHEDULE V. SNOW EMERGENCY
When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park or leave stalled or incapable of
moving, a vehicle during a declaring snow emergency, within the district or upon any of the streets
described as follows.
Street Side Location
Van Buren St. East Main St. to 6th St.
Van Buren St. East 8th St. to 11th St.
Van Buren St. East 14th St. to 15th St.
Van Buren St. West Main St. to 7th St.
Van Buren St. West 11th St. to Wayne St.
1st St. Both Van Buren St. to Dewey St.
9th St. Both Indiana Ave. to Van Buren St.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 76-9
PARKING SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 76
9th St. North Jackson St. to Cedar St.
9th St. North Union St. to Cedar Creek
9th St. South Union St. to Cleveland St.
9th St. South Van Buren St. to Cedar St.
15th St. Both Main St. to Union St.
Duesenberg Dr. Both City limit to Auburn Dr.
Auburn Dr. Both City limit to City Limit
Duesenberg Dr. Both City limit Wesley Rd.
Wesley Rd. Both Duesenberg Dr. to City Limit
Indiana Ave. Both City limit to City Limit
Main St. Both City limit to City Limit
North St. Both Grandstaff Dr. to Main St.
Grandstaff Dr. Both Auburn Dr. to North St.
Betz Rd. Both Indiana Ave. to Main St.
Old Brick Rd. Both City Limit to 18th St.
18th St. Both Main St. to Old Brick Rd.
15th St. Both All incorporated roadway
Touring Dr. Both All incorporated roadway
Eckhart Ave. Both 7th St. to Phaeton Way
Phaeton Way Both Eckhart Ave. to Dewy St.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 76-10
PARKING SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 76
Dewey St. Both Morningstar Rd. to Phaeton Way
Portage Pass Both Entire Road
Superior Dr. Both Entire Road
Center St. Both Entire Road
Wayne St. Both Entire Road
Ensley Ave. Both Entire Road
Snow route signs shall be erected giving notice of snow route locations. Signs shall be uniformly
place on the above stated locations as follows.
1. On blocks 200 feet or less in length, one sign per block.
2. On blocks in excess of 200 feet in length, the signs shall be placed no greater than 350 inches
apart.
The mayor by declaration may declare any other roadway in the City an Emergency Route by giving
notice in accordance with Indiana Code.
Ordinance 2019-09, passed 07.02.2019
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
SNOWMOBILES & OFFROAD
VEHICLES
CHAPTER 77
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 77-2
SNOWMOBILES & OFF-ROAD VEHICLES
CHAPTER 77
Table of Contents
77.01 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION
77.02 DEFINITIONS
77.03 RESTRICTIONS UPON OPERATION
77.04 PERMITTED OPERATION
77.05 POLICE CHIEF MAY AUTHORIZE EMERGENCY USE
77.06 AUTHORITY OF DEPARTMENT OF PARKS AND RECREATION
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 77-3
SNOWMOBILES & OFF-ROAD VEHICLES
CHAPTER 77
77.01 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION
This chapter is enacted pursuant to IC 14-16-1-22 and IC 14-16-2-23, and is supplemental to and shall be
construed in conjunction with IC 14-16-1-1 et seq. and IC 14-16-2-1 et seq. as from time to time hereafter
amended.
77.02 DEFINITIONS
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings given.
• HIGHWAY, STREET, or RIGHT-OF-WAY
The entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained, when any part thereof is
open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel.
• OFF-ROAD VEHICLE
A motor-driven vehicle capable of cross-country travel without benefit of a road or trail, on or
immediately over land, water, snow, ice, marsh, swampland, or other natural terrain. It includes, but is
not limited to, a multi-wheel drive or low pressure tire vehicle, amphibious machine, ground effect air
cushion vehicle, or other means of transportation deriving motive power from a source other than
muscle or wind. It does not include a farm vehicle being used for farming, a vehicle used for military or
law enforcement purposes, or a construction, mining, or other industrial-related vehicle used in
performance of its common function, or a registered aircraft.
• OPERATE
To ride in or on and to be in actual physical control of the operation of a snowmobile or an off-road
vehicle.
• OPERATOR
Any person who operates or is in actual physical control of a snowmobile or an off-road vehicle.
• OWNER
Any person, other than a lienholder, having the property in or title to a snowmobile or an off-road vehicle,
entitled to the use or possession thereof.
• PERSON
An individual, partnership, corporation, the state and any of its agencies or subdivisions, and any body
of persons whether incorporated or not.
• SNOWMOBILE
Any motor-driven vehicle designed for travel primarily on snow or ice, of a type which utilizes sled-type
runners or skis, or an endless belt tread, or any combination of these or other similar means of contact
with the surface upon which it is operated.
• VEHICLE
A snowmobile or an off-road vehicle.
77.03 RESTRICTIONS UPON OPERATION
A vehicle may not be operated:
On the public right-of-way adjacent to the traveled portion of the public highway, except as provided
herein.
On the private property of another without express permission to do so by the owner or lawful
occupant of that property.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 77-4
SNOWMOBILES & OFF-ROAD VEHICLES
CHAPTER 77
On public school grounds, park property, playgrounds, recreation areas, or golf courses, without
express permission to do so by the proper public or other authority.
In any manner so as to create a loud, unnecessary, or unusual noise, so as to disturb or interfere
with the peace and quiet of other persons.
In a careless, reckless, or negligent manner so as to endanger the safety of any person or the
property of any other person.
77.04 PERMITTED OPERATION
Between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m., a vehicle may be operated along the edge of streets,
highways, or alleys within the city limits at a speed not in excess of the maximum speed at which licensed
motor vehicles may be operated at such place, for the sole and only purpose of transporting the vehicle from
the place of residence of the person operating the vehicle or from the place of storage of the vehicle to the
nearest point where the vehicle may be lawfully operated outside the city limits or at such place within the
city limits as provided herein.
77.05 POLICE CHIEF MAY AUTHORIZE EMERGENCY USE
The City Police Chief may authorize use of a vehicle on the public highways, streets, and the right-of-way
within the city during emergencies pursuant to IC 14-16-2-21(a)(4).
77.06 AUTHORITY OF DEPARTMENT OF PARKS AND RECREATION
The Department of Parks and Recreation of the city, or its designee, shall have authority to supervise and
regulate programs in connection with events conducted by the Department of Parks and Recreation in which
vehicles are used. The Department of Parks and Recreation, or its designee, shall have authority to
designate city park areas which are available for the use of vehicles.
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
Title VI Implementation Plan
CHAPTER
101
101.001 GLOSSARY OF COMMON TERMS
101.002 OVERVIEW
101.003 SCOPE OF TITLE VI APPLICABILITY TO PROGRAMS AND ACTIVITIES
101.004 RESPONSIBLE OFFICIAL
101.005 STATEMENT OF ASSURANCES
101.006 PROGRAMS OR ACTIVITIES SUBJECT TO TITLE VI
101.007 COMPLAINT PROCEDURES
101.008 COMPLIANCE
101.009 TRAINING
101.010 GOALS AND EVALUATION PROCEDURES
101.011 PUBLIC NOTIFICATION
101.012 RECORDKEEPING AND REPORTING
101.013 MINORITY REPRESENTATION
APPENDIX A
APPENDIX B
APPENDIX C
APPENDIX D: CITY OF AUBURN TITLE VI COMPLAINT LOG
APPENDIX E: COMPLAINT PROCEDURE AUBURN, INDIANA
APPENDIX F: EXTERNAL COMPLAINT OF DISCRIMINATION
APPENDIX G: VOLUNTARY TITLE VI PUBLIC INVOLVEMENT SURVEY CITY OF AUBURN, INDIANA
APPENDIX H: 2004 CENSUS TEST LANGUAGE IDENTIFICATION FLASHCARD CITY OF AUBURN, INDIANA
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
Title VI Implementation Plan
CHAPTER
101
101.001 GLOSSARY OF COMMON TERMS
? “Beneficiary or recipient”
means the individual or organization for which federal funds are intended.
? “Implementation plan”
means the Title VI implementation plan developed and maintained by City of Auburn to ensure
compliance with 42 U.S.C. §2000d et seq.
? “Title VI Compliance Officer”
means City of Auburn employee designated by the Responsible Official to coordinate all Title VI
activities of City of Auburn.
? “Responsible Official”
means the person identified in Section 101.004.
101.002 OVERVIEW
Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 as codified in 42 U.S.C. 2000d states: provides as follow:
“No person in the United States shall, on the ground of race, color, or national origin, be excluded from
participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be subjected to discrimination under any program or activity
receiving federal financial assistance.”
The City of Auburn is a local Indiana Government entity operating under the rules of the Indiana General
Assembly and among other things provides services as authorized by statute. The City of Auburn, Indiana,
receives funds from taxes, fees, grants, and donations. All revenues are accounted for in accordance with
Indiana law. Federal and state grant funds shall only be used in a manner consistent with the grant
purpose. All financial records are audited annually by the Indiana State Board of Accounts.
The City, through its Implementation Plan, provides for compliance with Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of
1964. The City will have copies of this Title VI Implementation Plan available at its office during normal
business hours. The City will periodically publish statements concerning Title VI in materials available to the
public and to prospective beneficiaries.
101.003 SCOPE OF TITLE VI APPLICABILITY TO PROGRAMS AND ACTIVITIES
The City of Auburn affords all individuals the opportunity to benefit from civil rights programs administered by
the City of Auburn. The City of Auburn in accordance with Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C.
§2000d) shall:
Maintain a Title VI Implementation Plan. If required by Title VI or regulations promulgated
thereunder, the implementation plan shall:
1. Be developed with the participation of protected beneficiaries; and
2. Include Title VI implementation plans of any sub-recipients of federal funds through state
agencies;
Submit a copy of the implementation plan to the all appropriate federal and state officials as
required from time to time; and
Submit annual Title VI compliance reports and any implementation plan updates to the appropriate
and required agencies on a regular basis.
Title VI applies to discriminatory acts based on race, color, or national origin and specifically prohibits the
exclusion of individuals or groups from participation in, or enjoying the benefits of, federal programs.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
Title VI Implementation Plan
CHAPTER
101
The policy of the City of Auburn, Indiana is to implement in all city business and interactions the following
laws, rules, policies, and plans of the United States Federal Government as follows:
? Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 USC 2000d et seq);
? Sec. 162(a) of the Federal-Aid Highway Act of 1973 (23 USC 324);
? Age Discrimination Act of 1975;
? Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973;
? Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990;
? Civil Rights Restoration Act of 1987;
? 49 Code of Federal Regulations Part 21;
? 23 Code of Federal Regulations Part 200;
? United States Department Of Transportation Order 1050.2;
? Executive Order #12898 (Environmental Justice);
? Executive Order #13160 (Education Training Programs);
? Executive Order #13166 (Limited-English-Proficiency);
? All other federal laws, mandates and directives that require compliance with the Civil Rights Act or any
other related matter.
101.004 RESPONSIBLE OFFICIAL
The Mayor of the City of Auburn, Indiana or his / her designee has overall responsibility for implementation,
compliance and reporting with respect to Title VI. Inquiries related to these activities should be directed to:
Mayor City of Auburn, Indiana
City Hall
210 E. Ninth St.
Auburn, IN 46706
260/925-5430
101.005 STATEMENT OF ASSURANCES
The City of Auburn, its staff, any sub-recipients of federal funds under grants administered by the City of
Auburn, and all other parties involved with such grants shall remain in compliance with all provisions of Title
VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. §2000d).
Each sub-recipient of federal funds under grants administered by the City of Auburn shall have
agreed in writing to adopt the City of Auburn’s Title VI polices and plan, or
If the sub-recipient’s Title VI plan differs from the City of Auburn’s plan, the sub-recipient’s Title VI
plan shall be available for review from the Responsible Official.
101.006 PROGRAMS OR ACTIVITIES SUBJECT TO TITLE VI
U.S. Housing and Urban Development’s Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) program.
Funds are designated for the following program areas:
? Housing
? Community Projects
? Public Services
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
Title VI Implementation Plan
CHAPTER
101
? Public Facilities
? Economic Development
? Community Emergency Relief Fund
The U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) funded Community Development
Block Grant (CDBG) program for the City of Auburn to provide assistance to communities for use in
revitalizing neighborhoods,
The Land and Water Conservation Fund (LWCF) provides federal grant funds to protect important
natural areas, to acquire land for outdoor recreation and to develop or renovate public outdoor
recreation facilities such as campgrounds, picnic areas, sports & playfields, swimming facilities,
boating facilities, fishing facilities, trails, natural areas, and passive parks.
The Recreational Trails Program provides grant funds to develop and renovate recreation trails for
both motorized and non-motorized use. It does not fund equipment such as mowers or gators.
The Department of Transportation, pursuant to Title 49, Code of Federal Regulations, Departmen t
of Transportation, Subtitle A, Office of Secretary, Part 21, nondiscrimination in federally-assisted
programs of the Department of Transportation-Effectuation of Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964,
Title 23 Code of Federal Regulations, Part 200, Ti tle VI Program and Related Statutes –
Implementation and Review Procedures, as said Regulations may be amended from time to time.
Any and all other State or Federal programs that require compliance under Title VI of the Civil
Rights Act of 1964 or any other applicable state or federal law, mandate or order.
101.007 COMPLAINT PROCEDURES
Complaint Procedures
1. How a complaint shall be filed.
Complaints in relation to alleged discrimination under Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 may be
filed using the forms provided by the City of Auburn, Indiana. If an individual refuses to submit a
written complaint, the compliance officer, or designee of the compliance officer shall record the
information orally from the individual and shall provide a copy to the individual with a request that the
information be confirmed by the complainant.
A complaint may be filed by anyone who believes that the City of Auburn has discriminated against
a participant, beneficiary, or a class of beneficiaries on the basis of any protected Class under Title
VI of the Civil Rights Acts of 1964.
Complaints must be filed within one hundred eighty (180) days of the activity which prompts the
filing of the complaint.
2. Where to file a complaint
Complaints in relation to alleged discrimination under Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 may be
filed with City of Auburn’s Title VI compliance officer at:
City Hall
210 E. Ninth St.
Auburn, IN 46706
260/925-5430
3. Time frame within which the complaint shall be processed
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
Title VI Implementation Plan
CHAPTER
101
Upon receipt of a written complaint, the compliance officer shall review the complaint and shall file,
within seven (7) days, a concise statement with the Responsible Official regarding the nature of the
complaint and the steps to be taken to investigate or resolve the complaint.
4. Withdrawal of a complaint
A complainant may withdraw a complaint at any time before final action by filing with the compliance
officer a written statement of his or her desire to withdraw the complaint.
Investigations, Report of Findings, Hearings and Appeals
1. Investigations
Upon receipt of the complaint by an individual or at the time the compliance officer becomes
independently aware of actions, which may constitute a violation of Title VI, the compliance officer
shall take necessary action within thirty (30) days to investigate and recommend specific actions to
resolve the complaint. A report shall be filed by the compliance officer with the Responsible Official
within that period.
2. Report of Findings
The complainant shall be notified in writing of the results of the investigation and any actions taken.
The City of Auburn shall attempt to maintain the confidentiality of the complaint and the name of the
complainant.
The complainant shall be notified in writing, within thirty (30) days of the resolution of the complaint,
by the Responsible Official or the Title VI compliance officer of the resolution of a complaint. A
statement of corrective action shall include specific statements of actions to be taken or prohibited
actions and shall include a timetable for implementation.
3. Hearings and Appeals
A complainant may file a written appeal from the Responsible Official’s resolution of the complaint
within thirty (30) days of the receipt of the written notice of resolution. Appeals shall be directed to
the Mayor of City of Auburn and shall be set forth in writing. The complainant shall be notified of the
final resolution of the complaint within sixty (60) days of the Mayor’s receipt of the appeal.
A complainant filing a written appeal may request an in-person hearing before the Mayor or the
Mayor’s designee. Such request shall be set forth in writing and shall be submitted
contemporaneously with the written appeal. The complainant shall be notified of the date, time and
place of the hearing within 15 days of the City of Auburn’s receipt of the request.
101.008 COMPLIANCE
The City of Auburn shall make every effort to regulate, monitor, review, and report on the federal
programs to assure compliance.
Upon a finding by the City of Auburn of noncompliance, the City of Auburn shall take the following
actions with regard to:
1. Processing
The compliance officer shall immediately notify the Responsible Official in writing of the violations
held to constitute noncompliance with Title VI and of the steps necessary to correct these violations.
2. Reporting
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
Title VI Implementation Plan
CHAPTER
101
The compliance officer shall notify the sub-recipient or employee found to be in noncompliance, in
writing within 30 days of the compliance officer’s report of noncompliance, of the violations and
corrective measures necessary to remedy the violations.
3. Resolution
The City of Auburn shall attempt to secure voluntary compliance with Title VI. In the event that
efforts to secure voluntary compliance are not secured within a reasonable period of time, the
compliance officer will notify the Responsible Official, in writing, of the recommended corrective
action.
4. Enforcement / Corrective actions
The Responsible Official shall implement corrective actions within thirty (30) days of receipt and
acceptance of the notification of recommended corrective action.
Employees or grant sub-recipients who refuse to voluntarily comply with Title VI or to take corrective
actions required by the City of Auburn shall face disciplinary action, or in the case of grant subrecipients,
may face termination or suspension of the contractual relationship with the City of
Auburn.
5. Monitoring of programs
The City of Auburn shall undertake to periodically monitor all programs funded through federal
assistance for those sub-recipients who have been found by the City of Auburn to be in noncompliance
with Title VI.
101.009 TRAINING
The Title VI implementation plan will be made available via City of Auburn website. Sub-recipients of grants
will be notified of the Title VI implementation plan and complaint procedures at the time of any grant award.
The City of Auburn may periodically hold Title VI training seminars for its employees, particularly for those
individuals responsible for monitoring sub-recipients for Title VI compliance.
101.010 GOALS AND EVALUATION PROCEDURES
The City of Auburn endeavors to reevaluate its Title VI goals on an annual basis, as part of the process of
reviewing the agency’s Title VI plan. The City of Auburn shall, each year, set forth City of Auburn’s current
goals and the process for evaluating and revising those goals.
Goals
1. Report compliance activities in a timely manner.
2. Respond to and investigate all complaints within the timeframe and in accordance with the
procedures outlined in Section 101.007.
3. Give employees the opportunity to rate the plan to determine if the plan is adequate to address
their needs and the requirements of Title VI.
Evaluation of Goals
1. The Advisory Committee (comprised of the Grants Manager and two (2) other employees) shall,
at each meeting, review the agency’s goals and its progress towards these goals, and evaluate
the effectiveness of the plan’s provisions as they relate to these goals.
2. The Advisory Committee shall, at each meeting, establish a timeline for achievement of goals,
and implement a process for monitoring the progress towards these goals.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
Title VI Implementation Plan
CHAPTER
101
3. The Advisory Committee shall, at each meeting, promulgate a written report of the agency’s
progress towards the identified goals.
4. The Advisory Committee shall, at each meeting, discuss and evaluate whether any corrective
procedures are necessary to bring City of Auburn closer to its goals.
101.011 PUBLIC NOTIFICATION
Three (3) groups of people will receive notification of the City of Auburn’s Title VI plan, complaint forms,
nondiscrimination policy, and programs and services: 1) City of Auburn employees will have access to the
implementation plan and the complaint procedures on the city website; 2) federal grants applicants and subrecipients
of federal grants who will be notified of Title VI requirements at the time of application and at the
time of any grant award; and 3) members of the general public who request information via phone, fax, or
email.
The City of Auburn’s Title VI Plan is available for review at the city office. Title VI application forms and
checklists for sub-recipients are also available at the city office.
101.012 RECORDKEEPING AND REPORTING
Complaints
1. The compliance officer will maintain a log of all complaints filed with City of Auburn.
2. Grant personnel will certify annually that all sub-recipients have been notified of the Title VI
implementation plan and complaint procedures.
3. The compliance officer will maintain copies of complaint forms and will ensure that they are
available for use.
Reporting
1. Changes in the Title VI implementation plan will be provided to employees and sub-recipients as
changes are made.
2. Changes in the Title VI implementation will be forwarded to the State Auditor as changes are
made.
3. Grant personnel will maintain records of all sub-recipients in order that the City of Auburn can
determine if eligible parties are participating in the grants.
Changes
Any changes made of this plan are incorporated herein as part of City of Auburn’s recordkeeping and
reporting procedures.
Participation data:
Because the City of Auburn acts as an administrator or a pass-through source for sub-recipients of
federal funds, the agency is unable to provide data showing the extent to which members of protected
parties are participating in the Title VI programs and activities.
The City of Auburn endeavors to ensure that each sub-recipient of federal funds is in full compliance
with Title VI, and that each such entity ensures equal participation in programs funded by federal monies
to protected parties.
101.013 MINORITY REPRESENTATION
The City of Auburn shall attempt to identify and employ qualified minority applicants. Where minority
representation in particular areas of the agency is low, the City of Auburn endeavors to fill vacant positions
with qualified minorities. Whenever a planning or advisory body, such as a board or committee, is an
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
Title VI Implementation Plan
CHAPTER
101
integral part of City of Auburn’s programs, City of Auburn shall take such steps as are necessary to ensure
that minorities are notified of the existence of such bodies and are provided equal opportunity to participate
as members. Where members of a board or committee are appointed by the City of Auburn and where
minorities comprise at least 5% of the affected area or the surrounding community, the facility or agency will
make efforts to appoint a minority representative to serve on the board or committee.
The City of Auburn has also created a Title VI advisory committee to review and make recommendations
regarding this implementation plan and to identify areas where improvement is needed. The advisory
committee is currently comprised of at least three (3) people. The advisory committee shall meet at least
once each year.
APPENDIX A
During the performance of this contract, the contractor, for itself, its assignees and successors in interest
(hereinafter referred to as the "contractor") agrees as follows:
Compliance with Regulations: The contractor shall comply with the Regulation relative to
nondiscrimination in Federally-assisted programs of the Department of Transportation (hereinafter,
"DOT") Title 49, Code of Federal Regulations, Part 21, as they may be amended from time to time,
(hereinafter referred to as the Regulations), which are herein incorporated by reference and made a
part of this contract.
Nondiscrimination: The Contractor, with regard to the work performed by it during the contract,
shall not discriminate on the grounds of race, color, or national origin in the selection and retent ion
of subcontractors, including procurements of materials and leases of equipment. The contractor
shall not participate either directly or indirectly in the discrimination prohibited by section 21.5 of the
Regulations, including employment practices when the contract covers a program set forth in
Appendix B of the Regulations.
Solicitations for Subcontractors, Including Procurements of Materials and Equipment: In all
solicitations either by competitive bidding or negotiation made by the contractor for work to be
performed under a subcontract, including procurements of materials or leases of equipment, each
potential subcontractor or supplier shall be notified by the contractor of the contractor's obligations
under this contract and the Regulations relative to nondiscrimination on the grounds of race, color,
or national origin.
Information and Reports: The contractor shall provide all information and reports required by the
Regulations or directives issued pursuant thereto, and shall permit access to its book s, records,
accounts, other sources of information, and its facilities as may be determined by the City of
Auburn, Indiana, the Indiana Department of Transportation, or the Federal Highway Administration
to be pertinent to ascertain compliance with such Regulations, orders and instructions. Where any
information required of a contractor is in the exclusive possession of another who fails or refuses to
furnish this information the contractor shall so certify to the City of Auburn, Indiana, the Indiana
Department of Transportation or the Federal Highway Administration as appropriate, and shall set
forth what efforts it has made to obtain the information.
Sanctions for Noncompliance: In the event of the contractor's noncompliance with the
nondiscrimination provisions of this contract, the City of Auburn, Indiana shall impose such contract
sanctions as it or the Indiana Department of Transportation and/or the Federal Highway
Administration may determine to be appropriate, including, but not limited to:
4. Withholding of payments to the contractor under the contract until the contractor complies,
and/or
5. Cancellation, termination or suspension of the contract, in whole or in part.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
Title VI Implementation Plan
CHAPTER
101
Incorporation of Provisions: The contractor shall include the provisions of paragraphs (A) through
(F) in every subcontract, including procurements of materials and leases of equipment, unless
exempt by the Regulations, or directives issued pursuant thereto.
The contractor shall take such action with respect to any subcontractor procurement as the City of Auburn,
Indiana or the Indiana Department of Transportation and/or the Federal Highway Administration may direct
as a means of enforcing such provisions including sanctions for noncompliance: Provided, however, that, in
the event a contractor becomes involved in, or is threatened with, litigation with a subcontractor or supplier
as a result of such direction, the contractor may request the City of Auburn, Indiana to enter into such
litigation to protect the interests of the City of Auburn, Indiana, and, in addition, the contractor may request
the United States to enter into such litigation to protect the interests of the United States.
APPENDIX B
The following clauses shall he included in any and all deeds effecting or recording the transfer of real
property, structures or improvements thereon, or interest therein from the United States.
(GRANTING CLAUSE)
NOW, THEREFORE, the Department of Transportation, as authorized by law, and upon the condition that
the City of Auburn, Indiana will accept Title to the lands and maintain the project constructed thereon, in
accordance with INDOT or FHWA, the Regulations for the Administration of Federal Aid Transportation
Program and the policies and procedures prescribed by the Indiana Department of Transportation and/or the
Federal Highway Administration and, also in accordance with and in compliance with all requirements
imposed by or pursuant to Title 49, Code of Federal Regulations, Department of Transportation, Subtitle A,
Office of the Secretary, Part 21, Nondiscrimination in federally assisted programs of the Department of
Transportation (hereinafter referred to as the Regulations) pertaining to and effectuating the provisions of
Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (78 Stat. 252; 42 U.S.C. .2000d to 2000d-4), does hereby remise,
release, quitclaim and convey unto the City of Auburn, Indiana all the right, Title and interest of the
Department of Transportation in and to said lands described in Exhibit "A" attached hereto and made a part
hereof.
(HABENDUM CLAUSE)
TO HAVE AND TO HOLD said lands and interests therein unto the City of Auburn, Indiana and its
successors forever, subject, however, to the covenants, conditions, restrictions and reservations herein
contained as follows, which will remain in effect for the period during which the real property or structures
are used for a purpose for which Federal financial assistance is extended or for another purpose involving
the provision of similar services or benefits and shall be binding on the City of Auburn, Indiana, its
successors and assigns.
The City of Auburn, Indiana, in consideration or the conveyance of said lands and interests in lands, does
hereby covenant and agree as a covenant running with the land for itself, its successors and assigns, that
(1) no person shall on the grounds of race, color, or national origin, he excluded from participation in, be
denied the benefits of, or be otherwise subjected to discrimination with regard to any facility located wholly
or in part on over or under such lands hereby conveyed [,] [and)* (2) that the City of Auburn, Indiana shall
use the lands and interests in lands and interests in lands so conveyed, in compliance with all requirements
imposed by or pursuant to Title 49, Code of Federal Regulations, Department of Transportation, Subtitle A,
Office of the Secretary, Part 21, Nondiscrimination in federally assisted programs of the Department of
Transportation - Effectuation of Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, and as said Regulations may be
amended [,] and (3) that in the event of breach of any of the above-mentioned nondiscrimination conditions,
the Department shall have a right to reenter said lands and facilities on said land, and the above described
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
Title VI Implementation Plan
CHAPTER
101
land and facilities shall thereon revert to and vest in and become the absolute property of the Department of
Transportation and its assigns as such interest existed prior to this instruction.*
APPENDIX C
The following clauses shall be included in all deeds, licenses, leases, permits, or similar instruments entered
into by the City of Auburn, Indiana pursuant to the provisions of Assurance 6(a).
The (grantee, licensee, lessee, permitee, etc., as appropriate) for himself, his heirs, personal
representatives, successors in interest, and assigns, as a part of the consideration hereof, does hereby
covenant and agree [in the case of deeds and leases add "as a covenant running with the land"] that in the
event facilities are constructed, maintained, or otherwise operated on the said property described in this
(deed, license, lease, permit, etc.) for a purpose for which a Department of Transportation program or
activity is extended or for another purpose involving the provision of similar services or benefits, the
(grantee, licensee, lessee, permitee, etc.) shall maintain and operate such facilities and services in
compliance with all other requirements imposed pursuant to Title 49, Code of Federal Regulations,
Department of Transportation, Subtitle A, office of the Secretary, Part 21, Nondiscrimination in Federallyassisted
programs of the Department of Transportation - Effectuation of Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of
1964, and as said Regulations may be amended.
[Include in licenses, leases, permits, etc.]*
That in the event of breach of any of the above nondiscrimination covenants, City of Auburn, Indiana shall
have the right to terminate the [license, lease, permit, etc.] and to re-enter and repossess said land and the
facilities thereon, and hold the same as if said [licenses, lease, permit, etc.] had never been made or issued.
[Include in deed.]*
That in the event of breach of any of the above nondiscrimination covenants, City of Auburn, Indiana shall
have the right to reenter said lands and facilities thereon, and the above described lands and facilities shall
thereupon revert to and vest in and become the absolute property of City of Auburn, Indiana and its assigns.
The following shall be included in all deeds, licenses, leases, permits, or similar agreements entered into by
City of Auburn, Indiana pursuant to the provisions of Assurance 6(b).
The (grantee, licensee, lessee, permitee, etc., as appropriate) for himself, his personal representatives,
successors in interest, and assigns, as a part of the consideration hereof, does hereby covenant and agree
(in the case of deeds, and leases add "as a covenant running with the land") that (1) no person on the
ground of race, color. or national origin shall be excluded from participation in, denied the benefits of, or he
otherwise subjected to discrimination in the use of said facilities, (2) that in the construction of any
improvements on, over or under such land and the furnishing of services thereon, no person on the ground
of, race, color, or national origin shall be excluded from participation in, denied the benefits of, or otherwise
be subjected to discrimination, (3) that the (grantee, licensee, lessee, permitee, etc.) shall use the premises
in compliance with all other requirements imposed by or pursuant to Title 49, Code of Federal Regulations.
Department of Transportation, Subtitle A, Office of the Secretary. Part 21, Nondiscrimination in Federallyassisted
programs of the Department of Transportation - Effectuation of Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of
1964), and as said Regulations may be amended.
[Include in licenses, leases, permits, etc.]*
That in the event of breach of any of the above nondiscrimination covenants, City of Auburn, Indiana shall
have the right to terminate the [license, lease, permit, etc.] and to reenter and repossess said land and the
facilities thereon, and hold the same as if said [license, lease, permit, etc.] had never been made or issued.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
Title VI Implementation Plan
CHAPTER
101
[Include in deeds]*
That in the event of breach of any of the above nondiscrimination covenants, City of Auburn, Indiana shall
have the right to reenter said land and facilities thereon, and the above described lands and facilities shall
thereupon revert to and vest in and become the absolute property of City of Auburn, Indiana and its assigns.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
Title VI Implementation Plan
CHAPTER
101
APPENDIX D: CITY OF AUBURN TITLE VI COMPLAINT LOG
Case
#
Investigator(s) Complainant Sub-
Recipient
Basis of
Complaint /
Protected
Category
(race, color,
national
origin,
disability,
etc.)
Date
Filed
Date of
Final
Report
Action Taken
/ Disposition
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
Title VI Implementation Plan
CHAPTER
101
APPENDIX E: COMPLAINT PROCEDURE AUBURN, INDIANA
Any person who believes that he or she as a member of protect class, has been discriminated against based
on race, color, national origin, gender, age, disability, religion, low income status, or Limited English
Proficiency in violation of Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, as amended and its related statutes,
regulations and directives, Section 504 of the Vocational Rehabilitation Act of 1973, Americans with
Disabilities Act of 1990, as amended, the Civil rights Restoration Act of 1987, as amended, and any other
Federal nondiscrimination statute may submit a complaint. A complaint may also be submitted by a
representative on behalf of such a person.
It is the policy of Auburn Indiana to conduct a prompt and impartial investigation of all allegations of
discrimination and to take prompt effective corrective action when a claim of discrimination is substantiated.
No one may intimidated, threaten, coerce or engage in other discriminatory conduct anyone because they
have taken action or participated in an action to secure rights protected by the civil rights laws. Any
individual alleging such harassment or intimidation may submit a complaint by following the procedure
printed below.
Any individual who feels that he or she has been discriminated against may submit a written or verbal
complaint. The complaint may be communicated to any department head or to the County Title VI or ADA
Coordinator. The complaint should be submitted within 180 days of the alleged discrimination. Complaint
forms may be found on the count website or in the community Center. Individuals are not required to use the
County’s complaint form. If necessary, the county will help an individual reduce his or her complaint to
writing for his or her signature.
Generally, a complaint should include the name, address and telephone number of the complainant and a
brief description of the alleged discriminatory conduct including the date of harm. An individual submitting a
complaint alleging discrimination may include any relevant evidence, including the names of witness and
supporting documentation.
Direct Title VI / ADA Complaints to:
Human Resources Director
210 E. Ninth St.
Auburn, IN 46706
(260) 925-5430
humanresources@ci.auburn.in.us
Within 60 days of the receipt of the complaint the City will conduct an investigation of the allegation based
on the information provided and issue a written report of its findings to the complaint. The City will try to
obtain an informal voluntary resolution to all complaints at the lowest level possible.
A complainant’s identity shall be kept confidential except to the extent necessary to conduct an investigation.
All complaints shall be kept confidential.
These procedures do not deny the right of any individual to file a formal complaint with any government
agency or affect an individual’s right to seek private counsel for any complaint alleging discrimination.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
Title VI Implementation Plan
CHAPTER
101
APPENDIX F: EXTERNAL COMPLAINT OF DISCRIMINATION
INSTRUCTIONS:
The purpose of this form is to help any person interested in filing a discrimination complaint with Auburn
Indiana. You are not required to use this form. You may write a letter with the same information, sign it, and
return it to the address below. All bold items must be completed for your complaint to be investigated.
Failure to provide complete information may impair the investigation of your complaint.
Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, as amended and its related statutes and regulation (Title VI) prohibit
discrimination on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, age, disability/handicap, or income status in
connection with programs or activities receiving federal financial assistance for the United States
Department of Transportation, Federal Highway Administration, and /or Federal Transit Administration.
These prohibitions extend to Auburn Indiana as a sub-recipient of federal financial assistance.
Upon request, assistance will be provided if you are an individual with a disability or have limited English
proficiency. Complaint may also be filed using alternative formats such as computer disk, audiotape, or
Braille.
You also have the right to file a complaint with other state or federal agencies that provide federal financial
assistance to Auburn Indiana. Additionally, you have the right to seek private counsel.
Auburn, Indiana is prohibited from retaliating against any individual because he or she opposed an unlawful
policy or practice, field charges, testified, or participated in any complaint action under Title VI or other
nondiscrimination authorities.
Please make a copy of your complaint form for your personal records. Do not send your original documents
as they will not be returned. Mail the original complain form along with any copies of documents or records
relevant to your complaint to the address below.
Complaints of discrimination must be filed within 180 days of the date of the alleged discriminatory act. If the
alleged act of discrimination occurred more than 180 days ago, please explain your delay in filing this
complaint.
**Your complaint cannot be processed without your signature.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
Title VI Implementation Plan
CHAPTER
101
**Your complaint cannot be processed without your signature.
COMPLAINT INFORMATION
Name (first, middle, and last)
Address (number and street, city, state and ZIP code)
Home telephone number
( ) -
Work telephone number
( ) -
Cellular telephone number
( ) -
Name of complainant Date (month, day, year)
PERSON/AGENCY/COMPANY YOU BELIEVE DISCRIMINATED AGAINST YOU
Name (first, middle, and last) Title
Name of company
Address (number and street, city, state and ZIP code)
Home telephone number
( ) -
Work telephone number
( ) -
Cellular telephone number
( ) -
When was the last alleged discriminatory act? (month, day, year)
Complaints of discrimination must be filed within 180 days of the date of the alleged
discriminatory act. If the alleged act of discrimination occurred more than 180 days ago,
please explain your delay in filing this complaint.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
Title VI Implementation Plan
CHAPTER
101
The alleged
discrimination was
based on:
? Race ? Color ? Age ? Gender Identity
? Disability ? National Origin ? LEP ? Retaliation
? Religion ? Sex ? Income ? Sexual
Orientation
? Other
Name of complainant Date (month, day, year)
Describe the alleged act(s) of discrimination (use additional pages, if necessary)
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
Title VI Implementation Plan
CHAPTER
101
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
Title VI Implementation Plan
CHAPTER
101
REPORT OF INVESTIGATION City of Auburn, Indiana
I, _____________________________, representing the City of Auburn, have investigated the complaint
filed on _______________, 20___ by _____________________________alleging that discrimination
occurred which was in violation of the provisions of Title VI of the Federal Civil Rights Act.
The results of the investigation were as follows:
_____A. The agency or person was found to be in violation of Title VI.
_____B. The agency or person was not found to be in violation of Title VI.
_____C. The complainant withdrew the complaint.
A copy of the investigation report is attached.
Withdrawal of Complaint (if applicable) _____________________________________
If the agency or person was found to be in violation of Title VI, a brief description of the remedial action
taken to assure future compliance follows:
___________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________
Printed Name of Investigator: _________________________________________________________
Signature: ____________________________________ Date: _________________
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
Title VI Implementation Plan
CHAPTER
101
APPENDIX G: VOLUNTARY TITLE VI PUBLIC INVOLVEMENT SURVEY CITY OF AUBURN, INDIANA
As a recipient of federal funds, the Indiana Department of Transportation (INDOT) is requiring local agencies
to develop a procedure for gathering statistical data regarding participants and beneficiaries of its federal-aid
highway programs and activities (23 CRF §200.9(b)(4)). The City of Auburn is distributing this voluntary
survey to fulfill that requirement to gather information about the populations affected by proposed projects.
You are not required to complete this survey. Submittal of this information is voluntary. This form is a public
document that the City of Auburn, Indiana will use to monitor its programs and activities for compliance with
Title VI and the Civil Rights Act of 1964, as amended and its related statutes and regulations.
If you have any questions regarding the City of Auburn’s responsibilities under Title VI of the Civil Rights Act
of 1964 or the Americans with Disabilities Act, please contact the Human Resources Department of the City
of Auburn, Indiana.
City of Auburn
210 E Ninth Street
PO Box 506
Auburn, Indiana 46706
humanresources@ci.auburn.in.us
**You may return the survey by mail or e-mail to the address above**
Project Name
Date (month/day/year)
Proposed Project Name
Gender: ? Female ? Male
Ethnicity: ? Hispanic or Latino ? Not Hispanic or Latino
Race: (Check one or
more)
? American Indian or Alaska Native ? Asian
? Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific
Islander
? White
? Multiracial ? Black or African
American
Age: ? 1 - 21 ? 22 – 40
? 41 - 65 ? 65+
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
Title VI Implementation Plan
CHAPTER
101
Disability: ? Yes ? No
Household Income: ? $0 - $12,000 ? $12,001 - $24,000
? $24,001 - $36,000 ? $36,001 - $48,000
? $48,001 - $60,000 ? $60,000+
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
Title VI Implementation Plan
CHAPTER
101
APPENDIX H: 2004 CENSUS TEST LANGUAGE IDENTIFICATION FLASHCARD CITY OF AUBURN, INDIANA
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
Title VI Implementation Plan
CHAPTER
101
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
Title VI Implementation Plan
CHAPTER
101
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Animals
CHAPTER 90
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 90-2
Animals
CHAPTER 90
Table of Contents
90.01 DEFINITIONS
90.02 DOGS
90.03 ANIMALS AT LARGE
90.04 CERTAIN ANIMALS PROHIBITED
90.05 APPROPRIATE SHELTER
90.06 HITCHING OR TYING ANIMALS
90.07 FOOD AND WATER
90.08 VACCINATIONS; TAGS
90.09 MEDICAL CARE
90.10 REMOVAL OF EXCREMENT
90.11 SANITATION
90.12 WILD OR EXOTIC ANIMALS PROHIBITED
90.13 RESTRAINT OF ANIMALS
90.14 CRUELTY TO ANIMALS
90.15 FIGHTING ANIMALS
90.16 POISONOUS BAIT
90.17 MOTOR VEHICLE-CAUSED INJURIES
90.18 UNATTENDED ANIMALS
90.19 TRAINING METHODS
90.20 ANIMALS IN HEAT
90.21 ABANDONMENT
90.22 ANIMALS AS PRIZES OR INDUCEMENTS
90.23 PUPPY AND KITTEN SALE OR GIVEAWAY
90.24 DYED ANIMALS
90.25 ANIMALS AS NOVELTIES
90.26 ANIMAL EVENTS PROHIBITED
90.27 DESTRUCTION OF ANIMALS
90.28 NOISY DOGS
90.29 INTERFERING WITH ENFORCEMENT
90.30 FARM ANIMALS
90.31 NUISANCE ANIMALS PROHIBITED
90.32 VICIOUS ANIMALS PROHIBITED
90.33 HEARINGS
90.34 STRAYS
90.35 RIGHT OF ENTRY
90.36 RIGHT OF EUTHANASIA
90.37 ANIMAL TRAPS; REQUIREMENT AND PROHIBITIONS
90.38 OPEN FEEDING OF ANIMALS
90.39 MAINTENANCE OF RESIDENCE
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 90-3
Animals
CHAPTER 90
90.40 COSTS
90.41 OFF-PREMISES CONTROL
90.42 ENFORCEMENT
90.99 PENALTY
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 90-4
Animals
CHAPTER 90
90.01 DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.
• ANIMAL
Domestic animal unless otherwise noted.
• ATTACK
A sudden, unprovoked, violent assault, which causes serious physical injury.
• DOMESTIC ANIMAL
Any animal commonly referred to as a pet including, but not limited to, dogs, cats, fish, guinea pigs, potbellied
pigs, hamsters, some lizards and caged birds.
• FARM ANIMALS
Those animals which are kept for work and/or food production including, but not limited to, horses, cows,
pigs, sheep, chickens, llamas, ducks, and geese.
• LEASH
A restraint device which, when used properly, will not allow an animal to move greater than twelve (12)
feet from a person.
• NUISANCE
That activity which impairs or impedes the enjoyment of others which includes barking dogs, excrement
left uncleaned, or anything that offends the sensitivities of a reasonable person.
• RUNNING AT LARGE
Not confined on the property of an animal’s owners so as to prevent people, other than the owner,
family, or invitees, from accidental contact with the animal.
• TRESSPASSER
Any person, other than a minor under the age of 14 years, who comes onto the physical property of
another without the permission or request of the owner or duly constituted occupant of the property.
• RESTRAINED
To control the actions or behavior of another by force to stop them from doing something.
• WILD OR EXOTIC ANIMALS
Those animals which are defined by the state or federal government and require state or federal
licenses or permits.
90.02 DOGS
No owner or master of any dog shall allow it to roam beyond the owner’s property unattended by
the custodian or owner or the owner’s agent.
It shall be unlawful for any person to harbor or keep any dog which barks in a loud and frequent or
habitual manner. Any person who allows any dog to habitually remain and be lodged within its
house, store, enclosure, or yard shall be considered to harbor the dog within the meaning of this
chapter.
It shall be unlawful for any person to harbor or keep any dog which causes pollution from its
excrement by being caged on the premises of any person.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 90-5
Animals
CHAPTER 90
90.03 ANIMALS AT LARGE
It shall be unlawful for any person or corporation owning, possessing, harboring, or having the care
of any animal to allow the animal to run at large on the streets of this city unless restrained and
controlled.
“ANY ANIMAL” shall be defined to include, by way of description and not limitation, cattle, horses,
mules, swine, sheep, goats, cats, and poultry.
The Auburn Police Department is authorized and directed to take up and impound any animal found
roaming at large within the corporate limits of the city.
90.04 CERTAIN ANIMALS PROHIBITED
No person shall keep, stable, maintain, or harbor any poultry, horses, mules, swine, sheep, goats,
ponies, or animal of the bovine species within the city. However, this section shall not be construed
to prohibit the use of horses and ponies upon the public streets, nor the transport of any of these
animals in vehicles over the public streets.
No person shall permit any of the animals mentioned in (A) above to pasture within the city limits.
It shall be the duty of the representative of the Board of Public Works and Safety to take up and
impound any animal found in the city in violation of this section.
Specifically excluded from this chapter, as to the harboring of animals, are any doctor of
veterinary medicine who regularly practices his profession and skill within the city limits; the
grounds occupied by the DeKalb County Free Fall Fair Association that is bounded by Thirteenth
Street extended on the north, Cedar Creek on the east, Eighteenth Street on the south and Union
Street on the west, excluding only therefrom Evergreen Cemetery; any person who, upon passage
of this chapter, is now harboring chickens and poultry for their own personal use within the city
limits; and any person who, upon the passage of this chapter, now stables horses for their personal
pleasure within the city limits.
90.05 APPROPRIATE SHELTER
No person shall confine or allow his or her animal to remain outside without access to appropriate shelter
from the elements
Every owner and or keeper of a domesticated animal in Auburn, Indiana shall see that such animal is kept
clean, sanitary and healthy and is not confined so as to be forced to stand, sit or lie in its own excrement; the
person(s) responsible for the animal(s) shall regularly and as often as necessary to prevent odor or health
and sanitation problems, maintain all animal areas or area of animal contact as set forth herein.
An owned domestic dog, cat, or other allowed domestic animal within the City of Auburn shall be brought
inside a home, building, or other suitable dwelling within 30 minutes of the onset an active weather warning
issued by the National Weather Service affecting Auburn, Indiana. If an owner/guardian is not present to
rectify the situation a police officer may impound the animal on the spot for its health and safety.
90.06 HITCHING OR TYING ANIMALS
Every owner or keeper of a domesticated animal in Auburn, Indiana shall see that such animal shall not be
tethered by use of a choke collar, or on any collar too small for the size and age of the animal, not by any
rope, chaining or cord directly attached to the animal’s neck, nor by a leash less than twelve (12) feet in
length, or of such unreasonable weight as to prevent the animal from moving about freely.
90.07 FOOD AND WATER
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 90-6
Animals
CHAPTER 90
Every owner or keeper of a domesticated animal in Auburn, Indiana shall see that such animal has food that
is appropriate for the species in adequate amounts to maintain good health, fresh potable drinking water
where appropriate, shelter and ventilation, including quarters that are protected from excessive heat and
cold and are of sufficient size to permit the animal to exercise and move freely.
90.08 VACCINATIONS; TAGS
Cats and dogs over the age of six months must be vaccinated by a licensed veterinarian for rabies. Dogs
must be vaccinated yearly; cats must have a current rabies vaccination. Both cats and dogs must wear a
current rabies tag at all times attached to a properly fitted collar or harness.
90.09 MEDICAL CARE
All animals shall be provided with necessary medical care in addition to the required rabies vaccination.
90.10 REMOVAL OF EXCREMENT
Persons responsible for an animal shall immediately remove the animal’s excrement from public lands or
from the property of another, excepting a blind person working with a guide dog.
Any person who violates any provision of Section 90.10 shall upon conviction be fined in the amount of
$50.00.
90.11 SANITATION
All animals, where kept inside, or in a pen, tied, fastened, hitched, leashed, or enclosed in a fence, shall be
kept in a sanitary manner. The persons responsible for the animal(s) shall regularly, and as often as
necessary to prevent odor or health and sanitation problems, maintain all animal areas or areas of animal
contact.
90.12 WILD OR EXOTIC ANIMALS PROHIBITED
No wild or exotic animal shall be kept within the city without the necessary state and/or federal permits.
90.13 RESTRAINT OF ANIMALS
All animals shall be properly restrained as defined in this chapter.
90.14 CRUELTY TO ANIMALS
No person shall beat, cruelly treat, neglect, torment, overload, overwork, or otherwise abuse any animal
except that reasonable force employed to drive off vicious or trespassing animals.
90.15 FIGHTING ANIMALS
No person shall permit or conduct any dog fight, cock fight, or other combat between animals or between
animals and humans.
90.16 POISONOUS BAIT
No person shall set any type of poisonous substance or bait within the city limits that is deemed harmful to
any domestic animal, provided that controlled programs under the direction of the county board of health or
a licensed extermination service may be excluded.
90.17 MOTOR VEHICLE-CAUSED INJURIES
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 90-7
Animals
CHAPTER 90
Any person operating a motor vehicle who causes injury or death to an animal shall stop at once, assess the
extent of injury, and immediately notify the owner or Police Department of the location of the animal.
90.18 UNATTENDED ANIMALS
No animal shall be left unattended in a public place within the City limits of Auburn, Indiana.
90.19 TRAINING METHODS
No animal may be induced or encouraged to perform through the use of chemical, mechanical, electrical, or
manual devices in a manner which will cause or is likely to cause physical injury or suffering. Prohibited
devices include, but are not limited to, electrical prods and electrical (shock) collars.
90.20 ANIMALS IN HEAT
Every female dog or cat in heat shall be controlled so as to prevent conception except during instances of
planned breeding.
90.21 ABANDONMENT
No person shall abandon or cause to be abandoned any animal anywhere within the city limits in any public
or private place, way, or building.
90.22 ANIMALS AS PRIZES OR INDUCEMENTS
No person shall sell, offer for sale, trade, barter or give away any live animal, bird, or reptile as a prize for, or
use such as an inducement to enter a place of amusement; or offer such vertebrate as an incentive to enter
any business establishment or enter into any business agreement whereby the offer was made for the
purpose of attracting trade, for business other than establishments selling animals as their primary business.
90.23 PUPPY AND KITTEN SALE OR GIVEAWAY
No puppy or kitten which is under the age of eight weeks may be offered for sale, trade, or for other
compensation or free giveaway (except a puppy or kitten litter or litters may be taken to the animal shelter
during posted hours.
90.24 DYED ANIMALS
No person shall sell, offer for sale, trade, or barter any animal whose appearance has been chemically
altered by dyes or staining.
90.25 ANIMALS AS NOVELTIES
No person or establishment shall sell, offer for sale, barter, or give away chicks, goslings, ducklings, or other
fowl as pets or novelties. This section shall not apply to the sale of farm animals at the DeKalb County Free
Fall Fair.
90.26 ANIMAL EVENTS PROHIBITED
No person or group of persons or any profit or nonprofit organization, whether for pay or other compensation
or for free promotional purposes, shall conduct or allow any event involving contests between animals or
persons using animals in any form or manner, except those events reviewed and approved for the safety,
well-being, and comfort of the animals involved by the Board of Public Works and Safety.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 90-8
Animals
CHAPTER 90
This provision shall not prohibit events authorized by the DeKalb County Fair Association, Inc
conducted in accordance with health regulations for exhibition of domestic and farm animals in the
state, or shows, rides, and concessions approved by said association.
No event, ride, and/or concession shall be exempt from the provision of 90.22 and 90.25.
90.27 DESTRUCTION OF ANIMALS
No person other than a duly authorized agent of the Police Department may destroy any domestic animal
within the city limits, provided this provision shall not apply to the following:
A licensed veterinarian;
Those persons acting in immediate self-protection; or
City police officers or firemen acting to prevent undue suffering.
90.28 NOISY DOGS
No person shall allow the continuous barking, yelping, whining, or howling of a dog. The police officer may
take steps immediately to correct the situation and cause the noise to be abated, either through issuance of
a citation or impounding the animal if no owner or agent can be found at the time of the disturbance.
90.29 INTERFERING WITH ENFORCEMENT
No person shall interfere with the Auburn Police Department Officers in the pursuit of his/her duties as an
officer.
90.30 FARM ANIMALS
No resident of the city may board or raise any farm animals within the city corporation limits without the
express written authorization of the Board of Public Works and Safety.
90.31 NUISANCE ANIMALS PROHIBITED
No person shall own or harbor an animal which creates a public nuisance. This shall include animals which
are used for dog fighting.
90.32 VICIOUS ANIMALS PROHIBITED
No person shall own, keep, or harbor a vicious animal within the city, provided this section shall not
apply to animals under the control of a law enforcement or military agency. For the purpose of this
section, an animal may be declared vicious by the Police Department or Board of Works by applying
any of the following criteria:
1. The animal has attacked a person or persons and the attack was unprovoked.
2. The animal exhibits vicious propensities in present or past conduct including, but not limited to,
conduct such that the animal has attacked or bitten another individual.
3. The animal has inflicted injuries to a person creating a substantial danger to the health and life
of the victim.
4. The animal could not be controlled or restrained at the time of the attack to prevent the
occurrence.
5. The destruction of the animal is necessary to preserve the public health, safety and welfare.
Whenever an animal is declared vicious, the animal shall be immediately quarantined and the
Police Department shall notify the owner of said animal of the declaration. Such notice shall be
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 90-9
Animals
CHAPTER 90
served either in person or by certified or registered mail. The owner shall be notified and they must
appeal the declaration to the Board of Public Works and Safety within five (5) days of said notice or
said animal will be humanely destroyed at the direction of the Police Department at the owner’s
expense.
The appeal shall be made to the Board of Public Works and Safety by delivering a letter requesting
said appeal to the office of the Clerk-Treasurer at City Hall. Thereafter, a hearing shall be held
before the Board at the next regularly scheduled meeting or at a special meeting in accordance with
the provisions of Section 90.33. Any decision by the Board of Public Works and Safety may be
appealed to a county court of competent jurisdiction. Such appeal must be brought within ten (10)
days after receipt of the written decision of the Board of Public Works and Safety. During the period
that the animal is held in custody, the expense of said custody shall be the responsibility of the
owner of the animal.
Notice of appeal shall act as a stay of the Board of Public Works and Safety’s decision. However,
the animal shall remain in custody at the expense of the owner during this period.
90.33 HEARINGS
All hearings before the Board of Public Works and Safety shall be conducted according to the State Trial
Rules and the rules of evidence so as to provide all parties certain due process of law.
The rules of evidence may be relaxed by stipulation of the parties.
All hearings shall be recorded.
All witnesses shall be sworn.
The Board of Public Works and Safety and the City Police or other Department Prosecuting the
matter before the Board of Public Works and Safety shall be represented by separate legal counsel.
The decision of the Board of Public Works and Safety shall be final and presented to the animal’s
owner in writing.
90.34 STRAYS
Where there is no apparent owner of an animal, the Police Department place the animal at the animal
shelter.
90.35 RIGHT OF ENTRY
The police may use any force necessary to remove any animal locked in a closed vehicle when the ambient
temperature is eighty (80) degrees Fahrenheit or above outside the vehicle.
90.36 RIGHT OF EUTHANASIA
An animal may be euthanized at any time, when, in the judgment of the police or DeKalb Humane Society it
is determined that:
At the scene of an accident an animal is obviously injured beyond medical help, or vicious, and no traceable
form of identification is displayed on the animal;
An animal presented to the DeKalb Humane Society is obviously injured beyond medical help, or exhibits
obvious signs of infectious disease or parasite infestation that would impose a health risk to animals or
parasite infestation that would impose a health risk to animals housed in the shelter, or that exhibits
symptoms of malignancy, without a traceable form of identification.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 90-10
Animals
CHAPTER 90
90.37 ANIMAL TRAPS; REQUIREMENT AND PROHIBITIONS
It shall be unlawful for a person to use, place, set or cause to be used, placed, or set any leg-hold trap upon
any land or waters in the city unless properly licensed or authorized by the State of Indiana.
It shall be unlawful for any person to destroy, move, or alter any cages or compartments owned by the
Police Department used to capture stray animals.
90.38 OPEN FEEDING OF ANIMALS
It shall be unlawful for a person to openly place food and or refuse out for animals that is spoiled and or
creates a pungent or noxious odor that can be distinctly detected beyond the property line of the owner or
resident of a property. It shall be unlawful to feed animals on public property or on other people’s property.
90.39 MAINTENANCE OF RESIDENCE
It shall be unlawful for a person to maintain a residence in which animals reside, in such a manner as to
cause pungent or noxious odors that can be distinctly detected beyond the property line of the residence.
90.40 COSTS
All costs for sheltering an animal during the pendency of hearings and/or appeals shall be the sole
responsibility of the owner. Failure to pay the costs shall result in a suit being filed in the County
Circuit/Superior Court. Costs of the suit may be assessed to the animal’s owner to include filing costs and
reasonable attorney fees.
90.41 OFF-PREMISES CONTROL
All domestic animals shall be controlled by a leash when not on the property of an owner, excluding fish and
birds which shall be kept in an appropriate container.
90.42 ENFORCEMENT
It shall be the responsibility of the Police Department to issue citations for violations of this chapter.
90.99 PENALTY
Any violation of this Ordinance is punishable by a fine of $50.00. Each day a violation continues is a
separate offense.
Approved 2/19/2019 Ordinance 2019-02
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
MUNICIPAL PARKING
FACILITIES
CHAPTER 78
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 78-2
MUNICIPAL PARKING FACILITIES
CHAPTER 78
Table of Contents
78.01 REGULATION OF MUNICIPALLY OWNED PARKING FACILITIES
78.02 TOWING UNAUTHORIZED VEHICLES FROM PARKING FACILITIES
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 78-3
MUNICIPAL PARKING FACILITIES
CHAPTER 78
78.01 REGULATION OF MUNICIPALLY OWNED PARKING FACILITIES
The City of Auburn, Indiana shall regulate all parking facilities owned by the Municipal City of Auburn,
Indiana. The Municipal City of Auburn, Indiana shall regulate the city owned parking facilities by numbering
and identifying reserved parking spaces. A sign shall be clearly posted at the entrance of each parking
facility owned by the City of Auburn, Indiana identifying the facility as reserved parking and warning that
unauthorized vehicles will be towed at the expense of the owner.
78.02 TOWING UNAUTHORIZED VEHICLES FROM PARKING FACILITIES
The City of Auburn Police Department or an agent thereof shall be charged with the duty of towing any
unauthorized vehicles located in the City of Auburn, Indiana parking facilities. The towing of said vehicles
shall be at the expense of the owner of said vehicle. The City of Auburn Police Department upon towing any
vehicle shall attempt to contact the owner of said vehicle by telephone and by written letter informing the
owner of the vehicle’s location.
(as amended Ordinance 2018-14 passed 06/19/2018)
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Abandoned and Junk
Vehicles
CHAPTER 91
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 91-2
Abandoned and Junk Vehicles
CHAPTER 91
Table of Contents
ABANDONED VEHICLES
91.01 ABANDONED VEHICLES DECLARED NUISANCE
91.02 ADOPTION OF STATE PROVISIONS BY REFERENCE
91.03 ENFORCEMENT BY POLICE DEPARTMENT
91.04 MAXIMUM TOWING AND STORAGE CHARGES
JUNK VEHICLES
91.10 JUNK VEHICLES DECLARED A NUISANCE
91.11 DEFINITIONS
91.12 PROHIBITED STORAGE
91.13 PERMITTED STORAGE
91.14 REMOVAL
91.15 PROCEDURE FOR REMOVAL
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 91-3
Abandoned and Junk Vehicles
CHAPTER 91
ABANDONED VEHICLES
91.01 ABANDONED VEHICLES DECLARED NUISANCE
The Common Council finds that abandoned vehicles are a public nuisance and a safety and health hazard.
91.02 ADOPTION OF STATE PROVISIONS BY REFERENCE
IC 9-22-1-1 through 9-22-1-32 as it presently exists and is hereafter amended, is hereby adopted by
reference, as if set forth in full herein.
91.03 ENFORCEMENT BY POLICE DEPARTMENT
The Police Department is designated as the local agency given the responsibility for removal, storage, and
disposal of abandoned vehicles to the extent permitted under IC 9-22-1-1 through 9-22-1-16 as it presently
exists and is hereafter amended.
91.04 MAXIMUM TOWING AND STORAGE CHARGES
The maximum charge allowed for towing of abandoned or junk vehicles under this chapter shall be $75.
The maximum charge for storage of abandoned or junk vehicles shall be $20 per day. The maximum fine for
violating this section shall be $300 assessed to each owner of the property where the vehicle is located and
the title owner of said vehicle.
JUNK VEHICLES
91.10 JUNK VEHICLES DECLARED A NUISANCE
Because of the danger to health from vermin and insects and to children attracted by such junk cars, junk
motor vehicles are declared to be a nuisance except in lawfully operated junk yards or yards lawfully
operated for vehicles awaiting permission for junking from the Bureau of Motor Vehicles.
91.11 DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates
or requires a different meaning.
• JUNK MOTOR VEHICLE
A car which is partially dismantled or wrecked and which cannot safely or legally be operated.
• MOTOR VEHICLE
Any self propelled land vehicle which can be used for towing or transporting people or materials,
including but not limited to automobiles, trucks, buses, motor homes, motorized campers, motorcycles,
tractors, dune buggies and other off the road vehicles.
91.12 PROHIBITED STORAGE
It shall be unlawful for any person owning or having custody of any junked motor vehicle to store or permit
any such vehicle to remain on any private property within the city for a period of more than ten days after the
receipt of notice requiring such removal and it shall be further unlawful for any person owning any private
property in the city to store or to permit to remain any such vehicles on his property for more than a like
period.
91.13 PERMITTED STORAGE
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 91-4
Abandoned and Junk Vehicles
CHAPTER 91
This section shall not apply to any motor vehicle stored within an enclosed building or on the premises of a
business enterprise operated in a lawful place and manner when necessary to the operation of such
business enterprise. Such business enterprises shall include auto junk yards, auto repair and auto body
shops and automobile service stations.
91.14 REMOVAL
Any member of the Police Department may order any junk motor vehicle removed within ten days.
91.15 PROCEDURE FOR REMOVAL
Notice of the order of removal shall be placed on the junk motor vehicle and a copy of such notice
shall be served on any adult occupying the real estate on which the junk motor vehicle is located
and on the owner of the junk motor vehicle if known. If no occupant of the real estate or owner of
the junk motor vehicle can be found, a notice affixed to any building on the real estate shall
constitute notice to the owner and occupant of the real estate and to the owner of the junk motor
vehicle. If there is no building on the real estate, the notice shall be affixed elsewhere on the real
estate.
If the junk vehicle is not removed within the time fixed by the notice, the Police Department may
execute an order of removal. The notice may be hand delivered, attached to the real property or
mailed by first class mail. Prior to entering the premises of any municipal residence for the purpose
of removal of junk vehicles, the Police Department shall first obtain, through the DeKalb Superior or
Circuit Court, an administrative search warrant for the purposes of entering the premises upon
which said junk vehicle sits. The Police Department must have reasonable cause to believe that this
section is in violation before being able to obtain an administrative search warrant. Upon obtaining
the administrative search warrant, the Police Department shall serve said search warrant on the
owner of said residence before any removal of said vehicle. Said search warrant shall also give the
city authority to remove said vehicle and charge the costs of said removal to the owner.
After removal of the junk motor vehicle, the Police Department may elect to proceed as follows:
1. Within a reasonable time after removal of a junk motor vehicle to a storage area, the Police
Department shall prepare and forward to the Bureau of Motor Vehicles a vehicle report
containing a description of the vehicle including the make, model, engine number, if any,
identification number and the number of the license plate and request that the Bureau of Motor
Vehicles advise the Police Department of the name and most recent mailing address of the
owner and any lienholder. If the Bureau of Motor Vehicles provides a response to the inquiry
made by the Police Department, the Police Department shall mail a copy of the notice and a
copy of this section to each individual listed as an owner of the motor vehicle and as a
lienholder on the motor vehicle.
2. If the junk motor vehicle remains unclaimed a period of 30 days after being placed in storage,
the city will sell the vehicle to the highest bidder at a public sale conducted after notice under IC
5-3-1 or the city may elect to sell the motor vehicle as unclaimed property in accordance with IC
36-1-11 et. seq.
3. If the city elects to sell the motor vehicle the purchaser shall be furnished a bill of sale for the
motor vehicle.
4. The proceeds of sale of any motor vehicle shall be applied towards the costs incident to the
removal, storage and disposal of the motor vehicle. Any excess funds shall be returned to the
owner, if known, and if unknown deposited with the Clerk-Treasurer of the city.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 91-5
Abandoned and Junk Vehicles
CHAPTER 91
5. If the city has entered into an agreement with any business for the purpose of towing, storing
and disposing of junk motor vehicles, then the business may be powered to dispose of the junk
motor vehicle as allowed by state law.
© 2018, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Article
Title XV
Chapter 150
Table of Contents
00
Effective March 18, 2019
Amendment 1 - July 16, 2019
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article
ii
Table of Contents 00
Article 1: Ordinance Foundation 1-1
1.01 Title........................................................................................................................................................................ 1-2
1.02 Defined Words........................................................................................................................................................ 1-2
1.03 Authority................................................................................................................................................................ 1-2
1.04 Purpose................................................................................................................................................................... 1-2
1.05 Compliance............................................................................................................................................................ 1-2
1.06 Severability............................................................................................................................................................ 1-2
1.07 Interpretation.......................................................................................................................................................... 1-2
1.08 Ordinance Jurisdictional Area................................................................................................................................ 1-4
1.09 Repealer................................................................................................................................................................. 1-4
1.10 Transition Rules..................................................................................................................................................... 1-4
1.11 Administrative Officer........................................................................................................................................... 1-5
1.12 Saving Provision.................................................................................................................................................... 1-5
1.13 Effect of Annexation or Vacation on Zoning......................................................................................................... 1-5
1.14 Statutory Changes.................................................................................................................................................. 1-5
1.15 References.............................................................................................................................................................. 1-5
1.16 Establishment of Standard Zoning Districts.......................................................................................................... 1-6
1.17 Establishment of Overlay Districts........................................................................................................................ 1-7
1.18 Establishment of Planned Development Districts.................................................................................................. 1-7
1.19 Zoning District Land Uses..................................................................................................................................... 1-7
1.20 Unlisted Land Uses................................................................................................................................................ 1-7
1.21 Questionable Land Uses........................................................................................................................................ 1-7
1.22 Official Zoning Map.............................................................................................................................................. 1-8
1.23 Common Council Summary of Powers and Duties............................................................................................. 1-10
1.24 Plan Commission Summary of Powers and Duties............................................................................................. 1-10
1.25 Board of Zoning Appeals Summary of Duties..................................................................................................... 1-11
1.26 Zoning Administrator Summary of Duties.......................................................................................................... 1-11
1.27 Plan Commission Certification............................................................................................................................ 1-12
1.28 Unified Development Ordinance Adoption and Effective Date........................................................................... 1-13
Article 2: Zoning Districts 2-1
2.01 PR District Intent, Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses........................................................................... 2-2
2.02 PR District Development Standards...................................................................................................................... 2-3
2.03 AG District Intent, Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses.......................................................................... 2-4
2.04 AG District Development Standards..................................................................................................................... 2-5
2.05 AC District Intent, Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses.......................................................................... 2-6
2.06 AC District Development Standards...................................................................................................................... 2-7
2.07 ER District Intent, Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses.......................................................................... 2-8
2.08 ER District Development Standards...................................................................................................................... 2-9
2.09 R1 District Intent, Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses......................................................................... 2-10
2.10 R1 District Development Standards..................................................................................................................... 2-11
2.11 R2 District Intent, Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses......................................................................... 2-12
2.12 R2 District Development Standards..................................................................................................................... 2-13
2.13 R3 District Intent, Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses......................................................................... 2-14
2.14 R3 District Development Standards..................................................................................................................... 2-15
2.15 TR District Intent, Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses........................................................................ 2-16
2.16 TR District Development Standards.................................................................................................................... 2-17
2.17 M1 District Intent, Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses........................................................................ 2-18
2.18 M1 District Development Standards.................................................................................................................... 2-19
2.19 M2 District Intent, Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses........................................................................ 2-20
2.20 M2 District Development Standards.................................................................................................................... 2-21
2.21 MH District Intent, Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses....................................................................... 2-22
2.22 MH District Development Standards................................................................................................................... 2-23
2.23 IS District Intent, Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses.......................................................................... 2-24
2.24 IS District Development Standards...................................................................................................................... 2-25
2.25 DC District Intent, Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses........................................................................ 2-26
2.26 DC District Development Standards.................................................................................................................... 2-27
Article
Table of Contents iii
Table of Contents 00
2.27 C1 District Intent, Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses......................................................................... 2-28
2.28 C1 District Development Standards..................................................................................................................... 2-29
2.29 C2 District Intent, Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses......................................................................... 2-30
2.30 C2 District Development Standards..................................................................................................................... 2-31
2.31 I1 District Intent, Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses.......................................................................... 2-32
2.32 I1 District Development Standards...................................................................................................................... 2-33
2.33 I2 District Intent, Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses.......................................................................... 2-34
2.34 I2 District Development Standards...................................................................................................................... 2-35
2.35 HI District Intent, Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses......................................................................... 2-36
2.36 HI District Development Standards..................................................................................................................... 2-37
Article 3: Overlay Districts 3-1
3.01 WH-O District Intent, Effect on Uses, and Effect on Standards............................................................................ 3-2
3.02 Wellhead Protection Overlay District Development Standards............................................................................. 3-3
3.03 Process Supplement............................................................................................................................................... 3-4
3.04 Monitoring............................................................................................................................................................. 3-4
3.05 CG-O District Intent, Effect on Uses, and Effect on Standards............................................................................. 3-6
3.06 Corridors and Gateways Overlay District Development Standards....................................................................... 3-7
3.07 Corridors and Gateways Overlay District Design Standards................................................................................. 3-7
3.08 Corridors and Gateways Overlay District Other Non-residential Architectural Design Standards....................... 3-9
3.09 Corridors and Gateways Overlay District Non-residential Driveway Standards................................................ 3-10
3.10 ACO District Intent, Effect on Uses, and Development Standards..................................................................... 3-12
3.11 Applicability........................................................................................................................................................ 3-13
3.12 Establishment of Airport Compatibility Area...................................................................................................... 3-13
3.13 Restrictions for Each Sub-area............................................................................................................................. 3-14
Article 4: Planned Development Districts 4-1
4.01 PD District Intent, Regulations, and Prerequisites................................................................................................. 4-2
4.02 General................................................................................................................................................................... 4-3
4.03 Origination of Proposals........................................................................................................................................ 4-3
4.04 Rules and Procedures............................................................................................................................................. 4-3
4.05 Limitation of Revisions to this Unified Development Ordinance......................................................................... 4-3
4.06 Designation of Permanent Open Space.................................................................................................................. 4-4
Article 5: Development Standards 5-1
5.01 How to Use this Article.......................................................................................................................................... 5-2
5.02 Icon Key................................................................................................................................................................. 5-3
5.03 AD-01: General Accessory Dwelling Standards.................................................................................................... 5-4
5.04 AS-01: General Accessory Structure Standards..................................................................................................... 5-6
5.05 AS-02: Parks and Recreation and Agricultural Accessory Structure Standards.................................................... 5-7
5.06 AS-03: Estate Residential Accessory Structure Standards.................................................................................... 5-8
5.07 AS-04: Residential Accessory Structure Standards............................................................................................... 5-9
5.08 AS-05: Multiple-family Accessory Structure Standards...................................................................................... 5-10
5.09 AS-06: Manufactured Home Residential Accessory Structure Standards........................................................... 5-11
5.10 AS-07: Institutional Accessory Structure Standards............................................................................................ 5-12
5.11 AS-08: Downtown Commercial Accessory Structure Standards......................................................................... 5-13
5.12 AS-09: Neighborhood Commercial Accessory Structure Standards................................................................... 5-14
5.13 AS-10: General Commercial Accessory Structure Standards.............................................................................. 5-14
5.14 AS-11: Industrial Accessory Structure Standards................................................................................................ 5-15
5.15 AR-01: Residential and Neighborhood Commercial Architectural Standards.................................................... 5-16
5.16 AR-02: Traditional Residential Architectural Standards..................................................................................... 5-17
5.17 AR-03: Downtown Commercial Architectural Standards................................................................................... 5-18
5.18 AR-04: Commercial Architectural Standards...................................................................................................... 5-20
5.19 CF-01: General Confined Feeding Standards...................................................................................................... 5-21
5.20 DI-01: General Density and Intensity Standards................................................................................................. 5-22
5.21 DW-01: General Driveway Standards.................................................................................................................. 5-23
5.22 DW-02: Agricultural Driveway Standards........................................................................................................... 5-24
5.23 DW-03: Residential Driveway Standards............................................................................................................ 5-25
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article
iv
Table of Contents 00
5.24 DW-04: Non-residential Driveway Standards..................................................................................................... 5-26
5.25 EN-01: General Environmental Standards........................................................................................................... 5-27
5.26 FW-01: General Fence and Wall Standards......................................................................................................... 5-29
5.27 FW-02: Parks and Recreation Fence and Wall Standards.................................................................................... 5-30
5.28 FW-03: Agricultural Fence and Wall Standards................................................................................................... 5-30
5.29 FW-04: Residential Fence and Wall Standards.................................................................................................... 5-31
5.30 FW-05: Institutional and Commercial Fence and Wall Standards....................................................................... 5-31
5.31 FW-06: Downtown Commercial Fence and Wall Standards............................................................................... 5-32
5.32 FW-07: Industrial and High Impact Fence and Wall Standards........................................................................... 5-32
5.33 FP-01: General Floodplain Standards.................................................................................................................. 5-33
5.34 FA-01: General Floor Area Standards.................................................................................................................. 5-34
5.35 HT-01: General Height Standards........................................................................................................................ 5-35
5.36 HB-01: Type 1 Home Business Standards........................................................................................................... 5-36
5.37 HB-02: Type 2 Home Business Standards........................................................................................................... 5-37
5.38 HB-03: Type 3 Home Business Standards........................................................................................................... 5-38
5.39 KA-01 Agricultural Keeping of Animals Standards............................................................................................ 5-39
5.40 KA-02 Estate Residential Keeping of Farm Animals Standards......................................................................... 5-39
5.41 LA-01: General Landscaping Standards.............................................................................................................. 5-40
5.42 LA-02: Parking Lot Planting Standards............................................................................................................... 5-40
5.43 LT-01: General Lighting Standards...................................................................................................................... 5-41
5.44 LD-01: General Loading Standards..................................................................................................................... 5-42
5.45 LO-01: General Lot Standards............................................................................................................................. 5-43
5.46 MH-01: Manufactured Housing and Lease-lot Development Standards............................................................. 5-44
5.47 OD-01: General Outdoor Dining Standards........................................................................................................ 5-45
5.48 OS-01: General Outdoor Storage Standards........................................................................................................ 5-46
5.49 OS-02: Construction Trades Outdoor Storage Yard Standards............................................................................ 5-46
5.50 OS-03: Industrial and High Impact Outdoor Storage Standards.......................................................................... 5-46
5.51 PK-01: General Parking Standards...................................................................................................................... 5-47
5.52 PK-02: Residential Parking Standards................................................................................................................. 5-47
5.53 PK-03: Traditional Residential Parking Standards.............................................................................................. 5-48
5.54 PK-04: Multiple-family Residential Parking Standards...................................................................................... 5-48
5.55 PK-05: Manufactured Home Residential Parking Standards............................................................................... 5-48
5.56 PK-06: Downtown Commercial Parking Standards............................................................................................ 5-48
5.57 PK-07: Nonresidential Parking Standards........................................................................................................... 5-49
5.58 Table PK-A: Minimum Number Of Parking Spaces Per Use.............................................................................. 5-52
5.59 PF-01: General Performance Standards............................................................................................................... 5-56
5.60 PD-01: Permanent Outdoor Display Standards................................................................................................... 5-57
5.61 PD-02: Downtown Commercial Permanent Outdoor Display Standards............................................................ 5-58
5.62 PI-01: General Public Improvement Standards................................................................................................... 5-59
5.63 RV-01: Recreational Vehicle Standards............................................................................................................... 5-61
5.64 RW-01: Retaining Wall Standards....................................................................................................................... 5-62
5.65 SB-01: Setback Standards.................................................................................................................................... 5-63
5.66 SW-01: General Sewer and Water Standards....................................................................................................... 5-65
5.67 SX-01: General Sexually Oriented Business Standards...................................................................................... 5-66
5.68 SI-01: General Sign Standards............................................................................................................................ 5-67
5.69 SI-02: Agricultural Sign Standards...................................................................................................................... 5-70
5.70 SI-03: Residential Sign Standards....................................................................................................................... 5-71
5.71 SI-04: Multiple Family Residential Sign Standards............................................................................................ 5-72
5.72 SI-05: Parks and Recreation, Agricultural Commercial and Institutional Sign Standards.................................. 5-74
5.73 SI-06: Neighborhood and Downtown Commercial Sign Standards.................................................................... 5-79
5.74 SI-07: General Commercial Sign Standards........................................................................................................ 5-84
5.75 SI-09: Industrial Sign Standards.......................................................................................................................... 5-89
5.76 SL-01: General Solar and Alternate Energy Standards........................................................................................ 5-93
5.77 SL-02: Agricultural and Estate Residential Solar and Alternate Energy Standards............................................ 5-93
5.78 SL-03: Small Scale Solar and Alternate Energy Standards................................................................................. 5-93
5.79 SL-04: Large Scale Solar and Alternate Energy Standards................................................................................. 5-94
Article
Table of Contents v
Table of Contents 00
5.80 SL-05: Solar and Alternate Energy Farm Standards............................................................................................ 5-94
5.81 SE-01: General Special Exception Standards...................................................................................................... 5-95
5.82 SR-01: General Storage Tank Standards.............................................................................................................. 5-96
5.83 SR-02: Residential Storage Tank Standards........................................................................................................ 5-96
5.84 SR-03: Parks and Recreation and Estate Residential Storage Tank Standards.................................................... 5-96
5.85 SR-03: Non-residential Storage Tank Standards.................................................................................................. 5-96
5.86 ST-01: General Structure Standards..................................................................................................................... 5-97
5.87 TC-01: General Telecommunication Facility Standards...................................................................................... 5-98
5.88 TC-02: Telecommunication Micro Tower Facility Standards ........................................................................... 5-100
5.89 TC-03: Telecommunication Antenna Standards............................................................................................... 5-100
5.90 TU-01: General Temporary Use and Structure Standards................................................................................. 5-101
5.91 TU-02: Agricultural and Estate Residential Temporary Use and Structure Standards...................................... 5-101
5.92 TU-03: Residential Temporary Use and Structure Standards............................................................................ 5-102
5.93 TU-04: Nonresidential Temporary Use and Structure Standards...................................................................... 5-102
5.94 TR-01: General Trash Receptacle Standards..................................................................................................... 5-103
5.95 VC-01: General Vision Clearance Standards..................................................................................................... 5-104
Article 6: Subdivision Types 6-1
6.01 Residential Subdivision Intent............................................................................................................................... 6-2
6.02 Residential Subdivision Prerequisites.................................................................................................................... 6-2
6.03 Residential Subdivision Standards......................................................................................................................... 6-3
6.04 Commercial District Subdivision Intent................................................................................................................ 6-4
6.05 Commercial District Subdivision Prerequisites..................................................................................................... 6-4
6.06 Commercial District Subdivision Standards.......................................................................................................... 6-5
6.07 Industrial Park Subdivision Intent......................................................................................................................... 6-6
6.08 Industrial Park Subdivision Prerequisites.............................................................................................................. 6-6
6.09 Industrial Park Subdivision Standards................................................................................................................... 6-7
Article 7: Design Standards 7-1
7.01 Using This Section................................................................................................................................................. 7-2
7.02 Purpose of Design Standards................................................................................................................................. 7-2
7.03 Icon Key................................................................................................................................................................. 7-3
7.04 DN-01: General Development Name Standards.................................................................................................... 7-4
7.05 DD-01: General Dedication of Public Improvement Standards............................................................................ 7-5
7.06 EA-01: Easement Standards.................................................................................................................................. 7-6
7.07 EF-O1: General Entryway Feature Standards........................................................................................................ 7-8
7.08 EC-01: General Erosion Control Standards........................................................................................................... 7-9
7.09 FP-01: General Hazard Reduction Floodplain Standards.................................................................................... 7-10
7.10 LT-01: Residential Lot Establishment Standards................................................................................................. 7-11
7.11 LT-02: Non-residential Lot Establishment Standards.......................................................................................... 7-12
7.12 MX-01: General Mixed-use Development Standards.......................................................................................... 7-13
7.13 MM-01: General Monument and Marker Standards............................................................................................ 7-14
7.14 OP-01: General Open Space Standards............................................................................................................... 7-15
7.15 OA-01: Owners' Association Standards............................................................................................................... 7-16
7.16 PN-01: General Pedestrian Network Standards................................................................................................... 7-18
7.17 PL-01: General Perimeter Landscaping Standards.............................................................................................. 7-19
7.18 PQ-01: General Prerequisite Standards............................................................................................................... 7-20
7.19 SM-01 General Storm Water Standards............................................................................................................... 7-21
7.20 SA-01: General Street and Access Standards...................................................................................................... 7-23
7.21 SA-02: Private Street and Access Standards........................................................................................................ 7-27
7.22 SA-03: Other Residential Street and Access (Alley) Standards.......................................................................... 7-28
7.23 SA-04: Residential Street and Access Standards................................................................................................. 7-28
7.24 SA-05: Nonresidential Access Standards............................................................................................................. 7-29
7.25 SA-06: Street and Access (Signs) Standards....................................................................................................... 7-30
7.26 SL-01: Residential Street Lighting Standards...................................................................................................... 7-31
7.27 SL-02: Non-residential Street Lighting Standards............................................................................................... 7-31
7.28 SY-01: General Surety Standards......................................................................................................................... 7-32
7.29 UT-01: General Utility Standards........................................................................................................................ 7-34
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article
vi
Table of Contents 00
Article 8: Nonconformances 8-1
8.01 Intent...................................................................................................................................................................... 8-2
8.02 Distinction Between Conforming, Illegal Nonconforming, and Legal Nonconforming....................................... 8-2
8.03 Illegal Nonconforming Structures, Uses, and Lots................................................................................................ 8-2
8.04 Legal Nonconforming Structures........................................................................................................................... 8-3
8.05 Legal Nonconforming Lots.................................................................................................................................... 8-5
8.06 Legal Nonconforming Use..................................................................................................................................... 8-6
Article 9: Processes 9-1
9.01 Introduction to Processes....................................................................................................................................... 9-2
9.02 Improvement Location Permit............................................................................................................................... 9-3
9.03 Temporary Improvement Location Permit............................................................................................................. 9-8
9.04 Administrative Appeal......................................................................................................................................... 9-10
9.05 Development Plan................................................................................................................................................ 9-12
9.06 General Planned Development............................................................................................................................. 9-17
9.07 Planned Development: District Ordinance.......................................................................................................... 9-18
9.08 Planned Development: Detailed Development Plan............................................................................................ 9-21
9.09 Planned Development: Final Development Plan................................................................................................. 9-26
9.10 Special Exception................................................................................................................................................. 9-28
9.11 Subdivision of Land: Primary Plat....................................................................................................................... 9-31
9.12 Subdivision of Land: Secondary Plat................................................................................................................... 9-35
9.13 Unified Development Ordinance: Text Amendment............................................................................................ 9-37
9.14 Variance................................................................................................................................................................ 9-38
9.15 Zoning Map Amendment (Rezoning).................................................................................................................. 9-41
Article 10: Enforcement and Penalties 10-1
10.01 Authority.............................................................................................................................................................. 10-2
10.02 Violations............................................................................................................................................................. 10-2
10.03 Procedure for Violations...................................................................................................................................... 10-3
10.04 Appeals or Trials.................................................................................................................................................. 10-3
10.05 Enforcement, Remedies, and Injunctive Relief................................................................................................... 10-4
Article 11: Definitions 11-1
11.01 General................................................................................................................................................................. 11-2
11.02 Defined Words...................................................................................................................................................... 11-2
Article 12: Land Use Matrix A-1
Article 13: Flood Hazard Areas B-1
Article 14: Amendment Tracking C-1
Article
Table of Contents vii
Table of Contents 00
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article
viii
Table of Contents 00
© 2018, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Article
01
Ordinance Foundation
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 01
1-2
1.01 Title
This ordinance shall be formally known as the “Auburn Unified Development Ordinance” and may be cited and
referred to as the “Zoning Ordinance,” “Subdivision Control Ordinance,” or “Unified Development Ordinance.”
1.02 Defined Words
Words used in a special sense in this Unified Development Ordinance are defined in Article 11: Definitions.
1.03 Authority
This Unified Development Ordinance is adopted by the City pursuant to its authority under the laws of the State of
Indiana, IC 36-7-4 et seq.
1.04 Purpose
This Unified Development Ordinance is intended to guide the growth and development of Auburn in accordance with
the Auburn Comprehensive Plan, and for the following purposes:
A. Basic Rights: To secure adequate light, air, convenience of access, and safety from fire, flood, and other dangers,
which may include providing adequate open spaces for light, air, and outdoor uses.
B. General Welfare: To promote the public health, safety, morals, comfort, convenience, and general welfare.
C. Development and Growth: To promote the orderly, responsible, and beneficial development and growth of the
areas within the planning jurisdiction in accordance with Auburn land use policy.
D. Character: To protect and stabilize the character of agricultural, residential, institutional, commercial, industrial,
and natural areas.
E. Circulation and Vehicular Safety: To minimize or avoid traffic congestion on public streets and to ensure safe,
convenient, and efficient traffic circulation.
F. Environmental Integrity: To preserve and enhance the scenic beauty, aesthetics, and environmental integrity of
the planning jurisdiction.
G. Compatibility: To bring about compatibility between different land uses and to protect the scale and character of
existing development from the encroachment of incompatible uses.
H. Intensity and Use: To regulate and restrict the intensity and use of buildings, structures, and land for business,
industry, residence, and other uses.
I. Public Service: To define the powers and duties of administrative officers and bodies, and to establish procedures
for the implementation and enforcement of this Unified Development Ordinance.
J. Compliance: To require ongoing compliance and punitive recourse for noncompliance regarding the provisions
of this Unified Development Ordinance.
1.05 Compliance
No structure shall be located, erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved, altered, converted, enlarged, or used, nor
shall any piece of land be used, nor shall any existing use be expanded except when in full compliance with all provisions
of this Unified Development Ordinance and the permits and certificates required by this Unified Development
Ordinance have been lawfully issued. For regulations regarding existing nonconforming structures, see Article 08:
Nonconformance.
1.06 Severability
If any provision or the application of any provision of this Unified Development Ordinance is held unconstitutional
or invalid by the courts, the remainder of this Unified Development Ordinance or the application of such provision to
other circumstances shall not be affected.
1.07 Interpretation
A. Minimum Requirements: The provisions of this Unified Development Ordinance are the minimum requirements
necessary for the protection of the health, safety, comfort, morals, convenience, and general welfare of the people
at large.
B. Conflict or Inconsistency:
1. Internal: Unless otherwise specifically stated within this Unified Development Ordinance, if two (2) or more
provisions of this ordinance are in conflict or are inconsistent with one another, then the most restrictive
provision shall apply.
Basic Provisions
Article
Article 01: Ordinance Foundation 1-3
01
2. Federal, State and Local:
a. Whenever a provision of this Unified Development Ordinance imposes a greater restriction or a higher
standard than is required by any State or federal code or regulation, or other City ordinance or regulation,
the provision of this Unified Development Ordinance shall apply. This provision shall have no effect on
whether a project is to be reviewed or whether a permit is required.
b. Whenever a provision of any State or federal code or regulation or other City ordinance or regulation
imposes a greater restriction or a higher standard than is required by this Unified Development
Ordinance, the provision of the State or federal code or regulation, or other City ordinance or regulation,
shall apply. This provision shall have no effect on whether a project is to be reviewed or whether a
permit is required.
c. Whenever it is unlawful for the City to impose stricter or different provisions than which are regulated by
the State or federal code or regulation, the State or federal code or regulation shall apply. This provision
shall have no effect on the requirements for permits at the federal, State or local level.
3. Other: Whenever a private covenant, contract, commitment, agreement, or other similar private land use
regulation imposes a greater restriction or a higher standard than is required by a provision of this Unified
Development Ordinance, the City is not obligated to enforce the provisions of such private covenants,
contracts, commitments, agreements, or other similar regulations.
C. Text: If differences are found between the meaning or implication of any drawing, table, figure, title, or section
heading, the text of this Unified Development Ordinance shall apply.
D. Time Frames: Unless specifically noted otherwise, time frames stated within this Unified Development Ordinance
shall be calculated to include weekdays, weekends, and holidays. If a time frame ends on a Saturday, Sunday, or
holiday that the City offices are closed, the time frame shall be extended to the end of the next business day.
E. Delegation of Authority: If a provision in this Unified Development Ordinance requires the Zoning Administrator
or other City officer to perform an act or duty, that provision shall also include any person working under the
authority and supervision of the Zoning Administrator or other City officer unless specified otherwise.
F. Mandatory and Permissive Terms: The words “shall” or “must” are always mandatory. The words “may” or
“should” are always permissive.
G. Words Used: If words used in this Unified Development Ordinance are not defined in Article 11: Definitions,
they shall be construed to be the common usage of the language. Any legal or technical words not defined in
this Unified Development Ordinance shall be construed to be as defined by appropriate lexicon or current and
common dictionary.
H. Tense: If words are used in a specific tense (past, future, or present) it shall be construed to include all tenses,
unless the context clearly indicates a single tense.
I. Singular and Plural Form: If words are used in singular form, the plural form shall apply and vice versa, unless
the context clearly indicates the contrary.
J. Gender: If a feminine term is used, the masculine shall also apply and vice versa.
K. Conjunctions: The word “and” shall be construed to include all connected items in a series, conditions, and
provisions. The word “or” shall be construed to include one (1) or more of the items in a series, conditions, and
provisions, unless the context clearly suggests the contrary.
L. Rounding: If a formula is used within this Unified Development Ordinance and results in a non-whole number of an
indivisible object or feature, the non-whole number shall be rounded to the next highest whole number.
Basic Provisions
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 01
1-4
1.08 Ordinance Jurisdictional Area
This Unified Development Ordinance applies to all land within the city limits of Auburn, Indiana and its extraterritorial
jurisdiction.
1.09 Repealer
The following City of Auburn ordinances are hereby repealed and are replaced by this Unified Development
Ordinance and Official Zoning Map:
A. Zoning Ordinance: The City of Auburn Zoning Ordinance of November 16, 1987, Ordinance No. 89-1, Title XV,
Chapter 150 as amended, and its associated Zoning Map.
B. Subdivision Control: The City of Auburn Subdivision Control Ordinance of November 16, 1987, Ordinance
No. 89-1, Title XV, Chapter 152 as amended.
C. Manufactured Housing: The City of Auburn's Manufacturing Housing Ordinance, Chapter 156.
D. Floodplain Ordinance: The City of Auburn Flood Hazard Area Ordinance passed in 2017, Ordinance No.
2017-11, Title XV, Chapter 150.700, as amended.
1.10 Transition Rules
A. Plan Commission: Any application (e.g. Development Plan Review, Primary Plat, etc.) filed with the Plan
Commission that is full and complete prior to the effective date of this Unified Development Ordinance shall be
regulated by the terms and conditions of the Zoning Ordinance and/or Subdivision Control Ordinance that were in
place at the time of filing. However, all administrative procedures and fees shall follow those established in this
Unified Development Ordinance.
B. Rezone: Any application for a Zoning Map Amendment (Rezone) filed with the Plan Commission, that is full and
complete prior to the effective date of this Unified Development Ordinance shall continue through the process to
completion pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Zoning Ordinance that was in place at the time of filing.
However, if there is a specific use for which the rezone was proposed, and that use would no longer be permitted
in the proposed zoning district, or if the proposed zoning district no longer exists under this Unified Development
Ordinance, the Zoning Administrator shall amend the application such that the request for rezoning would
accomplish the same end goal for the applicant.
C. Board of Zoning Appeals: Any application (i.e. Development Standards Variance, Administrative Appeal,
etc.) filed with the Board of Zoning Appeals that is full and complete prior to the effective date of this Unified
Development Ordinance shall continue the process pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Zoning Ordinance
that were in place at the time of filing, provided that:
1. Required: The application is still required by the terms of this Unified Development Ordinance; or
2. Additional Approvals: If the proposed use or development requires additional approvals from the Board of
Zoning Appeals pursuant to the terms of this Unified Development Ordinance that were not required under
the previous ordinances, the application will be amended to include only those additional approvals that are
now required and within the jurisdiction of the Board of Zoning Appeals.
D. Planned Development:
1. Detailed Development Plan: A Detailed Development Plan for a Planned Development zoning district filed
with the Plan Commission that is full and complete prior to the adoption of an amendment to the PD District
Ordinance and/or Concept Plan shall continue the process pursuant to the terms and conditions of the PD
District Ordinance and/or Concept Plan in place prior to the amendment.
2. Final Development Plan: A Final Development Plan for a Planned Development zoning district filed with
the Plan Commission that is full and complete prior to the adoption of an amendment to the PD District
Ordinance and/or Concept Plan shall continue the process pursuant to the terms and conditions of the PD
District Ordinance and/or Concept Plan in place prior to the amendment. If the Final Development Plan is
compliant with a Detailed Development Plan that was approved prior to the adoption of such amendment
to the PD District Ordinance and/or Concept Plan, then the Final Development Plan may be considered for
approval utilizing the same standards that applied to the Detailed Development Plan.
Basic Provisions
Article
Article 01: Ordinance Foundation 1-5
01
E. Building Sites: All new building sites shall meet the requirements of this Unified Development Ordinance unless:
1. Building Permit: A complete Building Permit application was filed and is still valid; or
2. Improvement Location Permit: A complete Improvement Location Permit application was filed and is still
valid; or
3. Buildable Lot: A parcel was approved as a buildable lot by the Plan Commission (valid Primary or Secondary
Plat) or the Board of Zoning Appeals (valid Development Standards Variance) prior to the effective date of
this Unified Development Ordinance; or
4. Primary Plat: A complete and valid Primary Plat application has been filed with the Plan Commission prior
to the effective date of this Unified Development Ordinance.
1.11 Administrative Officer
The Zoning Administrator shall have the primary responsibility for administration and enforcement (or coordination
of enforcement) of this Unified Development Ordinance within the City’s zoning jurisdiction.
1.12 Saving Provision
This Unified Development Ordinance shall not be construed as eliminating or reducing any action now pending under,
or by virtue of, an existing law or previous zoning ordinance, subdivision control ordinance, or related ordinance.
This Unified Development Ordinance shall not be construed as discontinuing, reducing, modifying or altering any
penalty accruing or about to accrue.
1.13 Effect of Annexation or Vacation on Zoning
The Plan Commission shall be guided by the principles and directives of the Auburn Comprehensive Plan and this
Unified Development Ordinance in making recommendations to the Common Council regarding zoning district
classifications for newly annexed areas.
1.14 Statutory Changes
Whenever Indiana Code cited in this Unified Development Ordinance has been amended or superseded, this Unified
Development Ordinance shall be deemed amended in reference to the new or revised code.
1.15 References
Whenever any agency, department, position, document, map, or publication referenced in this Unified Development
Ordinance changes, the new or substitute agency, department, position, document, map, or publication shall be
deemed incorporated into this Unified Development Ordinance.
Basic Provisions
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 01
1-6
1.16 Establishment of Standard Zoning Districts
The standard zoning districts in this Unified Development Ordinance stand alone and are not part of a hierarchy or
pyramidal system of zoning. For example, what is permitted in the R2 zoning district is not necessarily permitted in
the R3 zoning district. Only those uses and development standards which are expressly permitted and noted for each
zoning district apply to that zoning district.
For the purpose of this Unified Development Ordinance, the City of Auburn has established the following zoning
districts:
District
Code
District Name District Purpose
PR Parks and
Recreation
This district is established for parks, trails, open spaces, and recreational areas.
AG Agricultural
This district is established for the protection of agricultural operations including small-scale
farms and buildings associated with agricultural production. This district is intended primarily
for areas within the City’s extra-territorial jurisdiction.
AC Agricultural
Commercial
This district is established for commercial and industrial uses directly related to agriculture
that are compatible with rural and agricultural areas. This district is intended primarily for
areas within the City’s extra-territorial jurisdiction.
ER Estate Residential
This district is established for agricultural operations and single-family detached dwellings in
a rural or country setting. This district is intended primarily for areas within the City’s extraterritorial
jurisdiction.
R1
Low Density
Single-Family
Residential
This district is established for single-family detached dwellings in the form of medium to large
sized homes on medium to large sized lots.
R2
Medium Density
Single-Family
Residential
This district is established for single-family detached dwellings in the form of small to
medium sized homes on medium sized lots.
R3
High Density
Single-Family
Residential
This district is established for single-family detached dwellings in the form of small to
medium sized homes on small to medium sized lots.
TR Traditional
Residential
This district is established for single-family detached dwellings in the form of small to
medium sized homes on small sized lots. This district is intended primarily for older,
traditional-style, existing neighborhoods within the City of Auburn.
M1 Multiple-Family
Residential
This district is established for single-family attached dwellings in the form of duplexes,
triplexes, up to 4 units, consistent in scale with single-family residential.
M2
High Density
Multiple-Family
Residential
This district is established for high density multiple-family dwellings in the form of apartment
and/or condominium complexes.
MH Manufactured
Home Residential
This district is established for lease lot developments (mobile or manufactured home parks)
which typically lease dwelling sites for single-wide and/or double-wide manufactured homes.
IS Institutional This district is established for various institutional uses including governmental, hospital,
educational, and religious institutions.
DC Downtown
Commercial
This district is established to accommodate the unique mix of retail, commercial,
entertainment, governmental, and professional uses with upper floor residential uses that
occur in a downtown setting. This district is intended primarily for the existing downtown
area.
C1 Neighborhood
Commercial
This district is established for existing commercial uses located adjacent to residential
neighborhoods and that serve those neighborhoods.
C2 General
Commercial
This district is established for a wide variety of retail, commercial, service, entertainment,
and eating establishments that are medium to large in scale and medium to high intensity.
I1 Light Industrial /
High-Tech
This district is established for low to moderate intensity industrial uses, light manufacturing
facilities, and technology or business parks.
I2 Heavy Industrial This district is established for moderate to high intensity industrial uses and light
manufacturing facilities.
HI High Impact This district is established for specific uses that can have a particularly high impact on
adjacent areas.
Zoning Districts
Article
Article 01: Ordinance Foundation 1-7
01
1.17 Establishment of Overlay Districts
The overlay districts as noted below have been established to add additional and unique development standards
which will help the City accomplish its goals. For the purpose of this Unified Development Ordinance, the following
overlay districts have been established for the purpose as stated:
District
Code District Name District Purpose
WH-O Wellhead Protection
Overlay
This overlay district is established to protect the integrity and potability of the community’s
public water supply and enhance water quality of streams.
CG-O Corridor and
Gateway Overlay
This overlay district is established to promote rational, aesthetically pleasing, and cohesive
development in areas along major arterial streets and gateways.
AC-O Airport Compatibility
Overlay
This overlay district is established to promote safety and compatibility for the occupants of
land near the DeKalb County Airport
1.18 Establishment of Planned Development Districts
As provided for in this Unified Development Ordinance, only the following standard zoning districts may be rezoned
to a planned development: R1, R2, R3, TR, M1, M2, MH, IS, C2, I1 and I2.
1.19 Zoning District Land Uses
The two-page layout for each standard zoning district in Article 02: Zoning Districts identifies land uses allowed in
that district. Such land uses are of two (2) kinds: permitted uses and special exception uses. Auburn's permitted and
special exception uses for each district are noted in the "Permitted Use" and "Special Exception Use" columns on each
two-page layout.
1.20 Unlisted Land Uses
Any land use not listed in either the permitted use or special exception use column of a particular zoning district, shall
be prohibited in that particular zoning district.
1.21 Questionable Land Uses
Any land use not listed in either the permitted use or special exception use column of a particular zoning district,
but that is similar or related to a use that is a permitted use or a special exception use in that zoning district may be
deemed permitted through a Questionable Land Use Interpretation by the Zoning Administrator.
Zoning Districts
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 01
1-8
1.22 Official Zoning Map
A. Description: The map labeled “Official Zoning Map” maintained by the Plan Commission is hereby incorporated
as part of this Unified Development Ordinance and is to function as the means to apply a zoning district to each
parcel within the City's jurisdiction. The zoning map shall be formally known as the “Official Zoning Map,” and
it may be cited and referred to as the “Auburn Zoning Map” or the “Zoning Map.”
B. Location: The Official Zoning Map will be located in the Department of Building, Planning and Development
and maintained by the Plan Commission.
C. Zoning District Boundaries:
1. Standard Zoning Districts: The standard zoning district boundaries shall be shown on the Official Zoning
Map. The two digit abbreviations for the standard zoning districts appearing in this Unified Development
Ordinance or a specific color noted on the map legend shall be used to identify the zoning districts on the
map.
2. Overlay Districts: The overlay district boundaries shown on the Official Zoning Map shall be interpreted as
follows:
a. Labeling: An overlay district shall be noted on the Official Zoning Map with a hatch or textured pattern
and be noted as such on the map legend.
b. Fully Covered: A lot that is fully covered (bounded) by an overlay district shall be interpreted to be
subject to the overlay district standards found in Article 03: Overlay Districts.
c. Partially Covered: A lot that is partially covered (transected) by an overlay district shall be interpreted to
be subject to the overlay district standards to the extent the lot area is covered by the overlay district.
3. Standards: Zoning district boundaries on the Official Zoning Map shall be interpreted as follows:
a. Streets: Zoning district boundaries shown within or parallel to the lines of streets, easements, and
transportation rights-of-way shall be deemed to follow the centerline of the affected street, easement or
right-of-way.
b. Section Lines: Zoning district boundaries indicated as following or being parallel to section or fractional
sectional lines, platted lot lines or City corporation lines shall be construed as following or paralleling
such lines.
c. Water: Zoning district boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerline of streams, rivers
or other moving bodies of water shall be construed to follow such center lines.
d. Vacated: Whenever any street, alley, public way, railroad right-of-way, waterway, or other similar area
is vacated by proper authority, the zoning districts adjoining each side of vacated areas shall be extended
automatically to the center of the vacated area. All areas included in the vacation shall thereafter be
subject to all regulations of the extended zoning districts. The following exception applies:
i. In the event of a partial vacation, the adjoining zoning district, or zoning district nearest the portion
vacated, shall be extended automatically to include all of the vacated area.
4. Disputes: Any disputes as to the exact zoning district boundaries shall be determined by the Zoning
Administrator. The Zoning Administrator may refuse to make a determination when he/she cannot definitely
determine the location of a zoning district boundary. The Board of Zoning Appeals may then interpret
the location of the zoning district boundary with reference to the scale of the Official Zoning Map and the
purposes set forth in all relevant provisions of this Unified Development Ordinance.
D. Regular Revisions: The Official Zoning Map shall be formally revised by the Plan Commission as changes are
made (i.e. rezonings, planned developments, annexations). During the time it takes for each revision to be made
electronically, hand drawn lines and text on a printout of the previous Official Zoning Map will be appropriate
to note zoning district changes. Revisions may be made at any time to correct drafting errors, clerical errors, or
omissions, in the map.
Official Zoning Map
Article
Article 01: Ordinance Foundation 1-9
01
E. Copies: Print copies of the Official Zoning Map may be distributed. Each copy of the Official Zoning Map shall
be accurate only to the date on which it was last modified. The date of the latest revision shall also be printed on
copies of the Official Zoning Map.
F. Damage, Destruction, or Loss: In the event the Official Zoning Map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost or
difficult to interpret, the Plan Commission may prepare a new map which shall depict the Official Zoning Map as
accurately as possible, and shall supersede the prior map upon approval by the Common Council. The new map
shall not have the effect of amending the Official Zoning Map.
Official Zoning Map
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 01
1-10
1.23 Common Council Summary of Powers and Duties
The powers and duties of the Common Council are described below. Duties should be interpreted as activities that are
obligations. Powers should be interpreted as activities that are optional and may be initiated.
A. Common Council Duties:
1. Documents: Adopt, reject or amend the Auburn Comprehensive Plan, strategic plans or Unified Development
Ordinance that have been certified and submitted by the Plan Commission.
2. Amendments: Adopt, reject or amend proposals to amend or partially repeal the text of the Auburn
Comprehensive Plan, strategic plans or Unified Development Ordinance that has been certified and submitted
by the Plan Commission.
3. Zoning Map: Adopt, reject or amend proposals to amend the Official Zoning Map certified and submitted by
the Plan Commission.
4. Fee Schedule: Adopt, reject or amend a fee schedule.
5. Enforcement: Enforce regulations and procedures of the Auburn Comprehensive Plan and Unified
Development Ordinance to the extent of the local resolutions, ordinances and State of Indiana Law.
6. Other: Other duties as permitted by Indiana Code.
B. Common Council Powers:
1. Document Amendment Initiation: Initiate amendments to the Auburn Comprehensive Plan, strategic plans, or
Unified Development Ordinance by making the proposal to the Plan Commission.
2. Zoning Map Amendment Initiation: Initiate amendments to the Official Zoning Map by making the proposal
to the Plan Commission.
3. Other: Other powers as permitted by Indiana Code.
1.24 Plan Commission Summary of Powers and Duties
The powers and duties of the Plan Commission are described below. Duties should be interpreted as activities that are
obligations. Powers should be interpreted as activities that are optional and may be initiated.
A. Plan Commission Duties:
1. Documents: Adopt and maintain the Common Council approved Auburn Comprehensive Plan and Unified
Development Ordinance as authorized under Indiana State Law.
2. Rules and Procedures: Adopt and maintain rules and procedures for holding meetings, holding public
hearings, and administrating and enforcing the Auburn Comprehensive Plan and Unified Development
Ordinance.
3. Records: Maintain complete records of all meetings, hearings, correspondences, and affairs of the Plan
Commission.
4. Materials: Publish and make available to the public all plans, ordinances, and other related material that are
the responsibility of the Plan Commission.
5. Process and Seal: Adopt and maintain a permitting process and seal used to certify official or approved
documents.
6. Recommendations for Documents: Certify and submit recommendations to the Common Council including
new versions of and revisions to the Auburn Comprehensive Plan, Unified Development Ordinance, and
Official Zoning Map.
7. Recommendations for Planned Developments: Certify and submit recommendations to the Common Council
for adopting a Planned Development District.
8. Fiscal Records: Maintain monetary and fiscal records of the Plan Commission.
9. Budget: Prepare and submit an annual budget to the Common Council.
10. Plats: Approve or deny plats or replats of subdivisions.
11. Waivers: Approve or deny request for waivers to the subdivision requirements of this Unified Development
Ordinance.
12. Development Plans: Approve or deny development plans and amendments to development plans.
13. Names: Approve or deny proposed subdivision names, street names and addresses in new developments.
14. Enforcement: Enforce regulations and procedures of the Comprehensive Plan and Unified Development
Ordinance to the extent of the local resolutions, ordinances and State of Indiana Law.
15. Other: Other duties as permitted by Indiana Code.
Powers and Duties
Article
Article 01: Ordinance Foundation 1-11
01
B. Plan Commission Powers:
1. Staff: Hire, remove, and determine job descriptions for support staff with the Department of Building,
Planning and Development.
2. Committees: Establish advisory committees as necessary.
3. Funding: Seek funding assistance through grant programs as necessary.
4. Distribution: Distribute copies or summaries of the Auburn Comprehensive Plan or Unified Development
Ordinance to the general public and development community.
5. Compensation: Determine the compensation for support staff and members as provided within the budget
submission to Common Council.
6. Other: Other powers as permitted by Indiana Code.
1.25 Board of Zoning Appeals Summary of Duties
The duties of the Board of Zoning Appeals are described below. Duties should be interpreted as activities that are
obligations.
A. Board of Zoning Appeals Duties:
1. Appeals: Hear and determine appeals from, and review any order, requirement, decision, or determination
made by an administrative official or commission (except the Plan Commission) charged with the enforcement
of this Unified Development Ordinance.
2. Exceptions: Authorize exceptions to the zoning district and overlay district regulations only in the classes of
uses or in particular situations as specified in this Unified Development Ordinance.
3. Variances: Authorize, on appeal in specific cases, variances from the terms of this Unified Development
Ordinance.
4. Interpretations: Interpret the Official Zoning Map.
5. Other: Other duties as permitted by Indiana Code.
1.26 Zoning Administrator Summary of Duties
The duties delegated by the Plan Commission to the Zoning Administrator are described below. Duties should be
interpreted as activities that are obligations.
A. Zoning Administrator Duties:
1. Plan Commission Files: Maintain complete records of all meetings, hearings, correspondences, budgets,
Rules and Procedures, memberships, term expirations and general affairs of the Plan Commission.
2. Plan Commission Meetings: Serve as staff for the Plan Commission and any of its committees by setting
agendas, conducting research, distributing meeting information, and serving as Plan Commission Secretary.
3. Publish: Publish and make available to the public all plans, ordinances, and other related material that are the
responsibility of the Plan Commission.
4. Public Interaction: Be available as a first point of contact for planning and zoning questions from the public.
5. Administrative Decisions: Make administrative decisions based on the standards and procedures in this
Unified Development Ordinance.
6. Interpretations: Interpret the standards in this Unified Development Ordinance.
7. Applications: Process applications submitted to the Department of Building, Planning and Development.
8. Review: Review permit applications and issue or deny permits submitted to the Department of Building,
Planning and Development.
9. Inspections and Enforcement: Complete field inspections of improvements, structures, and uses to verify
compliance with this Unified Development Ordinance.
10. Recommendations: Prepare and present Plan Commission recommendations to other commissions and
boards.
11. Other: Other duties that may be delegated by the Plan Commission from time to time.
Powers and Duties
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 01
1-12
1.27 Plan Commission Certification
This Unified Development Ordinance was certified with a favorable recommendation for adoption on the 13th day of
November, 2018, by the Auburn Plan Commission after holding a legally announced public hearing. The certification
was made by the following Plan Commission vote:
Signatures:
The Advisory Plan Commission of the City of Auburn, DeKalb County, Indiana
AYE NAY
Al Wleklinski,
President
Troy Ackerman,
Vice President
Thomas Smith,
Secretary
Mark Benbow,
Member
James Canino,
Member
Brett Carmer,
Member
Jim Finchum,
Member
Tim Griffin,
Member
Steve Klein,
Member
Christopher Lamm,
Member
Lou Metelko,
Member
Don Myers,
Member
Attest: Date:
Amy Schweitzer, Administrator,
City of Auburn, Indiana
Form and content approved by:
W. Erik Weber, City Attorney
Plan Commission Certification
Article
Article 01: Ordinance Foundation 1-13
01
1.28 Unified Development Ordinance Adoption and Effective Date
The Unified Development Ordinance shall become effective on March 18, 2019 after its passage by the Common
Council. Adopted by the Common Council of Auburn, Indiana on the 5th day of February, 2019.
Signatures:
The Common Council of the City of Auburn, DeKalb County, Indiana
AYE NAY
Wayne Madden,
District 1
Kevin Webb,
District 2
Matthew Kruse,
District 3
Mike Watson,
District 4
Michael Walter,
District 5
Jim Finchum,
At-Large
Denny Ketzenberger,
At-Large
Attest: Date:
Patricia M. Miller, Clerk-Treasurer,
City of Auburn, Indiana
Form and content approved by:
W. Erik Weber, City Attorney
Common Council Adoption
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 01
1-14
Certification and Adoption
© 2018, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Article
Zoning Districts
02
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article
District Intent Permitted Uses Special Exception Uses
2-2
Parks and Recreation (PR) District 02
2.01 PR District Intent, Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses
The PR (Parks and Recreation) District is
intended to be used as follows:
Use Type and Intensity
• All intensities of active and passive recreation
areas including parks, picnic areas, trails, open
spaces, playgrounds, and sports fields
• Public and privately owned areas
Application of District
• Existing and new facilities
• PR districts are typically spot zoned and
distributed around the community
• Buffer and transitional district
Development Standards
• Promote high quality natural areas for public
access, enjoyment, and recreation
Appropriate Adjacent Districts
• PR, AG, ER, R1, R2, R3, TR, M1, M2, MH, IS,
DC, C1, C2, I1 and I2
Accessory Permitted Uses
• farmers' market
Commercial Permitted Uses
• country club
• golf course
• recreation center or play center
• sports complex (outdoor)
• swimming pool
Industrial Permitted Uses
• public utility facility
Institutional Permitted Uses
• nature center
• park
• skate park
• swimming pool, public
Agricultural Special Exception Uses
• fairground
Commercial Special Exception Uses
• camp ground
• driving range
• marina
• paintball facility
• sports complex (indoor)
• stadium
• watercraft rental
Institutional Special Exception Uses
• community center
Residential Special Exception Uses
• caretaker's residence
Article
Additional Development Standards that Apply
Article 02: Zoning Districts 2-3
Parks and Recreation (PR) District 02
Minimum Lot Area
• no minimum
Minimum Lot Width
• 50 feet
Sanitary Sewer Utility
• Required
Water Utility
• Required
Minimum Front Yard Setback
• 40 feet for primary and accessory
structures
Minimum Side Yard Setback
• 25 feet for primary structure
• 10 feet for accessory structure
Minimum Rear Yard Setback
• 25 feet for primary structure
• 10 feet for accessory structure
Maximum Lot Coverage
• 30% of lot area
Minimum Main Floor Area
• n/a
Minimum Dwelling Unit Size
• n/a
Maximum Primary Structures
• no limit
Maximum Structure Height
• 40 feet for primary structures
• 30 feet for accessory structures
2.02 PR District Development Standards
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
ROW
Lot Area
Property
Line
Lot Width
Lot Depth
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Rear Setback
Side
Setback
Building
Envelope
Front Setback
ROW
Side
Setback
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
ROW
Accessory
Structures
Lot
Coverage
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Structure
Height
Pitched Roof Structures
(from highest point
on pitched roof)
Flat Roof Structures
(from highest
section of flat roof)
Accessory
Structure mechanical
is exempt Primary
Structure
Accessory Structure (AS)
• AS-01........................... Page 5-6
• AS-02........................... Page 5-7
Density and Intensity (DI)
• DI-01.......................... Page 5-22
Driveway (DW)
• DW-01........................ Page 5-23
• DW-04........................ Page 5-26
Environmental (EN)
• EN-01......................... Page 5-27
Fence and Wall (FW)
• FW-01........................ Page 5-29
• FW-02........................ Page 5-30
Floodplain (FP)
• FP-01......................... Page 5-33
Floor Area (FA)
• FA-01......................... Page 5-34
Height (HT)
• HT-01......................... Page 5-35
Landscaping (LA)
• LA-01......................... Page 5-40
Lighting (LT)
• LT-01.......................... Page 5-41
Lot (LO)
• LO-01......................... Page 5-43
Outdoor Storage (OS)
• OS-01........................ Page 5-46
Parking (PK)
• PK-01......................... Page 5-47
• PK-07......................... Page 5-49
Performance (PF)
• PF-01......................... Page 5-56
Public Improvement (PI)
• PI-01.......................... Page 5-59
Retaining Wall (RW)
• RW-01........................ Page 5-62
Setback (SB)
• SB-01......................... Page 5-63
Sewer and Water (SW)
• SW-01........................ Page 5-65
Sign (SI)
• SI-01.......................... Page 5-67
• SI-05.......................... Page 5-74
Solar / Alternate Energy (SL)
• SL-01......................... Page 5-93
• SL-03......................... Page 5-93
Special Exception (SE)
• SE-01......................... Page 5-95
Storage Tank (SR)
• SR-01......................... Page 5-96
• SR-03......................... Page 5-96
Structure (ST)
• ST-01......................... Page 5-97
Telecommunication Facility (TC)
• TC-02....................... Page 5-100
Temporary Use (TU)
• TU-01....................... Page 5-101
Trash Receptacle (TR)
• TR-01....................... Page 5-103
Vision Clearance (VC)
• VC-01....................... Page 5-104
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article
District Intent Permitted Uses Special Exception Uses
2-4
Agricultural (AG) District 02
2.03 AG District Intent, Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses
The AG (Agricultural) District is intended to
be used as follows:
Use Type and Intensity
• Low to moderate intensity agricultural activities
Application of District
• Existing agricultural areas
• Land within the extra-territorial jurisdiction of
the City of Auburn
• Holding district immediately after annexation
Development Standards
• Provide standards that allow common
agricultural practices
Appropriate Adjacent Districts
• PR, AG, AC, ER, R1, R2, M1, M2, MH, IS, C2,
I1, I2 and HI
Accessory Permitted Uses
• agricultural tourism
• child care home
• farmers' market
• home business, type 1
• home business, type 2
• home business, type 3
• outdoor storage
• roadside sales
• solar field
Agricultural Permitted Uses
• agricultural crop production
• hobby farming
• orchard
• plant nursery, wholesale
• raising of farm animals
• stable, private
• storage of agricultural products
• tree farm
• vineyard
Industrial Permitted Uses
• public utility facility
Residential Permitted Uses
• dwelling, single-family detached
• fair housing facility (small)
• personal storage (primary use)
Agricultural Special Exception Uses
• confined feeding operation (small)
• raising of exotic animals
Commercial Special Exception Uses
• camp ground
• kennel
• shooting range
• stable, commercial
• winery
Industrial Special Exception Uses
• telecommunication facility
Institutional Special Exception Uses
• cemetery or mausoleum
• church, temple or mosque
• police, fire or rescue station
Residential Special Exception Uses
• bed and breakfast
Article
Additional Development Standards that Apply
Article 02: Zoning Districts 2-5
Agricultural (AG) District 02
Minimum Lot Area
• 5 acres
Minimum Lot Width
• 120 feet
Sanitary Sewer Utility
• Required where available
Water Utility
• Required where available
Minimum Front Yard Setback
• 60 feet for primary and accessory
structures
Minimum Side Yard Setback
• 30 feet for primary and accessory
structures
Minimum Rear Yard Setback
• 30 feet for primary structures
• 15 feet for accessory structures
Maximum Lot Coverage
• 35% of lot area
Minimum Main Floor Area
• n/a
Minimum Dwelling Unit Size
• 1,000 square feet
Maximum Primary Structures
• 1
Maximum Structure Height
• 35 feet for primary structures
• 30 feet for accessory structures
2.04 AG District Development Standards
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Lot Width
Lot Area
Lot Depth
Property
Line
ROW
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Rear Yard
Setback
Side Yard
Setback
Building
Envelope
Front Yard
Setback
ROW
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Primary
Structure
Accessory
Structure
ROW
Lot
Coverage
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Structure
Height
Pitched Roof Structures
(from highest point on pitched roof)
Accessory Structure Primary Structure
chimneys are
exempt
Accessory Structure (AS)
• AS-01........................... Page 5-6
• AS-02........................... Page 5-7
Confined Feeding (CF)
• CF-01......................... Page 5-21
Density and Intensity (DI)
• DI-01.......................... Page 5-22
Driveway (DW)
• DW-01........................ Page 5-23
• DW-02........................ Page 5-24
Environmental (EN)
• EN-01......................... Page 5-27
Fence and Wall (FW)
• FW-01........................ Page 5-29
• FW-03........................ Page 5-30
Floodplain (FP)
• FP-01......................... Page 5-33
Floor Area (FA)
• FA-01......................... Page 5-34
Height (HT)
• HT-01......................... Page 5-35
Home Business (HB)
• HB-01......................... Page 5-36
• HB-02......................... Page 5-37
• HB-03......................... Page 5-38
Keeping of Animal (KA)
• KA-01......................... Page 5-39
Landscaping (LA)
• LA-01......................... Page 5-40
Lighting (LT)
• LT-01.......................... Page 5-41
Lot (LO)
• LO-01......................... Page 5-43
Performance (PF)
• PF-01......................... Page 5-56
Public Improvement (PI)
• PI-01.......................... Page 5-59
Retaining Wall (RW)
• RW-01........................ Page 5-62
Setback (SB)
• SB-01......................... Page 5-63
Sewer and Water (SW)
• SW-01........................ Page 5-65
Sign (SI)
• SI-01.......................... Page 5-67
• SI-02.......................... Page 5-70
Solar / Alternate Energy (SL)
• SL-01......................... Page 5-93
• SL-02......................... Page 5-93
Special Exception (SE)
• SE-01......................... Page 5-95
Storage Tank (SR)
• SR-01......................... Page 5-96
• SR-04......................... Page 5-96
Structure (ST)
• ST-01......................... Page 5-97
Telecommunication Facility (TC)
• TC-01......................... Page 5-98
• TC-02....................... Page 5-100
Temporary Use (TU)
• TU-01....................... Page 5-101
• TU-02....................... Page 5-101
Vision Clearance (VC)
• VC-01....................... Page 5-104
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article
District Intent Permitted Uses Special Exception Uses
2-6
Agricultural Commercial (AC) District 02
2.05 AC District Intent, Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses
The AC (Agricultural Commercial) District
is intended to be used as follows:
Use Type and Intensity
• Commercial and industrial uses directly related
to agricultural operations that are compatible
with the character of the area
Application of District
• Existing or new development
• Spot zoning within or directly adjacent to
existing agricultural areas
• Land within the City's extra-territorial
jurisdiction
Appropriate Adjacent Districts
• AG, AC, I2 and HI
Plan Commission
• This district should accommodate commercial
and industrial operations that are substantially
supported by the agricultural industry
Accessory Permitted Uses
• farmers' market
• outdoor storage
• permanent outdoor display area
• roadside sales
• solar field
Agricultural Permitted Uses
• agricultural crop production
• grain elevator
• orchard
• plant nursery, wholesale
• processing of agricultural products
• raising of exotic animals
• raising of farm animals
• sale of agricultural products
• stable, private
• storage of agricultural products
• tree farm
• vineyard
Commercial Permitted Uses
• farm implement sales
• landscape contractor
• plant nursery, retail or greenhouse
• stable, commercial
• tool or heavy equipment sales or rental
• winery
Industrial Permitted Uses
• food production or processing
• heavy equipment repair
• liquid fertilizer storage or distribution
• public utility facility
• outdoor storage
• storage tanks (nonhazardous)
• welding
Commercial Special Exception Uses
• camp ground
• kennel
Industrial Special Exception Uses
• telecommunication facility
• warehouse "self storage" facility
Article
Additional Development Standards that Apply
Article 02: Zoning Districts 2-7
Agricultural Commercial (AC) District 02
Minimum Lot Area
• 15,000 square feet
Minimum Lot Width
• 120 feet
Sanitary Sewer Utility
• Required where available
Water Utility
• Required where available
Minimum Front Yard Setback
• 50 feet for primary and accessory
structures
Minimum Side Yard Setback
• 30 feet for primary and accessory
structures
Minimum Rear Yard Setback
• 30 feet for primary and accessory
structures
Maximum Lot Coverage
• 60% of lot area
Minimum Main Floor Area
• n/a
Minimum Dwelling Unit Size
• n/a
Maximum Primary Structures
• no limit
Maximum Structure Height
• 35 feet for primary structures
• 30 feet for accessory structures
2.06 AC District Development Standards
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Lot Width
Lot Depth
Property
Line
ROW
Lot Area
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Side Yard
Setback
ROW
Front Yard
Setback
Building
Envelope
Rear Yard
Setback
ROW © 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Lot
Coverage
Primary
Structure
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Structure
Height
Pitched Roof Structures
(from highest point
on pitched roof)
Flat Roof Structures
(from highest
section of flat roof)
Accessory
Structure mechanical
is exempt Primary
Structure
Accessory Structure (AS)
• AS-01........................... Page 5-6
• AS-02........................... Page 5-7
Density and Intensity (DI)
• DI-01.......................... Page 5-22
Driveway (DW)
• DW-01........................ Page 5-23
• DW-02........................ Page 5-24
Environmental (EN)
• EN-01......................... Page 5-27
Fence and Wall (FW)
• FW-01........................ Page 5-29
• FW-03........................ Page 5-30
Floodplain (FP)
• FP-01......................... Page 5-33
Floor Area (FA)
• FA-01......................... Page 5-34
Height (HT)
• HT-01......................... Page 5-35
Landscaping (LA)
• LA-01......................... Page 5-40
Lighting (LT)
• LT-01.......................... Page 5-41
Lot (LO)
• LO-01......................... Page 5-43
Performance (PF)
• PF-01......................... Page 5-56
Permanent Outdoor Display (PD)
• PD-01......................... Page 5-57
Public Improvement (PI)
• PI-01.......................... Page 5-59
Retaining Wall (RW)
• RW-01........................ Page 5-62
Setback (SB)
• SB-01......................... Page 5-63
Sewer and Water (SW)
• SW-01........................ Page 5-65
Sign (SI)
• SI-01.......................... Page 5-67
• SI-05.......................... Page 5-74
Solar / Alternative Energy (SL)
• SL-01......................... Page 5-93
• SL-02......................... Page 5-93
Special Exception (SE)
• SE-01......................... Page 5-95
Storage Tank (SR)
• SR-01......................... Page 5-96
• SR-04......................... Page 5-96
Structure (ST)
• ST-01......................... Page 5-97
Telecommunication Facility (TC)
• TC-02....................... Page 5-100
Temporary Use (TU)
• TU-01....................... Page 5-101
• TU-04....................... Page 5-102
Vision Clearance (VC)
• VC-01....................... Page 5-104
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article
District Intent Permitted Uses Special Exception Uses
2-8
Estate Residential (ER) District 02
2.07 ER District Intent, Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses
The ER (Estate Residential) District is
intended to be used as follows:
Use Type and Intensity
• Single-family detached homes
• Large sized homes
• Large lots
• Hobby farming
Application of District
• Primarily for existing development
• Spot zoning or small pockets of development
(a couple of lots)
Development Standards
• Permit low density, low impact development
that complements a natural setting
Appropriate Adjacent Districts
• PR, AG, ER, R1, R2, M1, and IS
Plan Commission
• District is designed primarily for existing
development
• Should limit the use of this district within the
City of Auburn due to its low density nature and
to avoid exclusionary zoning practices
• New subdivisions involving multiple lots should
have access to municipal water and sewer
Accessory Permitted Uses
• accessory dwelling unit
• child care home
• home business, type 1
• home business, type 2
• roadside sales
• solar field
Agricultural Permitted Uses
• agricultural crop production
• hobby farming
• stable, private
Residential Permitted Uses
• bed and breakfast
• dwelling, single-family detached
• fair housing facility (small)
Industrial Special Exception Uses
• public utility facility
Residential Special Exception Uses
• personal storage (primary use)
Article
Additional Development Standards that Apply
Article 02: Zoning Districts 2-9
Estate Residential (ER) District 02
Minimum Lot Area
• 2 acres
Minimum Lot Width
• 120 feet
Sanitary Sewer Utility
• Required where available
Water Utility
• Required where available
Minimum Front Yard Setback
• 70 feet for primary and accessory
structures
Minimum Side Yard Setback
• 30 feet for primary and accessory
structures
Minimum Rear Yard Setback
• 30 feet for primary and accessory
structures
Maximum Lot Coverage
• 25% of lot area
Minimum Main Floor Area
• n/a
Minimum Dwelling Unit Size
• 1,800 square feet
Maximum Primary Structures
• 1
Maximum Density
• 0.8 du/acre in a multiple lot development
Maximum Structure Height
• 35 feet for primary structures
• 25 feet for accessory structures
2.08 ER District Development Standards
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
ROW
Lot Depth
Lot Width
Property
Line
Lot Area
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
ROW
Front
Yard
Setback
Building
Envelope
Side
Yard
Setback
Rear Yard
Setback
Side
Yard
Setback
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
ROW
Accessory
Structure
Lot
Coverage
Primary
Structure
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Structure
Height
Pitched Roof Structures
(from highest point on pitched roof)
Accessory Structure Primary Structure
chimneys are
exempt
Accessory Dwelling (AD)
• AD-01........................... Page 5-4
Accessory Structure (AS)
• AS-01........................... Page 5-6
• AS-03........................... Page 5-8
Architectural (AR)
• AR-01......................... Page 5-16
Density and Intensity (DI)
• DI-01.......................... Page 5-22
Driveway (DW)
• DW-01........................ Page 5-23
• DW-03........................ Page 5-25
Environmental (EN)
• EN-01......................... Page 5-27
Fence and Wall (FW)
• FW-01........................ Page 5-29
• FW-04........................ Page 5-31
Floodplain (FP)
• FP-01......................... Page 5-33
Floor Area (FA)
• FA-01......................... Page 5-34
Height (HT)
• HT-01......................... Page 5-35
Home Business (HB)
• HB-01......................... Page 5-36
• HB-02......................... Page 5-37
• HB-03......................... Page 5-38
Keeping of Animal (KA)
• KA-02......................... Page 5-39
Landscaping (LA)
• LA-01......................... Page 5-40
Lighting (LT)
• LT-01.......................... Page 5-41
Lot (LO)
• LO-01......................... Page 5-43
Outdoor Storage (OS)
• OS-01........................ Page 5-46
Parking (PK)
• PK-01......................... Page 5-47
• PK-02......................... Page 5-47
Performance (PF)
• PF-01......................... Page 5-56
Public Improvement (PI)
• PI-01.......................... Page 5-59
Recreational Vehicle (RV)
• RV-01......................... Page 5-61
Retaining Wall (RW)
• RW-01........................ Page 5-62
Setback (SB)
• SB-01......................... Page 5-63
Sewer and Water (SW)
• SW-01........................ Page 5-65
Sign (SI)
• SI-01.......................... Page 5-67
• SI-03.......................... Page 5-71
Solar / Alternative Energy (SL)
• SL-01......................... Page 5-93
• SL-02......................... Page 5-93
Special Exception (SE)
• SE-01......................... Page 5-95
Storage Tank (SR)
• SR-01......................... Page 5-96
• SR-03......................... Page 5-96
Structure (ST)
• ST-01......................... Page 5-97
Telecommunication Facility (TC)
• TC-02........................ Page 5-100
Temporary Use and Structure(TU)
• TU-01....................... Page 5-101
• TU-02....................... Page 5-101
Vision Clearance (VC)
• VC-01....................... Page 5-104
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article
District Intent Permitted Uses Special Exception Uses
2-10
Low Density Single-family Residential (R1) District 02
2.09 R1 District Intent, Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses
The R1 (Low Density Single-family Residential)
District is intended to be used as
follows:
Use Type and Intensity
• Single-family detached homes
• Large to medium sized homes
• Large to medium sized lots
Application of District
• Existing and new development
• Areas within the City of Auburn and areas
within the City's extra-territorial jurisdiction
• Small to medium sized pockets of development
Development Standards
• Promote low impact development in concert
with the natural setting
Appropriate Adjacent Districts
• PR, AG, ER, R1, R2, R3, TR, M1, M2, MH,
and IS
Board of Zoning Appeals
• Allow special exception use only when it clearly
benefits the residential nature of the district
Accessory Permitted Uses
• child care home
• home business, type 1
• home business, type 2
Residential Permitted Uses
• dwelling, manufactured home
• dwelling, single-family detached
• fair housing facility (small)
Industrial Special Exception Uses
• public utility facility
Article
Additional Development Standards that Apply
Article 02: Zoning Districts 2-11
Low Density Single-family Residential (R1) District 02
Minimum Lot Area
• 14,500 square feet
Minimum Lot Width
• 100 feet
Sanitary Sewer Utility
• Required
Water Utility
• Required
Minimum Front Yard Setback
• 35 feet for primary and accessory
structures
Minimum Side Yard Setback
• 10 feet for primary structures and
accessory structures
Minimum Rear Yard Setback
• 30 feet for primary structures
• 10 feet for accessory structures
Maximum Lot Coverage
• 35% of lot area
Minimum Main Floor Area
• n/a
Minimum Dwelling Unit Size
• 1,200 square feet
Maximum Primary Structures
• 1
Maximum Density
• 1.5 du/acre in a multiple lot development
Maximum Structure Height
• 35 feet for primary structures
• 20 feet for accessory structures
2.10 R1 District Development Standards
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Lot Width
Lot Depth
R.O.W.
Property
Line
Lot Area
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
R.O.W.
Front Yard
Setback
Building
Envelope
Side
Yard
Setback
Rear Yard
Setback
Side
Yard
Setback
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
R.O.W.
Accessory
Structure
Lot
Coverage
Primary
Structure
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Structure
Height
Pitched Roof Structures
(from highest point on pitched roof)
Accessory Structure Primary Structure
chimneys are
exempt
Accessory Structure (AS)
• AS-01........................... Page 5-6
• AS-04........................... Page 5-9
Architectural (AR)
• AR-01......................... Page 5-16
Density and Intensity (DI)
• DI-01.......................... Page 5-22
Driveway (DW)
• DW-01........................ Page 5-23
• DW-03........................ Page 5-25
Environmental (EN)
• EN-01......................... Page 5-27
Fence and Wall (FW)
• FW-01........................ Page 5-29
• FW-04........................ Page 5-31
Floodplain (FP)
• FP-01......................... Page 5-33
Floor Area (FA)
• FA-01......................... Page 5-34
Height (HT)
• HT-01......................... Page 5-35
Home Business (HB)
• HB-01......................... Page 5-36
• HB-02......................... Page 5-37
Landscaping (LA)
• LA-01......................... Page 5-40
Lighting (LT)
• LT-01.......................... Page 5-41
Lot (LO)
• LO-01......................... Page 5-43
Outdoor Storage (OS)
• OS-01........................ Page 5-46
Parking (PK)
• PK-01......................... Page 5-47
• PK-02......................... Page 5-47
Performance (PF)
• PF-01......................... Page 5-56
Public Improvement (PI)
• PI-01.......................... Page 5-59
Recreational Vehicle (RV)
• RV-01......................... Page 5-61
Retaining Wall (RW)
• RW-01........................ Page 5-62
Setback (SB)
• SB-01......................... Page 5-63
Sewer and Water (SW)
• SW-01........................ Page 5-65
Sign (SI)
• SI-01.......................... Page 5-67
• SI-03.......................... Page 5-71
Solar / Alternative Energy (SL)
• SL-01......................... Page 5-93
• SL-03......................... Page 5-93
Special Exception (SE)
• SE-01......................... Page 5-95
Storage Tank (SR)
• SR-01......................... Page 5-96
• SR-02......................... Page 5-96
Structure (ST)
• ST-01......................... Page 5-97
Telecommunication Facility (TC)
• TC-02........................ Page 5-100
TemporaryUse and Structure (TU)
• TU-01....................... Page 5-101
• TU-03....................... Page 5-102
Vision Clearance (VC)
• VC-01....................... Page 5-104
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article
District Intent Permitted Uses Special Exception Uses
2-12
Medium Density Single-family Residential (R2) District 02
2.11 R2 District Intent, Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses
Accessory Permitted Uses
• child care home
• home business, type 1
• home business, type 2
Residential Permitted Uses
• dwelling, manufactured home
• dwelling, single-family detached
• fair housing facility (small)
Industrial Special Exception Uses
• public utility facility
The R2 (Medium Density Single-family
Residential) District is intended to be used
as follows:
Use Type and Intensity
• Single-family detached homes
• Small to medium sized homes
• Medium sized lots
Application of District
• Existing and new development
• District areas can range from small pockets
(a couple of lots) to large areas (entire
neighborhoods and blocks)
Development Standards
• Promote low-impact development in harmony
with a natural setting
Appropriate Adjacent Districts
• PR, AG, ER, R1, R2, R3, TR, M1, M2, MH, IS,
DC, and C1
Plan Commission
• Should use this district for the majority of new
single-family residential development within the
City of Auburn
Board of Zoning Appeals
• Allow a special exception use only when it
clearly benefits the residential nature of the
district
Article
Additional Development Standards that Apply
Article 02: Zoning Districts 2-13
Medium Density Single-family Residential (R2) District 02
Minimum Lot Area
• 10,000 square feet
Minimum Lot Width
• 70 feet
Sanitary Sewer Utility
• Required
Water Utility
• Required
Minimum Front Yard Setback
• 30 feet for primary and accessory
structures
Minimum Side Yard Setback
• 8 feet for primary and accessory
structures
Minimum Rear Yard Setback
• 30 feet for primary structures
• 8 feet for accessory structures
Maximum Lot Coverage
• 40% of lot area
Minimum Main Floor Area
• n/a
Minimum Dwelling Unit Size
• 1,000 square feet
Maximum Primary Structures
• 1
Maximum Density
• 3.5 du/acre in a multiple lot development
Maximum Structure Height
• 35 feet for primary structures
• 20 feet for accessory structures
2.12 R2 District Development Standards
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Lot Area
Property
Line
Lot Width
Lot Depth
ROW
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
ROW
Building
Envelope
Rear Yard
Setback
Side Yard
Setback
Front Yard
Setback
ROW © 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Primary
Structure
Lot
Coverage
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Structure
Height
Pitched Roof Structures
(from highest point on pitched roof)
Accessory Structure Primary Structure
chimneys are
exempt
Accessory Structure (AS)
• AS-01........................... Page 5-6
• AS-04........................... Page 5-9
Architectural (AR)
• AR-01......................... Page 5-16
Density and Intensity (DI)
• DI-01.......................... Page 5-22
Driveway (DW)
• DW-01........................ Page 5-23
• DW-03........................ Page 5-25
Environmental (EN)
• EN-01......................... Page 5-27
Fence and Wall (FW)
• FW-01........................ Page 5-29
• FW-04........................ Page 5-31
Floodplain (FP)
• FP-01......................... Page 5-33
Floor Area (FA)
• FA-01......................... Page 5-34
Height (HT)
• HT-01......................... Page 5-35
Home Business (HB)
• HB-01......................... Page 5-36
• HB-02......................... Page 5-37
Landscaping (LA)
• LA-01......................... Page 5-40
Lighting (LT)
• LT-01.......................... Page 5-41
Lot (LO)
• LO-01......................... Page 5-43
Outdoor Storage (OS)
• OS-01........................ Page 5-46
Parking (PK)
• PK-01......................... Page 5-47
• PK-02......................... Page 5-47
Performance (PF)
• PF-01......................... Page 5-56
Public Improvement (PI)
• PI-01.......................... Page 5-59
Recreational Vehicle (RV)
• RV-01......................... Page 5-61
Retaining Wall (RW)
• RW-01........................ Page 5-62
Setback (SB)
• SB-01......................... Page 5-63
Sewer and Water (SW)
• SW-01........................ Page 5-65
Sign (SI)
• SI-01.......................... Page 5-67
• SI-03.......................... Page 5-71
Solar / Alternative Energy (SL)
• SL-01......................... Page 5-93
• SL-03......................... Page 5-93
Special Exception (SE)
• SE-01......................... Page 5-95
Storage Tank (SR)
• SR-01......................... Page 5-96
• SR-02......................... Page 5-96
Structure (ST)
• ST-01......................... Page 5-97
Telecommunication Facility (TC)
• TC-02........................ Page 5-100
Temporary Use and Structure(TU)
• TU-01....................... Page 5-101
• TU-03....................... Page 5-102
Vision Clearance (VC)
• VC-01....................... Page 5-104
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article
District Intent Permitted Uses Special Exception Uses
2-14
High Density Single-family Residential (R3) District 02
2.13 R3 District Intent, Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses
Accessory Permitted Uses
• child care home
• home business, type 1
• home business, type 2
Residential Permitted Uses
• dwelling, manufactured home
• dwelling, single-family detached
• fair housing facility (small)
Industrial Special Exception Uses
• public utility facility
Institutional Special Exception Uses
• parking lot, independent
Residential Special Exception Uses
• bed and breakfast
• dwelling, two-family (duplex)
The R3 (High Density Single-family Residential)
District is intended to be used as
follows:
Use Type and Intensity
• Single-family detached homes
• Small to medium sized homes
• Small to medium sized lots
Application of District
• Infill development
• District areas can range from small pockets
(a couple of lots) to large areas (entire
neighborhoods or blocks)
Development Standards
• Promote limited impact development in concert
with an urban environment
Appropriate Adjacent Districts
• PR, R1, R2, R3, TR, M1, M2, MH, IS, DC, and
C1
Plan Commission
• Recognize the smaller the lots, the higher the
quality of design must be.
Board of Zoning Appeals
• Utilize the design features of surrounding
properties to determine commitments and
approvals
• Allow special exception uses only when it
clearly benefits the residential nature of the
district
Article
Additional Development Standards that Apply
Article 02: Zoning Districts 2-15
High Density Single-family Residential (R3) District 02
Minimum Lot Area
• 7,200 square feet
Minimum Lot Width
• 60 feet
Sanitary Sewer Utility
• Required
Water Utility
• Required
Minimum Front Yard Setback
• 25 feet for primary and accessory
structures
Minimum Side Yard Setback
• 5 feet for primary and accessory
structures
Minimum Rear Yard Setback
• 15 feet for primary structures
• 5 feet for accessory structures
Maximum Lot Coverage
• 50% of lot area
Minimum Main Floor Area
• n/a
Minimum Dwelling Size
• 900 square feet
Maximum Primary Structures
• 1
Maximum Density
• 4.6 du/acre in a multiple lot development
Maximum Structure Height
• 35 feet for primary structures
• 20 feet for accessory structures
2.14 R3 District Development Standards
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Structure
Height
Pitched Roof Structures
(from highest point on pitched roof)
Accessory Structure Primary Structure
chimneys are
exempt
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Lot
Area
Lot Depth
Property
Line
Lot Width
ROW ROW © 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Building
Envelope
Front
Yard
Setback
Side
Yard
Setback
Side
Yard
Setback
Rear Yard
Setback
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Primary
Structure
ROW
Accessory
Structure
Lot
Coverage
Accessory Structure (AS)
• AS-01........................... Page 5-6
• AS-04........................... Page 5-9
Architectural (AR)
• AR-01......................... Page 5-16
Density and Intensity (DI)
• DI-01.......................... Page 5-22
Driveway (DW)
• DW-01........................ Page 5-23
• DW-03........................ Page 5-25
Environmental (EN)
• EN-01......................... Page 5-27
Fence and Wall (FW)
• FW-01........................ Page 5-29
• FW-04........................ Page 5-31
Floodplain (FP)
• FP-01......................... Page 5-33
Floor Area (FA)
• FA-01......................... Page 5-34
Height (HT)
• HT-01......................... Page 5-35
Home Business (HB)
• HB-01......................... Page 5-36
• HB-02......................... Page 5-37
Landscaping (LA)
• LA-01......................... Page 5-40
Lighting (LT)
• LT-01.......................... Page 5-41
Lot (LO)
• LO-01......................... Page 5-43
Outdoor Storage (OS)
• OS-01........................ Page 5-46
Parking (PK)
• PK-01......................... Page 5-47
• PK-03......................... Page 5-48
Performance (PF)
• PF-01......................... Page 5-56
Public Improvement (PI)
• PI-01.......................... Page 5-59
Recreational Vehicle (RV)
• RV-01......................... Page 5-61
Retaining Wall (RW)
• RW-01........................ Page 5-62
Setback (SB)
• SB-01......................... Page 5-63
Sewer and Water (SW)
• SW-01........................ Page 5-65
Sign (SI)
• SI-01.......................... Page 5-67
• SI-03.......................... Page 5-71
Solar / Alternative Energy (SL)
• SL-01......................... Page 5-93
• SL-03......................... Page 5-93
Special Exception (SE)
• SE-01......................... Page 5-95
Storage Tank (SR)
• SR-01......................... Page 5-96
• SR-02......................... Page 5-96
Structure (ST)
• ST-01......................... Page 5-97
Telecommunication Facility (TC)
• TC-02........................ Page 5-100
Temporary Use and Structure(TU)
• TU-01....................... Page 5-101
• TU-03....................... Page 5-102
Vision Clearance (VC)
• VC-01....................... Page 5-104
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article
District Intent Permitted Uses Special Exception Uses
2-16
Traditional Residential (TR) District 02
2.15 TR District Intent, Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses
Accessory Permitted Uses
• child care home
• home business, type 1
• home business, type 2
Institutional Permitted Uses
• park
Residential Permitted Uses
• dwelling, single-family detached
• fair housing facility (small)
Industrial Special Exception Uses
• public utility facility
Institutional Special Exception Uses
• church, temple or mosque
• parking lot, independent
Residential Special Exception Uses
• bed and breakfast
• dwelling, two-family (duplex)
The TR (Traditional Residential) District is
intended to be used as follows:
Use Type and Intensity
• Single-family detached homes
• Small to medium sized homes
• Small to medium sized lots
Application of District
• Existing "old town" residential neighborhoods
• Infill development
• District areas can range from small pockets
(a couple of lots) to large areas (entire
neighborhoods or blocks) but should be
contiguous to the existing City street grid
Development Standards
• Protect, maintain, and promote the "old
residential" character in Auburn
• Promote limited impact development in concert
with an urban environment
Appropriate Adjacent Districts
• PR, R1, R2, R3, TR, M1, M2, IS, DC, and C1
Plan Commission
• Should use this district primarily for existing
development
• Recognize the smaller the lots, the higher the
quality of design must be.
Board of Zoning Appeals
• Utilize the design features of surrounding
properties to determine commitments and
approvals
• Allow special exception uses only when it
clearly benefits the residential nature of the
district
Article
Additional Development Standards that Apply
Article 02: Zoning Districts 2-17
Traditional Residential (TR) District 02
Minimum Lot Area
• 5,500 square feet
Minimum Lot Width
• 40 feet
Sanitary Sewer Utility
• Required
Water Utility
• Required
Minimum Front Yard Setback
• 25 feet for primary and accessory
structures; or established building
setback line
Minimum Side Yard Setback
• 5 feet for primary and accessory
structures
Minimum Rear Yard Setback
• 15 feet for primary structures
• 5 feet for accessory structures
• 20 feet for accessory structures with
vehicular access from an alley
Maximum Lot Coverage
• 55% of lot area
Minimum Main Floor Area
• n/a
Minimum Dwelling Unit Size
• 1,000 square feet
Maximum Primary Structures
• 1
Maximum Density
• 5.8 du/acre in a multiple lot development
Maximum Structure Height
• 35 feet for primary structures
• 20 feet for accessory structures
2.16 TR District Development Standards
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Property
Line
Lot Depth
Lot Width
ROW
Lot Area
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Building
Envelope
Rear Building
Setback
Front Yard
Setback
Side
Building
Setback
Side
Building
Setback
ROW © 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Primary
Structure
Accessory
Structure
Lot
Coverage
ROW
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Structure
Height
Pitched Roof Structures
(from highest point on pitched roof)
Accessory Structure Primary Structure
chimneys are
exempt
Accessory Structure (AS)
• AS-01........................... Page 5-6
• AS-04........................... Page 5-9
Architectural (AR)
• AR-02......................... Page 5-17
Density and Intensity (DI)
• DI-01.......................... Page 5-22
Driveway (DW)
• DW-01........................ Page 5-23
• DW-03........................ Page 5-25
Environmental (EN)
• EN-01......................... Page 5-27
Fence and Wall (FW)
• FW-01........................ Page 5-29
• FW-04........................ Page 5-31
Floodplain (FP)
• FP-01......................... Page 5-33
Floor Area (FA)
• FA-01......................... Page 5-34
Height (HT)
• HT-01......................... Page 5-35
Home Business (HB)
• HB-01......................... Page 5-36
• HB-02......................... Page 5-37
Landscaping (LA)
• LA-01......................... Page 5-40
Lighting (LT)
• LT-01.......................... Page 5-41
Lot (LO)
• LO-01......................... Page 5-43
Outdoor Storage (OS)
• OS-01........................ Page 5-46
Parking (PK)
• PK-01......................... Page 5-47
• PK-03......................... Page 5-48
Performance (PF)
• PF-01......................... Page 5-56
Public Improvement (PI)
• PI-01.......................... Page 5-59
Recreational Vehcile (RV)
• RV-01......................... Page 5-61
Retaining Wall (RW)
• RW-01........................ Page 5-62
Setback (SB)
• SB-01......................... Page 5-63
Sewer and Water (SW)
• SW-01........................ Page 5-65
Sign (SI)
• SI-01.......................... Page 5-67
• SI-03.......................... Page 5-71
Solar / Alternate Energy (SL)
• SL-01......................... Page 5-93
• SL-03......................... Page 5-93
Special Exception (SE)
• SE-01......................... Page 5-95
Storage Tank (SR)
• SR-01......................... Page 5-96
• SR-02......................... Page 5-96
Structure (ST)
• ST-01......................... Page 5-97
Telecommunication Facility (TC)
• TC-02........................ Page 5-100
Temporary Use and Structure(TU)
• TU-01....................... Page 5-101
• TU-03....................... Page 5-102
Vision Clearance (VC)
• VC-01....................... Page 5-104
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article
District Intent Permitted Uses Special Exception Uses
2-18
Multiple-family Residential (M1) District 02
2.17 M1 District Intent, Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses
The M1 (Multiple-family Residential) District
is intended to be used as follows:
Use Type and Intensity
• Single-family attached homes in the form of
duplexes and triplexes
• Small to medium sized lots
• Similar in scale and intensity to single-family
neighborhoods
Application of District
• Existing and new development
• Spot zoning or small pockets of development
(a couple of contiguous lots)
• Use very sparingly for the conversion of singlefamily
dwellings
Development Standards
• Recognize that multiple-family developments
require stringent standards to protect the
quality of life for tenants and surrounding land
uses
Appropriate Adjacent Districts
• PR, AG, R1, R2, R3, TR, M1, M2, MH, IS, DC,
and C1
Plan Commission
• Should use this district for existing
developments and carefully for new
development within the City of Auburn
Board of Zoning Appeals
• Allow special exception use only when it clearly
complements the residential nature of the
district
Accessory Permitted Uses
• child care home
• home business, type 1
• home business, type 2
Residential Permitted Uses
• dwelling, two-family (duplex)
• dwelling, three-family (triplex)
• dwelling, four-family (quadplex)
• dwelling, five-family
Industrial Special Exception Uses
• public utility facility
Institutional Special Exception Uses
• assisted living facility
Residential Special Exception Uses
• dwelling, multiple-family (6 to 10 units per
building)
• dwelling, multiple-family (11+ units per building)
• dwelling, single-family detached
• fair housing facility (large)
Article
Additional Development Standards that Apply
Article 02: Zoning Districts 2-19
Multiple-family Residential (M1) District 02
Minimum Lot Area
• 12,500 square feet
Minimum Lot Width
• 60 feet
Sanitary Sewer Utility
• Required
Water Utility
• Required
Minimum Front Yard Setback
• 30 feet for primary and accessory
structures
Minimum Side Yard Setback
• 15 feet for primary and accessory
structures
Minimum Rear Yard Setback
• 25 feet for primary structures
• 15 feet for accessory structures
Maximum Lot Coverage
• 50% of lot area
Minimum Main Floor Area
• n/a
Minimum Dwelling Unit Size
• 900 square feet per unit
Minimum Distance Between Primary
Structures
• 15 feet
Maximum Dwelling Units
• 40 for the development
Maximum Density
• 10 du/acre for the development
Maximum Structure Height
• 35 feet for primary structures
• 2 ½ stories
• 20 feet for accessory structures
2.18 M1 District Development Standards
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Building
Envelope
ROW
Front Yard
Setback
Rear Yard
Setback
Side
Yard
Setback
Side
Yard
Setback
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Lot Area
Property
Line
Lot Width
Lot Depth
ROW
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Primary
Structure
Lot
Coverage
ROW
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Structure
Height
Pitched Roof Structures
(from highest point on pitched roof)
Accessory Structure Primary Structure
chimneys are
exempt
Accessory Structure (AS)
• AS-01........................... Page 5-6
• AS-04........................... Page 5-9
Architectural (AR)
• AR-01......................... Page 5-16
Density and Intensity (DI)
• DI-01.......................... Page 5-22
Driveway (DW)
• DW-01........................ Page 5-23
• DW-03........................ Page 5-25
Environmental (EN)
• EN-01......................... Page 5-27
Fence and Wall (FW)
• FW-01........................ Page 5-29
• FW-04........................ Page 5-31
Floodplain (FP)
• FP-01......................... Page 5-33
Floor Area (FA)
• FA-01......................... Page 5-34
Height (HT)
• HT-01......................... Page 5-35
Home Business (HB)
• HB-01......................... Page 5-36
• HB-02......................... Page 5-37
Landscaping (LA)
• LA-01......................... Page 5-40
Lighting (LT)
• LT-01.......................... Page 5-41
Lot (LO)
• LO-01......................... Page 5-43
Outdoor Storage (OS)
• OS-01........................ Page 5-46
Parking (PK)
• PK-01......................... Page 5-47
• PK-02......................... Page 5-47
Performance (PF)
• PF-01......................... Page 5-56
Public Improvement (PI)
• PI-01.......................... Page 5-59
Recreational Vehicle (RV)
• RV-01......................... Page 5-61
Retaining Wall (RW)
• RW-01........................ Page 5-62
Setback (SB)
• SB-01......................... Page 5-63
Sewer and Water (SW)
• SW-01........................ Page 5-65
Sign (SI)
• SI-01.......................... Page 5-67
• SI-04.......................... Page 5-72
Solar / Alternative Energy (SL)
• SL-01......................... Page 5-93
• SL-03......................... Page 5-93
Special Exception (SE)
• SE-01......................... Page 5-95
Storage Tank (SR)
• SR-01......................... Page 5-96
• SR-02......................... Page 5-96
Structure (ST)
• ST-01......................... Page 5-97
Telecommunication Facility (TC)
• TC-02........................ Page 5-100
Temporary Use and Structure(TU)
• TU-01....................... Page 5-101
• TU-03....................... Page 5-102
Trash Receptacle (TR)
• TR-01....................... Page 5-103
Vision Clearance (VC)
• VC-01....................... Page 5-104
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article
District Intent Permitted Uses Special Exception Uses
2-20
High Density Multiple-family Residential (M2) District 02
2.19 M2 District Intent, Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses
The M2 (High Density Multiple-family
Residential) District is intended to be used
as follows:
Use Type and Intensity
• Multiple-family homes in the form of apartment
or condominium complexes
• Medium to high density
• Multiple primary structures on one lot
Application of District
• Existing and new development
• District is comprised of spot zoning or
small pockets of development (a couple of
contiguous lots)
Development Standards
• Stringent standards to protect the quality of life
for tenants and surrounding zoning districts
Appropriate Adjacent Districts
• PR, AG, R1, R2, R3, TR, M1, M2, MH, IS, DC,
C1, and C2
Plan Commission
• Should use this district for existing
developments and carefully for new residential
development within the City of Auburn
Board of Zoning Appeals
• Discourage the creation of duplexes and
triplexes from existing single-family detached
homes.
• Allow a special exception use only when it
clearly compliments the residential nature of
the district
Accessory Permitted Uses
• home business, type 1
Industrial Permitted Uses
• public utility facility
Institutional Permitted Uses
• assisted living facility
• park
Residential Permitted Uses
• assisted living facility
• dwelling, two-family (duplex)
• dwelling, three-family (triplex)
• dwelling, four-family (quadplex)
• dwelling, five-family
• dwelling, multiple-family (6 to 10 units per
building)
• dwelling, multiple-family (11+ units per building)
• fair housing facility (large)
• retirement community
Institutional Special Exception Uses
• mental health facility
• nursing home
• police, fire or rescue station
Residential Special Exception Uses
• fraternity or sorority house
Article
Additional Development Standards that Apply
Article 02: Zoning Districts 2-21
High Density Multiple-family Residential (M2) District 02
Minimum Lot Area
• 25,000 square feet
Minimum Lot Width
• 100 feet
Sanitary Sewer Utility
• Required
Water Utility
• Required
Minimum Front Yard Setback
• 30 feet for primary and accessory
structures
Minimum Side Yard Setback
• 25 feet for primary and accessory
structures
Minimum Rear Yard Setback
• 20 feet for primary structures
• 15 feet for accessory structures
Maximum Lot Coverage
• 50% of lot area
Minimum Main Floor Area
• n/a
Minimum Dwelling Unit Size
• 500 square feet per unit
Minimum Distance Between Primary
Structures
• 20 feet
Maximum Density
• 25 du/acre in a multiple lot development
Maximum Structure Height
• 45 feet for primary structures
• 20 feet for accessory structures
2.20 M2 District Development Standards
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Building
Envelope Rear Yard
Setback
Side
Yard
Setback
Side
Yard
Setback
Front Yard
Setback
ROW
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Lot Depth
Property
Line
Lot Width
ROW
Lot Area
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Accessory
Structure
Lot
Coverage
Primary
Structure
ROW
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Structure
Height
Pitched Roof Structures
(from highest point on pitched roof)
Accessory Structure Primary Structure
chimneys are
exempt
Accessory Structure (AS)
• AS-01........................... Page 5-6
• AS-05......................... Page 5-10
Density and Intensity (DI)
• DI-01.......................... Page 5-22
Driveway (DW)
• DW-01........................ Page 5-23
• DW-04........................ Page 5-26
Environmental (EN)
• EN-01......................... Page 5-27
Fence and Wall (FW)
• FW-01........................ Page 5-29
• FW-04........................ Page 5-31
Floodplain (FP)
• FP-01......................... Page 5-33
Floor Area (FA)
• FA-01......................... Page 5-34
Height (HT)
• HT-01......................... Page 5-35
Home Business (HB)
• HB-01......................... Page 5-36
Landscaping (LA)
• LA-01......................... Page 5-40
• LA-02......................... Page 5-40
Lighting (LT)
• LT-01.......................... Page 5-41
Lot (LO)
• LO-01......................... Page 5-43
Outdoor Storage (OS)
• OS-01........................ Page 5-46
Parking (PK)
• PK-01......................... Page 5-47
• PK-04......................... Page 5-48
Performance (PF)
• PF-01......................... Page 5-56
Public Improvement (PI)
• PI-01.......................... Page 5-59
Retaining Wall (RW)
• RW-01........................ Page 5-62
Setback (SB)
• SB-01......................... Page 5-63
Sewer and Water (SW)
• SW-01........................ Page 5-65
Sign (SI)
• SI-01.......................... Page 5-67
• SI-04.......................... Page 5-72
Solar / Alternative Energy (SL)
• SL-01......................... Page 5-93
• SL-04......................... Page 5-94
Special Exception (SE)
• SE-01......................... Page 5-95
Storage Tank (SR)
• SR-01......................... Page 5-96
• SR-02......................... Page 5-96
Structure (ST)
• ST-01......................... Page 5-97
Telecommunication Facility (TC)
• TC-02........................ Page 5-100
Temporary Use and Structure(TU)
• TU-01....................... Page 5-101
• TU-03....................... Page 5-102
Trash Receptacle (TR)
• TR-01....................... Page 5-103
Vision Clearance (VC)
• VC-01....................... Page 5-104
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article
District Intent Permitted Uses Special Exception Uses
2-22
Manufactured Home Residential (MH) District 02
2.21 MH District Intent, Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses
The MH (Manufactured Home Residential)
District is intended to be used as follows:
Use Type and Intensity
• Lease lot housing developments
(manufactured and/or mobile home parks)
• Multiple primary structures on one lot
Application of District
• Existing and new development
• Zoning district is comprised of small to medium
sized pockets of development
• Primarily for areas within Auburn's city limits
Development Standards
• Lease lot developments require more stringent
development standards to protect the quality of
life of tenants and surrounding districts
• Standards shall be in accordance with IC
16-11-27-1 et.seq. Rule 410, IAC 6-6 and their
subsequent amendments
Appropriate Adjacent Districts
• PR, AG, R1, R2, R3, M1, M2, MH, IS, and C1
Plan Commission
• Should use this district for existing
development and with sensitivity for new
residential development within the City of
Auburn
Board of Zoning Appeals
• Allow special exception use only when it clearly
complements the residential nature of the
district
Accessory Permitted Uses
• home business, type 1
Institutional Permitted Uses
• community center
• park
Residential Permitted Uses
• dwelling, manufactured home
• dwelling, mobile home
• manufactured home park
• mobile home park
• retirement community
Industrial Special Exception Uses
• public utility facility
Residential Special Exception Uses
• dwelling, single-family detached
Article
Additional Development Standards that Apply
Article 02: Zoning Districts 2-23
Manufactured Home Residential (MH) District 02
Minimum Lot Area
• 5 acres
Minimum Lot Width
• 250 feet
Minimum Dwelling Site Area
• 3,000 square feet
Minimum Dwelling Site Width
• 30 feet
Sanitary Sewer Utility
• Required
Water Utility
• Required
Minimum Front Yard Setback
• 40 feet for primary and accessory
structures
Minimum Side Yard Setback
• 20 feet for primary and accessory
structures
Minimum Rear Yard Setback
• 20 feet for primary and accessory
structures
Minimum Dwelling Site Front Yard Setback
• 10 feet from edge of pavement of interior
street
Minimum Dwelling Site Side Yard Setback
• 5 feet
Minimum Dwelling Site Rear Yard Setback
• 5 feet
Maximum Lot Coverage
• 65% of lot area
Minimum Main Floor Area
• n/a
Minimum Dwelling Unit Size
• 700 square feet
Maximum Primary Structures
• 1 per dwelling site
Maximum Density
• 10 du/acre in a multiple dwelling site
development
Maximum Structure Height
• 25 feet for primary structures
• 20 feet for accessory structures
2.22 MH District Development Standards
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
ROW
Lot Depth
Lot Width
Lot
Area
Dwelling
Site
Property
Line
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
ROW
Dwelling
Site Rear
Yard
Setback
Building
Envelope
Front Yard
Setback
Dwelling
Site Side
Yard
Setback
Dwelling Site Front Yard Setback Rear Yard
Setback
Side Yard
Setback
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
ROW
Lot
Coverage
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Structure
Height
Pitched Roof Structures
(from highest point on pitched roof)
Accessory Structure Primary Structure
chimneys are
exempt
Accessory Structure (AS)
• AS-01........................... Page 5-6
• AS-06..........................Page 5-11
Density and Intensity (DI)
• DI-01.......................... Page 5-22
Driveway (DW)
• DW-01........................ Page 5-23
• DW-03........................ Page 5-25
Environmental (EN)
• EN-01......................... Page 5-27
Fence and Wall (FW)
• FW-01........................ Page 5-29
• FW-04........................ Page 5-31
Floodplain (FP)
• FP-01......................... Page 5-33
Floor Area (FA)
• FA-01......................... Page 5-34
Height (HT)
• HT-01......................... Page 5-35
Home Business (HB)
• HB-01......................... Page 5-36
Landscaping (LA)
• LA-01......................... Page 5-40
Lighting (LT)
• LT-01.......................... Page 5-41
Lot (LO)
• LO-01......................... Page 5-43
Manufactured Housing (MH)
• MH-01........................ Page 5-44
Outdoor Storage (OS)
• OS-01........................ Page 5-46
Parking (PK)
• PK-01......................... Page 5-47
• PK-05......................... Page 5-48
Performance (PF)
• PF-01......................... Page 5-56
Public Improvement (PI)
• PI-01.......................... Page 5-59
Recreational Vehicle (RV)
• RV-01......................... Page 5-61
Retaining Wall (RW)
• RW-01........................ Page 5-62
Setback (SB)
• SB-01......................... Page 5-63
Sewer and Water (SW)
• SW-01........................ Page 5-65
Sign (SI)
• SI-01.......................... Page 5-67
• SI-04.......................... Page 5-72
Solar / Alternative Energy (SL)
• SL-01......................... Page 5-93
Special Exception (SE)
• SE-01......................... Page 5-95
Storage Tank (SR)
• SR-01......................... Page 5-96
• SR-02......................... Page 5-96
Structure (ST)
• ST-01......................... Page 5-97
Telecommunication Facility (TC)
• TC-02........................ Page 5-100
Temporary Use and Structure(TU)
• TU-01....................... Page 5-101
• TU-03....................... Page 5-102
Trash Receptacle (TR)
• TR-01....................... Page 5-103
Vision Clearance (VC)
• VC-01....................... Page 5-104
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article
District Intent Permitted Uses Special Exception Uses
2-24
Institutional (IS) District 02
2.23 IS District Intent, Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses
The IS (Institutional) District is intended to
be used as follows:
Use Type and Intensity
• All intensities of institutionally-owned lands,
including state, county, and city facilities
• Public facilities
• Limited quasi-public uses
• Multiple primary structures per lot
Application of District
• Existing and new development
• District areas can range from spot zoning,
small pockets (a couple of contiguous lots),
and medium sized areas
• Buffering or transitional district
Development Standards
• Enact quality development standards that
optimize accessibility and use while minimizing
the impacts to surrounding areas
Appropriate Adjacent Districts
• PR, AG, ER, R1, R2, R3, TR, M1, M2, MH, IS,
DC, C1, C2, and I1
Plan Commission
• Zone property IS only after determining the
site is appropriate for any of the possible uses
allowed in the zoning district
• Be sensitive to the potential for light pollution,
noise pollution and the generation of excessive
vehicular traffic
• Pedestrian traffic should be accommodated
within each development
Board of Zoning Appeals
• Allow a special exception use only when
compatible with the surrounding areas
Accessory Permitted Uses
• farmers' market
Commercial Permitted Uses
• accounting firm
• art and craft gallery
• child care center
• country club
• day care, adult
• funeral home or mortuary
• golf course
• insurance office
• investment firm
• law office
• membership associations
• office, design services
• office, medical
• reading clinic
• real estate office
• recreation center or play center
• service organization
• technology park
• title company
Industrial Permitted Uses
• public utility facility
Institutional Permitted Uses
• assisted living facility
• bus station
• cemetery or mausoleum
• child care institution
• church, temple or mosque
• community center
• government office
• government operation (non-office)
• hospital
• library
• mental health facility
• museum
• nursing home
• park
• parking lot, independent
• parking structure
• police, fire or rescue station
• post office
• school (P-12)
• swimming pool, public
• trade or business school
• university or college
Accessory Special Exception Uses
• solar field
Commercial Special Exception Uses
• bank or credit union
• employment service
• office, veterinarian clinic or hospital
• publishing corporate office
• secretarial service
• temporary service agency
• trade office
• travel agency
Institutional Special Exception Uses
• crematory
• jail
• juvenile detention facility
• municipal airport
• municipal heliport
• recycling collection point
Residential Special Exception Uses
• fair housing facility (large)
Article
Additional Development Standards that Apply
Article 02: Zoning Districts 2-25
Institutional (IS) District 02
Minimum Lot Area
• n/a
Minimum Lot Width
• n/a
Sanitary Sewer Utility
• Required
Water Utility
• Required
Minimum Front Yard Setback
• 30 feet for primary and accessory
structures
Minimum Side Yard Setback
• 10 feet for primary and accessory
structures
• 20 feet for primary and accessory
structures adjacent to residential uses or
residential zoning district
Minimum Rear Yard Setback
• 30 feet for primary and accessory
structures
Maximum Lot Coverage
• 70% of lot area
Minimum Main Floor Area
• 1,000 square feet
Minimum Dwelling Unit Size
• n/a
Maximum Primary Structures
• no limit
Maximum Structure Height
• 50 feet for primary structures
• 20 feet for accessory structures
2.24 IS District Development Standards
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Lot Width
Lot Depth
Property
Line
ROW
Lot Area
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
ROW
Rear Yard
Setback
Front Yard
Setback
Building
Envelope
Side
Yard
Setback
Side
Yard
Setback
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
ROW
Lot
Coverage
Primary
Structure
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Structure
Height
Pitched Roof Structures
(from highest point
on pitched roof)
Flat Roof Structures
(from highest
section of flat roof)
Accessory
Structure mechanical
is exempt Primary
Structure
Accessory Structure (AS)
• AS-01........................... Page 5-6
• AS-07......................... Page 5-12
Architectural (AR)
• AR-04......................... Page 5-20
Density and Intensity (DI)
• DI-01.......................... Page 5-22
Driveway (DW)
• DW-01........................ Page 5-23
• DW-04........................ Page 5-26
Environmental (EN)
• EN-01......................... Page 5-27
Fence and Wall (FW)
• FW-01........................ Page 5-29
• FW-05........................ Page 5-31
Floodplain (FP)
• FP-01......................... Page 5-33
Floor Area (FA)
• FA-01......................... Page 5-34
Height (HT)
• HT-01......................... Page 5-35
Home Business (HB)
• HB-01......................... Page 5-36
Landscaping (LA)
• LA-01......................... Page 5-40
• LA-02......................... Page 5-40
Lighting (LT)
• LT-01.......................... Page 5-41
Loading (LD)
• LD-01......................... Page 5-42
Lot (LO)
• LO-01......................... Page 5-43
Outdoor Storage (OS)
• OS-01........................ Page 5-46
Parking (PK)
• PK-01......................... Page 5-47
• PK-07......................... Page 5-49
Performance (PF)
• PF-01......................... Page 5-56
Public Improvement (PI)
• PI-01.......................... Page 5-59
Retaining Wall (RW)
• RW-01........................ Page 5-62
Setback (SB)
• SB-01......................... Page 5-63
Sewer and Water (SW)
• SW-01........................ Page 5-65
Sign (SI)
• SI-01.......................... Page 5-67
• SI-05.......................... Page 5-74
Solar / Alternative Energy (SL)
• SL-01......................... Page 5-93
• SL-04......................... Page 5-94
Special Exception (SE)
• SE-01......................... Page 5-95
Storage Tank (SR)
• SR-01......................... Page 5-96
• SR-04......................... Page 5-96
Structure (ST)
• ST-01......................... Page 5-97
Telecommunication Facility (TC)
• TC-02....................... Page 5-100
• TC-03....................... Page 5-100
Temporary Use and Structure
(TU)
• TU-01....................... Page 5-101
Trash Receptacle (TR)
• TR-01....................... Page 5-103
Vision Clearance (VC)
• VC-01....................... Page 5-104
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article
District Intent Permitted Uses Special Exception Uses
2-26
Downtown Commercial (DC) District 02
2.25 DC District Intent, Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses
The DC (Downtown Commercial) District is
intended to be used as follows:
Use Type and Intensity
• Traditional downtown uses including low to
moderate intensity commercial, retail, service,
eating, and entertainment establishments
• Mixed uses that promote a strong pedestrianoriented
downtown
• No dwelling units on ground floors
Application of District
• Existing downtown area
• Downtown-like buildings in the City's planning
jurisdiction
Development Standards
• Assure that future development and
modifications will reflect the existing character
of downtown
• Reduce parking requirements due to the nature
of downtown lots and downtown dynamics
• Minimize light, noise, water, and air pollution
Appropriate Adjacent Districts
• PR, R2, R3, TR, M1, M2, IS, DC, C1, and I1
Plan Commission
• Allow and promote vehicular traffic generation
Board of Zoning Appeals
• Drive-up windows should clearly not conflict
with pedestrian traffic
• Restrict drive-up window lanes from creating
new curb cuts or from breaking up the
continuity of structure facades
Accessory Permitted Uses
• farmers' market
• home business, type 1
• permanent outdoor display area
Commercial Permitted Uses
• bank machine or atm walk-up
• bank without drive-up window
• bar or tavern
• barber or beauty shop
• club or lodge
• coffee shop
• delicatessen
• funeral home or mortuary
• ice cream shop
• movie theater
• office, design services
• office, general services
• office, dental clinic
• office, medical clinic
• office, optical clinic
• photographic studio
• restaurant
• restaurant with outdoor dining
• studio arts
• type 1 retail, very low intensity
• type 2 retail, low intensity
• type 3 retail, medium intensity
Institutional Permitted Uses
• community center
• government office
• library
• museum
• park
• parking lot, independent
• parking structure
• police, fire or rescue station
• post office
• trade or business school
Residential Permitted Uses
• dwelling unit (upper floors)
Commercial Special Exception Uses
• bank machine or atm drive-up
• bank with drive-up window
• boarding house
• coin laundry
• hotel or motel
• skating rink
• type 3 retail, plant nursery, retail or greenhouse
• type 4 retail, high intensity
Industrial Special Exception Uses
• public utility facility
Institutional Special Exception Uses
• church, temple or mosque
Residential Special Exception Uses
• bed and breakfast
Article
Additional Development Standards that Apply
Article 02: Zoning Districts 2-27
Downtown Commercial (DC) District 02
Minimum Lot Area
• 1,000 square feet
Minimum Lot Width
• no minimum
Sanitary Sewer Utility
• Required
Water Utility
• Required
Minimum Front Yard Setback
• 0 feet
Minimum Side Yard Setback
• 0 feet
Minimum Rear Yard Setback
• 0 feet
Maximum Lot Coverage
• 100% of lot area
Minimum Main Floor Area
• 1,000 square feet
Minimum Dwelling Unit Size
• 500 square feet
Maximum Primary Structures
• 1
Maximum Structure Height
• 48 feet for primary structures
• 20 feet for accessory structures
2.26 DC District Development Standards
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Property
Line
Lot
Area
Lot Width
Lot Depth
Primary
Structure
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Building
Envelope
Primary
Structure
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Primary
Structure
Lot
Coverage
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Structure
Height
Pitched Roof Structures
(from highest point
on pitched roof)
Flat Roof Structures
(from highest
section of flat roof)
Accessory
Structure mechanical
is exempt Primary
Structure
Accessory Structure (AS)
• AS-01........................... Page 5-6
• AS-08......................... Page 5-13
Architectural (AR)
• AR-03......................... Page 5-18
Density and Intensity (DI)
• DI-01.......................... Page 5-22
Driveway (DW)
• DW-01........................ Page 5-23
Environmental (EN)
• EN-01......................... Page 5-27
Fence and Wall (FW)
• FW-01........................ Page 5-29
• FW-06........................ Page 5-32
Floodplain (FP)
• FP-01......................... Page 5-33
Floor Area (FA)
• FA-01......................... Page 5-34
Height (HT)
• HT-01......................... Page 5-35
Home Business (HB)
• HB-01......................... Page 5-36
Landscaping (LA)
• LA-01......................... Page 5-40
• LA-02......................... Page 5-40
Lighting (LT)
• LT-01.......................... Page 5-41
Lot (LO)
• LO-01......................... Page 5-43
Outdoor Dining (OD)
• OD-01........................ Page 5-45
Outdoor Storage (OS)
• OS-01........................ Page 5-46
Parking (PK)
• PK-01......................... Page 5-47
• PK-06......................... Page 5-48
Performance (PF)
• PF-01......................... Page 5-56
Permanent Outdoor Display (PD)
• PD-02......................... Page 5-58
Public Improvement (PI)
• PI-01.......................... Page 5-59
Retaining Wall (RW)
• RW-01........................ Page 5-62
Setback (SB)
• SB-01......................... Page 5-63
Sewer and Water (SW)
• SW-01........................ Page 5-65
Sign (SI)
• SI-01.......................... Page 5-67
• SI-06.......................... Page 5-79
Solar / Alternative Energy (SL)
• SL-01......................... Page 5-93
• SL-03......................... Page 5-93
Special Exception (SE)
• SE-01......................... Page 5-95
Storage Tank (SR)
• SR-01......................... Page 5-96
• SR-02......................... Page 5-96
Structure (ST)
• ST-01......................... Page 5-97
Telecommunication Facility (TC)
• TC-02....................... Page 5-100
• TC-03....................... Page 5-100
Temporary Use and Structure(TU)
• TU-01....................... Page 5-101
• TU-04....................... Page 5-102
Trash Receptacle (TR)
• TR-01....................... Page 5-103
Vision Clearance (VC)
• VC-01....................... Page 5-104
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article
District Intent Permitted Uses Special Exception Uses
2-28
Neighborhood Commercial (C1) District 02
2.27 C1 District Intent, Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses
The C1 (Neighborhood Commercial) District
is intended to be used as follows:
Use Type and Intensity
• Low intensity retail and services
• Serve adjacent neighborhoods
• One to three tenant structures
Application of District
• Existing and new development
• Buffering or transitional district
• Spot zoning
Development Standards
• Ensure development is consistent with
residential scale and character
Appropriate Adjacent Districts
• PR, R2, R3, TR, M1, M2, MH, IS, DC, and C1
Plan Commission
• Zone property C1 only after determining the
site is appropriate for any of the possible uses
allowed in the zoning district
• Be sensitive to the potential for light pollution,
noise pollution and the generation of excessive
vehicular traffic
• Pedestrian traffic should be accommodated
within each development and connected to
surrounding areas
Board of Zoning Appeals
• Allow a special exception use only when it
clearly benefits the surrounding areas
Accessory Permitted Uses
• farmers' market
• home business, type 1
Commercial Permitted Uses
• bank machine or atm walk-up
• bank with drive-up window
• bank without drive-up window
• barber or beauty shop
• coffee shop
• delicatessen
• ice cream shop
• office, design services
• office, general services
• office, medical
• photographic studio
• recreation center or play center
• restaurant
• restaurant with drive-up window
• restaurant with outdoor dining
• studio arts
• tailor or pressing shop
• tanning salon
• type 1 retail, very low intensity
• type 2 retail, low intensity
Industrial Permitted Uses
• public utility facility
Institutional Permitted Uses
• community center
• government office
• library
• park
• parking lot, independent
• police, fire or rescue station
• post office
Residential Permitted Uses
• bed and breakfast
• dwelling unit (upper floors)
Accessory Special Exception Uses
• permanent outdoor display area
Commercial Special Exception Uses
• bank machine or atm drive-up
• child care center
• day care, adult
• gas station
• plant nursery, retail or greenhouse
Institutional Special Exception Uses
• church, temple or mosque
• parking lot, independent
Residential Special Exception Uses
• personal storage (primary use)
Article
Additional Development Standards that Apply
Article 02: Zoning Districts 2-29
Neighborhood Commercial (C1) District 02
Minimum Lot Area
• 5,000 square feet
Maximum Lot Area
• 1 acre
Minimum Lot Width
• 55 feet
Sanitary Sewer Utility
• Required
Water Utility
• Required
Minimum Front Yard Setback
• 30 feet for primary and accessory
structures
Minimum Side Yard Setback
• 10 feet for primary and accessory
structures
• 20 feet for primary and accessory
structures adjacent to residential uses or
residential zoning district
Minimum Rear Yard Setback
• 30 feet for primary and accessory
structures
Maximum Lot Coverage
• 65% of lot area
Minimum Main Floor Area
• 800 square feet
Maximum Main Floor Area
• 10,000 square feet for a single
establishment
Minimum Dwelling Unit Size
• 800 square feet
Maximum Primary Structures
• no limit
Maximum Density
• 3 du/acre in a multiple unit development
Maximum Structure Height
• 35 for primary structures
• 20 for accessory structures
2.28 C1 District Development Standards
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Property
Line
Lot Area
ROW
Lot Width
Lot Depth
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
ROW
Rear Yard Setback
Front Yard
Setback
Building
Envelope
Side
Yard
Setback
Side
Yard
Setback
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
ROW
Primary
Structure
Lot
Coverage
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Structure
Height
Pitched Roof Structures
(from highest point
on pitched roof)
Flat Roof Structures
(from highest
section of flat roof)
Accessory
Structure mechanical
is exempt Primary
Structure
Accessory Structure (AS)
• AS-01........................... Page 5-6
• AS-09......................... Page 5-14
Architectural (AR)
• AR-01......................... Page 5-16
Density and Intensity (DI)
• DI-01.......................... Page 5-22
Driveway (DW)
• DW-01........................ Page 5-23
• DW-04........................ Page 5-26
Environmental (EN)
• EN-01......................... Page 5-27
Fence and Wall (FW)
• FW-01........................ Page 5-29
• FW-05........................ Page 5-31
Floodplain (FP)
• FP-01......................... Page 5-33
Floor Area (FA)
• FA-01......................... Page 5-34
Height (HT)
• HT-01......................... Page 5-35
Home Business (HB)
• HB-01......................... Page 5-36
Landscaping (LA)
• LA-01......................... Page 5-40
• LA-02......................... Page 5-40
Lighting (LT)
• LT-01.......................... Page 5-41
Loading (LD)
• LD-01......................... Page 5-42
Lot (LO)
• LO-01......................... Page 5-43
Outdoor Dining (OD)
• OD-01........................ Page 5-45
Outdoor Storage (OS)
• OS-01........................ Page 5-46
Parking (PK)
• PK-01......................... Page 5-47
• PK-07......................... Page 5-49
Performance (PF)
• PF-01......................... Page 5-56
Public Improvement (PI)
• PI-01.......................... Page 5-59
Retaining Wall (RW)
• RW-01........................ Page 5-62
Setback (SB)
• SB-01......................... Page 5-63
Sewer and Water (SW)
• SW-01........................ Page 5-65
Sign (SI)
• SI-01.......................... Page 5-67
• SI-06.......................... Page 5-79
Solar / Alternative Energy (SL)
• SL-01......................... Page 5-93
• SL-03......................... Page 5-93
Special Exception (SE)
• SE-01......................... Page 5-95
Storage Tank (SR)
• SR-01......................... Page 5-96
• SR-02......................... Page 5-96
Structure (ST)
• ST-01......................... Page 5-97
Telecommunication Facility (TC)
• TC-02....................... Page 5-100
• TC-03....................... Page 5-100
Temporary Use and Structure(TU)
• TU-01....................... Page 5-101
Trash Receptacle (TR)
• TR-01....................... Page 5-103
Vision Clearance (VC)
• VC-01....................... Page 5-104
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article
District Intent Permitted Uses Special Exception Uses
2-30
General Commercial (C2) District 02
2.29 C2 District Intent, Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses
The C2 (General Commercial) District is
intended to be used as follows:
Use Type and Intensity
• Moderate to high intensity commercial,
retail, service, eating, and entertainment
establishments
• Stand alone buildings, strip centers, and malls
Application of District
• Existing and new development
• Zoning districts can range from medium sized
to large areas
Development Standards
• Minimize light, noise, water, and air pollution
Appropriate Adjacent Districts
• PR, AG, M2, IS, C2, I1, and I2
Plan Commission
• Zone property C2 only after determining the
site is appropriate for any of the possible
permitted uses
• Be very sensitive to pedestrian and vehicular
safety; environmental protection; and the
potential for light and noise pollution
Board of Zoning Appeals
• Allow a special exception use only when it
clearly benefits the surrounding areas
Accessory Permitted Uses
• farmers' market
• permanent outdoor display area
Commercial Permitted Uses
• automobile oriented business
• bank machine or atm drive-up
• bank machine or atm walk-up
• bank with drive-up window
• bank without drive-up window
• banquet hall
• bar or tavern
• barber or beauty shop
• billiard or arcade room
• bowling alley
• broadcast studio
• child care center
• club or lodge
• coffee shop
• coin laundry
• country club
• dance or night club
• day care, adult
• delicatessen
• driving range
• dry-cleaning service (on-site)
• fireworks sales
• fitness center or health club
• funeral home or mortuary
• gas station
• gun sales
• health spa or day spa
• heavy equipment sales or rental
• hotel or motel
• hunting store
• ice cream shop
• kennel
• miniature golf
• movie theater
• office, construction trade
• office, design services
• office, general services
• office, medical
• photographic studio
• recreation center or play center
• recreational vehicle or watercraft sales
• restaurant
• restaurant with drive-up window
• restaurant with outdoor dining
• sexually oriented business
• skating rink
• sports complex (indoor)
• studio arts
• swimming pool
• tailor or pressing shop
• tanning salon
• tattoo or piercing parlor
• type 1 retail, very low intensity
• type 2 retail, low intensity
• type 3 retail, medium intensity
• type 4 retail, high intensity
• type 5 retail, very high intensity
Industrial Permitted Uses
• public utility facility
• research center
Institutional Permitted Uses
• assisted living facility
• government office
• mental health facility
• nursing home
• parking lot, independent
• police, fire or rescue station
• recycling collection point
• trade or business school
Residential Permitted Uses
• personal storage (primary use)
Accessory Special Exception Uses
• solar field
Commercial Special Exception Uses
• farm implement sales
• manufactured home sales
• paintball facility
• semi tractor - trailer sales
• shooting range
• sports complex (outdoors)
Industrial Special Exception Uses
• construction trade office with outdoor yard
• telecommunication facility
• warehouse "self storage" facility
Institutional Special Exception Uses
• church, temple or mosque
Article
Additional Development Standards that Apply
Article 02: Zoning Districts 2-31
General Commercial (C2) District 02
Minimum Lot Area
• 15,000 square feet
Minimum Lot Width
• 100 feet
Sanitary Sewer Utility
• Required
Water Utility
• Required
Minimum Front Yard Setback
• 50 feet for primary and accessory
structures; or established building
setback line
Minimum Side Yard Setback
• 20 feet for primary structures
• 10 feet for accessory structures
Minimum Rear Yard Setback
• 30 feet for primary structures; or
established building setback line
• 10 feet for accessory structures
Maximum Lot Coverage
• 75% of lot area
Minimum Main Floor Area
• 1,000 square feet
Minimum Dwelling Unit Size
• n/a
Maximum Primary Structures
• 6
Maximum Structure Height
• 50 feet for primary structures
• 25 feet for accessory structures
2.30 C2 District Development Standards
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Lot
Area
Lot Width
Lot Depth
Property
Line
ROW
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
ROW
Rear Yard
Setback
Front Yard
Setback
Building
Envelope
Side
Yard
Setback
Side
Yard
Setback
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Lot
Coverage
Primary
Structure
ROW
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Structure
Height
Pitched Roof Structures
(from highest point
on pitched roof)
Flat Roof Structures
(from highest
section of flat roof)
Accessory
Structure mechanical
is exempt Primary
Structure
Accessory Structure (AS)
• AS-01........................... Page 5-6
• AS-10......................... Page 5-14
Architectural (AR)
• AR-04......................... Page 5-20
Density and Intensity (DI)
• DI-01.......................... Page 5-22
Driveway (DW)
• DW-01........................ Page 5-23
• DW-04........................ Page 5-26
Environmental (EN)
• EN-01......................... Page 5-27
Fence and Wall (FW)
• FW-01........................ Page 5-29
• FW-05........................ Page 5-31
Floodplain (FP)
• FP-01......................... Page 5-33
Floor Area (FA)
• FA-01......................... Page 5-34
Height (HT)
• HT-01......................... Page 5-35
Landscaping (LA)
• LA-01......................... Page 5-40
• LA-02......................... Page 5-40
Lighting (LT)
• LT-01.......................... Page 5-41
Loading (LD)
• LD-01......................... Page 5-42
Lot (LO)
• LO-01......................... Page 5-43
Outdoor Dining (OD)
• OD-01........................ Page 5-45
Outdoor Storage (OS)
• OS-01........................ Page 5-46
• OS-02........................ Page 5-46
Parking (PK)
• PK-01......................... Page 5-47
• PK-07......................... Page 5-49
Performance (PF)
• PF-01......................... Page 5-56
Permanent Outdoor Display (PD)
• PD-01......................... Page 5-57
Public Improvement (PI)
• PI-01.......................... Page 5-59
Retaining Wall (RW)
• RW-01........................ Page 5-62
Setback (SB)
• SB-01......................... Page 5-63
Sewer and Water (SW)
• SW-01........................ Page 5-65
Sexually Oriented Business (SX)
• SX-01......................... Page 5-66
Sign (SI)
• SI-01.......................... Page 5-67
• SI-07.......................... Page 5-84
Solar / Alternative Energy (SL)
• SL-01......................... Page 5-93
• SL-04......................... Page 5-94
Special Exception (SE)
• SE-01......................... Page 5-95
Storage Tank (SR)
• SR-01......................... Page 5-96
• SR-04......................... Page 5-96
Structure (ST)
• ST-01......................... Page 5-97
Telecommunication Facility (TC)
• TC-02....................... Page 5-100
• TC-03....................... Page 5-100
Temporary Use and Structure
(TU)
• TU-01....................... Page 5-101
• TU-04....................... Page 5-102
Trash Receptacle (TR)
• TR-01....................... Page 5-103
Vision Clearance (VC)
• VC-01....................... Page 5-104
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article
District Intent Permitted Uses Special Exception Uses
2-32
Light Industrial / High-Tech (I1) District 02
2.31 I1 District Intent, Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses
The I1 (Light Industrial / High-Tech) District
is intended to be used as follows:
Use Type and Intensity
• Low intensity industrial uses
• Business park, distribution operations, and
industrial facilities
• High-Tech facilities
• Stand alone buildings or multiple primary
structures on one lot
Application of District
• Existing and new development
• Zoning district is comprised of small pockets
of development (a couple of lots) to medium
sized areas
• Should exist primarily within Auburn's city limits
Development Standards
• Require development standards that minimize
impacts on surrounding properties while
encouraging economic vitality
• Do not require separation or buffering from
uses with similar intensity
• Require extensive buffering when adjacent to
less intense uses
Appropriate Adjacent Districts
• PR, AG, IS, DC, C2, I1 and I2
Plan Commission
• Zone property I1 only after determining that
the site is appropriate for any of the possible
permitted uses
• Be very sensitive to environmental protection
Board of Zoning Appeals
• Allow a special exception use only when it
clearly benefits the surrounding areas
• Assure environmental protection before
granting a special exception
• Be very sensitive to pedestrian and vehicular
safety and the potential for light pollution,
noise pollution, loading bays fronting streets,
oversized signs, extensive truck traffic, and
inadequate ingress/egress
Accessory Permitted Uses
• farmers' market
• permanent outdoor display area
• solar field
Commercial Permitted Uses
• automobile oriented business
• banquet hall
• bowling alley
• broadcast studio
• club or lodge
• dance or night club
• farm implement sales
• fireworks sales
• fitness center or health club
• gun sales
• health spa or day spa
• heavy equipment sales or rental
• kennel
• office, construction trade
• office, general services
• skating rink
• technology park
• type 3 retail, plant nursery retail or greenhouse
• type 5 retail, very high intensity
Industrial Permitted Uses
• assembly
• construction trade office with outdoor yard
• distribution facility
• flex-space
• light manufacturing
• public utility facility
• research center
• sign painting or fabrication
• testing lab
• tool and die shop
• warehouse
• warehouse "self storage" facility
• water treatment plant
• welding
Institutional Permitted Uses
• government operation (non-office)
• recycling collection point
Residential Special Exception Uses
• personal storage (primary use)
Commercial Special Exception Uses
• hunting store
• manufactured home sales
• office, medical
• recreational vehicle or watercraft sales
• paintball facility
• semi tractor - trailer sales
• shooting range
Industrial Special Exception Uses
• telecommunication facility
Article
Additional Development Standards that Apply
Article 02: Zoning Districts 2-33
Light Industrial / High-Tech (I1) District 02
Minimum Lot Area
• 1 acre
Minimum Lot Width
• 100 feet
Sanitary Sewer Utility
• Required
Water Utility
• Required
Minimum Front Yard Setback
• 100 feet for primary and accessory
structures
Minimum Side Yard Setback
• 25 feet for primary and accessory
structures
Minimum Rear Yard Setback
• 25 feet for primary and accessory
structures
Maximum Lot Coverage
• 75% of lot area
Minimum Main Floor Area
• n/a
Maximum Main Floor Area
• 75,000 square feet
Minimum Dwelling Unit Size
• n/a
Maximum Primary Structures
• 4
Maximum Structure Height
• 50 feet for primary structures
• 35 feet for accessory structures
2.32 I1 District Development Standards
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Structure
Height
Pitched Roof Structures
(from highest point
on pitched roof)
Flat Roof Structures
(from highest
section of flat roof)
Accessory
Structure mechanical
is exempt Primary
Structure
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Lot Width
Lot Depth
Property
Line
ROW
Lot
Area
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
ROW
Front Yard
Setback
Building
Envelope
Side
Yard
Setback
Rear Yard
Setback
Side
Yard
Setback
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
ROW
Lot
Coverage
Primary
Structure
Accessory Structure (AS)
• AS-01........................... Page 5-6
• AS-11......................... Page 5-15
Density and Intensity (DI)
• DI-01.......................... Page 5-22
Driveway (DW)
• DW-01........................ Page 5-23
• DW-04........................ Page 5-26
Environmental (EN)
• EN-01......................... Page 5-27
Fence and Wall (FW)
• FW-01........................ Page 5-29
• FW-07........................ Page 5-32
Floodplain (FP)
• FP-01......................... Page 5-33
Floor Area (FA)
• FA-01......................... Page 5-34
Height (HT)
• HT-01......................... Page 5-35
Landscaping (LA)
• LA-01......................... Page 5-40
• LA-02......................... Page 5-40
Lighting (LT)
• LT-01.......................... Page 5-41
Loading (LD)
• LD-01......................... Page 5-42
Lot (LO)
• LO-01......................... Page 5-43
Outdoor Storage (OS)
• OS-02........................ Page 5-46
Parking (PK)
• PK-01......................... Page 5-47
• PK-07......................... Page 5-49
Performance (PF)
• PF-01......................... Page 5-56
Permanent Outdoor Display (PD)
• PD-01......................... Page 5-57
Public Improvement (PI)
• PI-01.......................... Page 5-59
Retaining Wall (RW)
• RW-01........................ Page 5-62
Setback (SB)
• SB-01......................... Page 5-63
Sewer and Water (SW)
• SW-01........................ Page 5-65
Sexually Oriented Business(SX)
• SX-01......................... Page 5-66
Sign (SI)
• SI-01.......................... Page 5-67
• SI-09.......................... Page 5-89
Solar / Alternative Energy (SL)
• SL-01......................... Page 5-93
• SL-04......................... Page 5-94
Special Exception (SE)
• SE-01......................... Page 5-95
Storage Tank (SR)
• SR-01......................... Page 5-96
• SR-04......................... Page 5-96
Structure (ST)
• ST-01......................... Page 5-97
Telecommunication Facility (TC)
• TC-01......................... Page 5-98
• TC-02....................... Page 5-100
Temporary Use and Structure(TU)
• TU-01....................... Page 5-101
• TU-04....................... Page 5-102
Trash Receptacle (TR)
• TR-01....................... Page 5-103
Vision Clearance (VC)
• VC-01....................... Page 5-104
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article
District Intent Permitted Uses Special Exception Uses
2-34
Heavy Industrial (I2) District 02
2.33 I2 District Intent, Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses
The I2 (Heavy Industrial) District is intended
to be used as follows:
Use Type and Intensity
• Moderate to high-intensity industrial uses
• Business parks, distribution operations, and
industrial parks
• Stand alone buildings or multiple primary
structures on one lot
Application of District
• Existing and new development
• Zoning district is comprised of small pockets
of development (a couple of lots) to medium
sized areas
• Should exist primarily within Auburn's city limits
Development Standards
• Recognize the need for development standards
that minimize impacts on surrounding
properties while encouraging economic vitality
• Do not require separation or buffering from
uses with similar intensity
• Require extensive buffering when adjacent to
less intense uses
• Assure there are minimal negative affects on
the natural environment
• Minimize light, noise, water, and air pollution
Appropriate Adjacent Districts
• PR, AG, AC, I1, I2 and HI
Plan Commission
• Zone property I2 only after determining that
the site is appropriate for any of the possible
permitted uses
• Be very sensitive to environmental protection
Board of Zoning Appeals
• Allow a special exception use only when it
clearly benefits the surrounding areas
• Be very sensitive to the potential for light
pollution, noise pollution, extensive truck traffic,
and inadequate ingress/egress
Accessory Permitted Uses
• outdoor storage
• solar field
Agricultural Permitted Uses
• processing of agricultural products
• storage of agricultural products
Commercial Permitted Uses
• kennel
Industrial Permitted Uses
• assembly
• construction trade office with outdoor yard
• distribution facility
• flex-space
• food production or processing
• heavy manufacturing
• light manufacturing
• liquid fertilizer storage or distribution
• public utility facility
• recycling processing
• research center
• sewage treatment plant
• sign painting or fabrication
• storage tanks (nonhazardous)
• testing lab
• tool and die shop
• transfer station
• warehouse
• warehouse "self storage" facility
• water treatment plant
• welding
Institutional Permitted Uses
• government operation (non-office)
Commercial Special Exception Uses
• shooting range
Industrial Special Exception Uses
• solar farm
• telecommunication facility
Article
Additional Development Standards that Apply
Article 02: Zoning Districts 2-35
Heavy Industrial (I2) District 02
Minimum Lot Area
• 2 acre
Minimum Lot Width
• 250 feet
Sanitary Sewer Utility
• Required
Water Utility
• Required
Minimum Front Yard Setback
• 100 feet for primary and accessory
structures
Minimum Side Yard Setback
• 25 feet for primary and accessory
structures
Minimum Rear Yard Setback
• 25 feet for primary and accessory
structures
Maximum Lot Coverage
• 75% of lot area
Minimum Main Floor Area
• n/a
Maximum Main Floor Area
• 250,000 square feet
Minimum Dwelling Unit Size
• n/a
Maximum Primary Structures
• 8
Maximum Structure Height
• 70 feet for primary structures
• 35 feet for accessory structures
2.34 I2 District Development Standards
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Structure
Height
Pitched Roof Structures
(from highest point
on pitched roof)
Flat Roof Structures
(from highest
section of flat roof)
Accessory
Structure mechanical
is exempt Primary
Structure
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Lot Width
Lot Depth
Property
Line
ROW
Lot
Area
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
ROW
Front Yard
Setback
Building
Envelope
Side
Yard
Setback
Rear Yard
Setback
Side
Yard
Setback
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
ROW
Lot
Coverage
Primary
Structure
Accessory Structure (AS)
• AS-01........................... Page 5-6
• AS-11......................... Page 5-15
Density and Intensity (DI)
• DI-01.......................... Page 5-22
Driveway (DW)
• DW-01........................ Page 5-23
• DW-04........................ Page 5-26
Environmental (EN)
• EN-01......................... Page 5-27
Fence and Wall (FW)
• FW-01........................ Page 5-29
• FW-07........................ Page 5-32
Floodplain (FP)
• FP-01......................... Page 5-33
Floor Area (FA)
• FA-01......................... Page 5-34
Height (HT)
• HT-01......................... Page 5-35
Landscaping (LA)
• LA-01......................... Page 5-40
• LA-02......................... Page 5-40
Lighting (LT)
• LT-01.......................... Page 5-41
Loading (LD)
• LD-01......................... Page 5-42
Lot (LO)
• LO-01......................... Page 5-43
Outdoor Storage (OS)
• OS-02........................ Page 5-46
• OS-03........................ Page 5-46
Parking (PK)
• PK-01......................... Page 5-47
• PK-07......................... Page 5-49
Performance (PF)
• PF-01......................... Page 5-56
Public Improvement (PI)
• PI-01.......................... Page 5-59
Retaining Wall (RW)
• RW-01........................ Page 5-62
Setback (SB)
• SB-01......................... Page 5-63
Sewer and Water (SW)
• SW-01........................ Page 5-65
Sexually Oriented Business(SX)
• SX-01......................... Page 5-66
Sign (SI)
• SI-01.......................... Page 5-67
• SI-09.......................... Page 5-89
Solar / Alternative Energy (SL)
• SL-01......................... Page 5-93
• SL-04......................... Page 5-94
Special Exception (SE)
• SE-01......................... Page 5-95
Storage Tank (SR)
• SR-01......................... Page 5-96
• SR-04......................... Page 5-96
Structure (ST)
• ST-01......................... Page 5-97
Telecommunication Facility (TC)
• TC-01......................... Page 5-98
• TC-02....................... Page 5-100
Temporary Use and Structure(TU)
• TU-01....................... Page 5-101
Trash Receptacle (TR)
• TR-01....................... Page 5-103
Vision Clearance (VC)
• VC-01....................... Page 5-104
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article
District Intent Permitted Uses Special Exception Uses
2-36
High Impact (HI) District 02
2.35 HI District Intent, Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses
The HI (High Impact) District is intended to
be used as follows:
Use Type and Intensity
• High impact uses
Application of District
• Existing and new development
Development Standards
• Minimize light, noise, water, and air pollution
Appropriate Adjacent Districts
• AG, AC, C2, I2 and HI
Plan Commission
• Zone property HI only after determining the
site is appropriate for any of the possible uses
allowed in the zoning district
• Be very sensitive to environmental protection
Accessory Permitted Uses
• outdoor storage
• solar field
Commercial Permitted Uses
• amusement park
• race track
• shooting range
• sports complex (indoor)
• sports complex (outdoors)
• stadium
• truck stop
• type 6 retail, special handling
Industrial Permitted Uses
• construction demolition landfill
• electrical generation plant
• gravel or sand mining
• incinerator
• junk yard
• metal shredding
• public utility facility
• rendering plant
• sanitary landfill or refuse dump
• scrap metal yard
• sewage treatment plant
• solar farm
• storage tanks (hazardous)
• storage tanks (non-hazardous)
• telecommunication facility
Institutional Permitted Uses
• jail
• juvenile detention facility
• municipal airport
• municipal heliport
• prison
Article
Additional Development Standards that Apply
Article 02: Zoning Districts 2-37
High Impact (HI) District 02
Minimum Lot Area
• 20 acres
Minimum Lot Width
• 400 feet
Sanitary Sewer Utility
• Required
Water Utility
• Required
Minimum Front Yard Setback
• 200 feet for primary and accessory
structures
Minimum Side Yard Setback
• 200 feet for primary and accessory
structures
Minimum Rear Yard Setback
• 200 feet for primary and accessory
structures
Maximum Lot Coverage
• 65% of lot area
Minimum Main Floor Area
• n/a
Minimum Dwelling Unit Size
• n/a
Maximum Primary Structures
• 5
Maximum Structure Height
• 70 feet for primary structures
• 35 feet for accessory structures
2.36 HI District Development Standards
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Lot Width
Lot Depth
Property
Line
Lot
Area
ROW
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
ROW
Rear Yard
Setback
Front Yard
Setback
Building
Envelope
Side
Yard
Setback
Side
Yard
Setback
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
ROW
Lot
Coverage
Primary
Structure
Accessory
Structure
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Structure
Height
Pitched Roof Structures
(from highest point
on pitched roof)
Flat Roof Structures
(from highest
section of flat roof)
Accessory
Structure mechanical
is exempt Primary
Structure
Accessory Structure (AS)
• AS-01........................... Page 5-6
• AS-11......................... Page 5-15
Density and Intensity (DI)
• DI-01.......................... Page 5-22
Driveway (DW)
• DW-01........................ Page 5-23
• DW-04........................ Page 5-26
Environmental (EN)
• EN-01......................... Page 5-27
Fence and Wall (FW)
• FW-01........................ Page 5-29
• FW-07........................ Page 5-32
Floodplain (FP)
• FP-01......................... Page 5-33
Floor Area (FA)
• FA-01......................... Page 5-34
Height (HT)
• HT-01......................... Page 5-35
Landscaping (LA)
• LA-01......................... Page 5-40
• LA-02......................... Page 5-40
Lighting (LT)
• LT-01.......................... Page 5-41
Loading (LD)
• LD-01......................... Page 5-42
Lot (LO)
• LO-01......................... Page 5-43
Outdoor Storage (OS)
• OS-03........................ Page 5-46
Parking (PK)
• PK-01......................... Page 5-47
• PK-07......................... Page 5-49
Performance (PF)
• PF-01......................... Page 5-56
Public Improvement (PI)
• PI-01.......................... Page 5-59
Retaining Wall (RW)
• RW-01........................ Page 5-62
Setback (SB)
• SB-01......................... Page 5-63
Sewer and Water (SW)
• SW-01........................ Page 5-65
Sign (SI)
• SI-01.......................... Page 5-67
• SI-09.......................... Page 5-89
Solar / Alternative Energy (SL)
• SL-01......................... Page 5-93
• SL-05......................... Page 5-94
Special Exception (SE)
• SE-01......................... Page 5-95
Storage Tank (SR)
• SR-01......................... Page 5-96
• SR-04......................... Page 5-96
Structure (ST)
• ST-01......................... Page 5-97
Telecommunication Facility (TC)
• TC-02........................ Page 5-100
Temporary Use and Structure(TU)
• TU-01....................... Page 5-101
Trash Receptacle (TR)
• TR-01....................... Page 5-103
Vision Clearance (VC)
• VC-01....................... Page 5-104
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article
2-38
02
© 2018, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Article
Overlay Districts
03
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 03
3-2
Wellhead Protection Overlay (WH-O) District
3.01 WH-O District Intent, Effect on Uses, and Effect on Standards
District Intent
The WH-O (Wellhead Protection Overlay)
District is intended to protect the public
water supply by minimizing the potential
for contamination.
Application of District
• Areas where water flows to a public water
supply or well field within a five (5) year period
of time
• Areas may be within Auburn's city limits or the
City's extra-territorial jurisdiction
• Single-family and multiple-family dwelling units
connected to a municipal sewer system are
exempt from the WH-O District requirements
Land Use Restrictions
• Uses that utilize or contain volatile, poisonous,
toxic, or other material hazardous to the
potability of water are restricted or excluded
Effect on Uses
All uses allowed as a permitted use or special
exception use in the underlying zoning
district shall remain permitted except for
the following uses shall not be permitted:
• body shop (automobile oriented)
• car wash (automobile oriented)
• cemetery
• chemical or fuel storage > 500 gallons
• chemical processing
• confined feeding operation (small)
• construction demolition landfill
• dry cleaners
• ethanol production facility
• gas station
• golf course
• gravel or sand mining
• heavy equipment repair
• incinerator
• junk yard
• lagoons associated with agricultural use
• lagoons associated with industrial use
• liquid fertilizer storage or distribution
• municipal airport
• municipal heliport
• oil change facility (automobile oriented)
• processing of agricultural products (ethanol)
• recycling processing
• rendering plant
• sanitary landfill or refuse dump
• scrap metal yard
• storage of hazard wastes
• transfer station
• truck stop (with idling)
• truck stop (without idling)
Effect on Standards
The development standards of Article 02:
Zoning Districts and Article 05: Development
Standards apply where an alternative development
standard has not been specified
herein for the WH-O District.
The design standards of Article 06: Subdivision
Types and Article 07: Design Standards
apply where an alternative design standard
has not been specified herein for the WH-O
District.
Article
Article 03: Overlay Districts
03
3-3
3.02 Wellhead Protection Overlay District Development Standards
This Wellhead Protection Overlay District Development Standards section applies when the Wellhead Protection
Overlay District exists over any of the following underlying zoning districts:
M1
The following standards apply:
A. Cross-Reference: Refer to Article 02: Zoning Districts and Article 05: Development Standards for standards
applicable to the underlying zoning district.
B. Exemptions: Single-family and multiple-family dwelling units connected to a municipal sewer system shall be
exempt from the WH-O District requirements.
C. Best Management Practices: Uses within the WH-O District shall implement best management practices known
to its particular industry. Simple, but important practices, include:
1. Avoid Excess Potential Contaminant Usage: Each land use within the WH-O District shall use the minimal
amount of the potential contaminant that is necessary to achieve the desired result; employ waste reduction
and management strategies; and mandate responsible purchasing to reduce the threat of hazardous materials.
2. Proper Use and Handling: Each land use within the WH-O District shall train employees and follow instructions
on labels to ensure proper use and handling of potential contaminants.
3. Proper Storage and Disposal: Each land use within the WH-O District shall create and implement a
chemical management plan that includes a list of chemicals and potential contaminants used, the method
of disposal, and procedures for assuring that chemicals and potential contaminants are not discharged. The
chemical management plan shall be updated at least every five (5) years and be provided to the Auburn Water
Department upon request.
D. Sewer and Water Standards
1. Abandoned Wells: All known abandoned wells shall be identified and sealed at the surface or plugged with
impervious materials in accordance with Rule 10 in the Indiana Administrative Code, 312 IAC 13.
2. Sanitary Sewer: Connection to the City of Auburn municipal sanitary sewer system or a privately-owned
sanitary sewer system shall be required.
E. Storage Tank Standards: The storage of flammable and combustible liquids in containers and tanks shall meet
the Fire and Building Safety Standards as established in Article 13 Building Codes of Title 675 of the Indiana
Administrative Code.
1. Above Ground Storage Tanks:
a. Above ground storage of flammable and combustible products shall be not exceed one thousand (1,000)
gallons.
b. Above ground storage of flammable and combustible liquids shall have corrosion protection for the tank
and piping.
c. Storage of more than forty (40) gallons of flammable or combustible liquids for more than twenty-four
(24) hours shall meet the following secondary containment requirements:
i. Secondary containment shall be capable of containing 110% of the volume of the tank.
ii. Secondary containment shall be designed to prevent and control the escape of the contaminant into
ground water for a minimum of seventy-two (72) hours; or designed and built with an outer shell that
includes monitoring between the tank wall and outer shell.
iii. The secondary containment structure shall be properly maintained and shall be free of vegetation,
cracks, open seams, open drains, siphons, or other openings that jeopardize the integrity of the
structure.
iv. The secondary containment structure shall be designed to prevent the infiltration of precipitation.
Wellhead Protection Overlay (WH-O) District
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 03
3-4
2. Underground Storage Tanks:
a. New underground storage tanks (USTs) shall not be permitted.
b. Existing underground storage tanks may be replaced or upgraded, but shall meet the following
conditions.
i. Underground storage tanks shall be constructed of noncorrosive material or materials having
corrosion protection (externally coated and cathodically protected metal, double-walls, metal having
a thick corrosion resistant cladding or jacket, internal tank lining).
ii. Spill protection, overfill protection, and leak detection features shall be incorporated on each
underground tank system.
3.03 Process Supplement
Additional Reviews: If a subdivision of land, planned development, special exception, variance, rezoning, or
Improvement Location Permit is proposed or requested for a site that lies fully or partially within the WH-O District,
the proposed development and process shall be subject to an additional review by the Auburn Water Department. The
Auburn Water Department may suggest conditions for approval or reasons for denial.
3.04 Monitoring
A. Inspection: Land uses involving the storage or use of potential contaminants may be subject to periodic inspection
by the Building Commissioner, Fire Marshall, or the Auburn Water Department. The scope of inspections
shall be limited to issues related to the storage and use of the potential contaminants.
B. Testing: The Auburn Water Department may request periodic testing for spillage or soil contamination.
C. Reporting: The Auburn Water Department and Auburn Fire Department may require reporting of any spillage of
contaminants into the soil and in accordance with the Indiana Department of Environmental Management's Spill
Rule 327 IAC 2-6.1, as amended.
Wellhead Protection Overlay (WH-O) District
Article
Article 03: Overlay Districts
03
3-5
Wellhead Protection Overlay (WH-O) District
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 03
3-6
Corridors and Gateways Overlay (CG-O) District
3.05 CG-O District Intent, Effect on Uses, and Effect on Standards
District Intent
The CG-O (Corridors and Gateways Overlay)
District is intended to promote a plan
for rational, aesthetically pleasing, and
cohesive development in areas along Auburn's
major arterial streets and gateways.
Applicability
• Streets that are subject to the CG-O District
are designated on the Zoning Map
• The CG-O District shall extend four hundred
(400) feet from the right-of-way line on each
side of the designated street
• The CG-O District includes areas within
Auburn's city limits and the City's extraterritorial
jurisdiction
• Agricultural uses and structures in the AG
District are exempt from the requirements of
the CG-O District
Land Use Restrictions
• Uses that involve outdoor storage are
restricted
Effect on Uses
All uses allowed as a permitted use or special
exception use in the underlying zoning
district shall remain permitted except for
the following prohibited uses:
• outdoor storage
Effect on Standards
The development standards of Article 02:
Zoning Districts and Article 05: Development
Standards apply where an alternative development
standard has not been specified
herein for the CG-O District.
The design standards of Article 06: Subdivision
Types and Article 07: Design Standards
apply where an alternative design standard
has not been specified herein for the CG-O
District.
Article
Article 03: Overlay Districts
03
3-7
Corridors and Gateways Overlay (CG-O) District
3.06 Corridors and Gateways Overlay District Development Standards
This Corridors and Gateways Overlay District Development Standards section applies when the Corridors and
Gateways Overlay District exists over any of the following underlying zoning districts:
M1
The following standards apply:
A. Cross Reference: Refer to Article 02: Zoning Districts and Article 05: Development Standards for standards
applicable to the underlying zoning district.
B. Exemptions: Agricultural uses and structures in the AG District are exempt from the requirements of the CG-O
District.
C. Accessory Structure Standards:
1. Applicability: This Accessory Structure Standards section applies to all underlying zoning districts within the
CG-O District.
2. Compatibility: All accessory structures and uses that are permitted in the underlying zoning district shall be
permitted, except that all sides of attached or detached accessory structure shall match, closely resemble, or
significantly complement the materials and colors used on the primary structure.
3.07 Corridors and Gateways Overlay District Design Standards
This Corridors and Gateways Overlay District Development Standards section applies when the Corridors and
Gateways Overlay District exists over any of the following underlying zoning districts:
The following standards apply:
A. Project Applicability: These architectural standards shall apply to construction of a new primary structure or
additions to a primary structure. Where an addition is made to an existing structure, the architectural standards
shall apply only to the new construction. Interior remodeling of existing structures shall not cause the exterior of
the structure to be subject to these architectural standards.
B. Consistency: Each structure may be unique; however, all structures within a single development shall be complementary
in design, theme, materials, and architecture.
C. Form: Lineal or strip development shall incorporate variations in building height, building mass, roof forms, and
changes in wall planes. Lineal or strip development is discouraged.
D. Facades: The architectural style, materials, color and design on the front elevation shall be applied to all elevations
of the structure.
1. Exterior Materials: A minimum of three (3) materials from the following list shall be used for building
exteriors:
a. Stone.
b. Brick.
c. Split-face concrete masonry units.
d. Integrally colored concrete masonry units.
e. Fiber cement board.
f. Exterior insulation finish system (EIFS).
g. Stucco.
h. Architectural pre-cast (panels or detailing).
i. Architectural metal panels.
j. Glass.
k. Ornamental metal.
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 03
3-8
2. Glass: Large expanses of glass shall be permitted, up to seventy percent (70%) of the facade area. The
structure may not be constructed entirely of a metal and glass curtain wall.
3. Wall Planes:
a. For every fifty (50) feet of structure facing a public street, as measured horizontally, there shall be a
minimum four (4) foot projection or recess in the facade (vertical plane). The projection or recess can
be realized with setbacks of the structure facade or architectural elements including, but not limited to
arcades, columns, piers and pilasters.
b. Any wall exceeding fifty (50) feet in length shall include at least one (1) change in wall plane. The
minimum change in plane shall be five (5) feet.
4. Facade Colors: Facade colors shall be low reflectance, subtle, or neutral hues or tones. The use of highfluorescent
colors shall not be permitted.
E. Entries:
1. General: Entries shall be clearly defined and accentuated with such features as awnings, porticos, overhangs,
recesses or projections, arcades, raised corniced parapets over the door, peaked roof forms, or arches.
2. Required Features: Each structure greater than 3,000 square feet shall have clearly defined, highly visible
customer entrance featuring at least two (2) of the following components:
a. Canopies or porticos.
b. Overhangs.
c. Arcades.
d. Raised corniced parapets over the door.
e. Peaked roof forms.
f. Arches.
g. Outdoor patios.
h. Architectural details such as decorative tile work, brickwork or moldings that are integrated into the
building structure and design.
i. Integrated planters or wing walls that incorporate landscaped areas and/or places for sitting.
j. Columns.
k. Awnings.
l. Enframed window walls.
F. Mechanical and Utility Equipment Screening: All mechanical equipment, trash compactors, and the like shall be
screened using enclosures that are architecturally compatible with the primary structure.
1. Ground Mounted Features: Mechanical and utility equipment located on the ground shall be screened using
landscaping, fencing, or walls.
2. Roof Mounted Features: Mechanical and utility equipment located on roofs shall be screened using parapet
walls or other roof designs.
G. Trash Receptacle Screening:
1. Design: Trash receptacles shall be enclosed with a solid enclosure that complements the architecture of the
primary structure.
2. Height: The minimum height of the trash receptacle enclosure shall be the height of the trash receptacle plus
two (2) feet, or at least six (6) feet, whichever is greater.
3. Enclosure Gate: The enclosure shall contain a solid gate. The gate shall be maintained in operable condition.
The gate shall remain closed except when the dumpster is being accessed.
4. Landscaping: Shrub plantings shall be provided where possible to further enhance the wall enclosure.
Corridors and Gateways Overlay (CG-O) District
Article
Article 03: Overlay Districts
03
3-9
3.08 Corridors and Gateways Overlay District Other Non-residential Architectural Design Standards
This Corridors and Gateways Overlay District Development Standards section applies when the Corridors and
Gateways Overlay District exists over any of the following underlying zoning districts:
The following standards apply:
A. Project Applicability: These architectural standards shall apply to construction of a new primary structure or
additions to a primary structure. Where an addition is made to an existing structure, the architectural standards
shall apply only to the new construction. Interior remodeling of existing structures shall not cause the exterior of
the structure to be subject to these architectural standards.
B. Compatibility: All buildings on a site shall be complementary in design, theme, materials and architecture.
C. Facade: The architectural style, materials, color and design of the front facade shall be applied to all elevations of
the structure that are visible from a street.
1. Exterior Materials: All exterior siding shall be comprised of the following materials:
a. Masonry.
b. Stone.
c. Fiber cement plank siding.
d. Decorative precast panels.
e. Integrally colored, textured concrete masonry unit.
f. External insulation finish system.
g. Concrete tilt-up panels with brick or stone facing.
h. Metal siding, but no greater than 50% of the building.
i. Vinyl siding, but no greater than 50% of the building.
2. Facade Colors: Facade colors shall be low reflectance, subtle, or neutral hues or tones. The use of highfluorescent
colors shall be prohibited.
D. Entries: Pedestrian and customer entries shall be emphasized by overhanging eaves, canopies, sloped roofs, offset
roof lines, projected or recessed areas, or a change in building materials.
E. Mechanical and Utility Equipment Screening: All mechanical equipment, trash compactors, and the like shall be
screened using enclosures that are architecturally compatible with the primary structure.
1. Ground Mounted Features: Mechanical and utility equipment located on the ground shall be screened using
landscaping, fencing, or walls.
2. Roof Mounted Features: Mechanical and utility equipment located on roofs shall be screened using parapet
walls or other roof designs.
F. Trash Receptacle Screening:
1. Design: Trash receptacles shall be enclosed with a solid enclosure that complements the architecture of the
primary structure. Trash receptacles enclosures attached to the primary structure shall be designed as an
architecturally integrated part of the primary structure.
2. Height: The minimum height of the trash receptacle enclosure shall be the height of the trash receptacle plus
two (2) feet, or at least six (6) feet, whichever is greater.
3. Enclosure Gate: The enclosure shall contain a solid gate. The gate shall be maintained in operable condition.
The gate shall remain closed except when the dumpster is being accessed.
4. Landscaping: Shrub plantings shall be provided where possible to further enhance the wall enclosure.
Corridors and Gateways Overlay (CG-O) District
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 03
3-10
3.09 Corridors and Gateways Overlay District Non-residential Driveway Standards
This Corridors and Gateways Overlay District Development Standards section applies when the Corridors and
Gateways Overlay District exists over any of the following underlying zoning districts:
The following standards apply:
A. Accessibility: Direct access to the streets subject to the CG-O District shall not be permitted unless the site does
not have access to another public street or common access street. Direct access onto any street subject to the
CG-O District shall be closed, if another means of access is established at a later date at a one-to-one (1:1) ratio
(meaning if one access is established on another street, one existing access on the CG-O street shall be closed).
Closing the access includes removing the entrance and driveway improvements and establishing the landscape
greenbelt within six (6) months.
Corridors and Gateways Overlay (CG-O) District
Article
Article 03: Overlay Districts
03
3-11
Corridors and Gateways Overlay (CG-O) District
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 03
3-12
Airport Compatibility Overlay (AC-O) District
3.10 ACO District Intent, Effect on Uses, and Development Standards
District Intent
The Airport Compatibility Overlay District
is intended to establish a standard of
safety and compatibility for the occupants
of land in the vicinity of the DeKalb County
Airport by regulating incompatible land
uses and setting development standards
that supplement or supercede the underlying
zoning district.
Effect on Uses
The permitted uses and special exception
uses allowed within the Airport Compatibility
Overlay District shall be those of the underlying
zoning district with the elimination
of the uses listed in Section 3.13: Additional
Restrictions for Each Sub-area.
Development Standards
The development standards within the
Airport Compatibility Overlay District shall
be those of the underlying zoning district
in addition to the standards listed in Section
3.13: Additional Restrictions for Each
Sub-area.
Article
Article 03: Overlay Districts
03
3-13
Airport Compatibility Overlay (AC-O) District
3.11 Applicability
The following requirements apply to all land within the Airport Compatibility Overlay District, as defined in Section
3.13: Establishment of Airport Compatibility Area.
3.12 Establishment of Airport Compatibility Area
The airport compatibility area and subareas have been determined, established and drawn using information and regulations
collated from FAA Advisory Circulars; FAA Land Use Planning Guides; the State of Indiana Tall Structures
Act (IC 8-21-10); Aviation Compatible Land Use Planning Guides from the States of California, Oregon, Washington
and Wisconsin; and the 2004 Land Use Report from the National Association of State Aviation Officials.
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 03
3-14
Airport Compatibility Overlay (AC-O) District
3.13 Restrictions for Each Sub-area
A. Traffic Pattern Zone (AC6): The Traffic Pattern Zone generally includes those portions of the regular traffic
patterns and pattern entry routes not included in other zones.
1. Open Space: Open spaces to be maintained every ¼ to ½ mile throughout the Traffic Pattern Zone.
2. Limited Uses, Structures, and Materials: The following uses, structures, and materials are allowed in the
Traffic Pattern Zone only under the limitations as noted below.
a. Agricultural uses shall not create a wildlife hazard to aircraft,
b. Residential uses shall be allowed at any density allowed by the underlying zoning district. Prior to
issuance of a Building Permit or Improvement Location Permit, the owner shall sign and record a noise
sensitive use and a non-remonstrance waiver in the form(s) adopted by the City of Auburn,
c. Non-residential uses shall be low to high intensity with a population intensity limit of one hundred fifty
(150) persons/acre average per site (max multiplier x 3.0),
d. Noise sensitive non-residential uses should be avoided. However, when permitted, prior to issuance of a
Building Permit or Improvement Location Permit, they shall sign and record a noise sensitive use and a
non-remonstrance waiver in the form(s) adopted by the City of Auburn,
e. Trash transfer stations, including all transport, processing and disposal, shall take place in a totally
enclosed environment and all odor shall be controlled (not masked),
f. Compost operations shall not include food or other municipal solid waste,
g. Existing wetlands and associated wildlife activities shall be monitored for wildlife hazards to aircraft and
any such hazards shall be addressed immediately,
h. Existing wastewater treatment facilities shall be monitored for wildlife hazards to aircraft and any such
hazards shall be addressed immediately,
i. Existing retention ponds should be converted to dry detention ponds where possible,
j. New detention ponds shall be designed to drain dry within 48 hours and vegetation providing food and/or
cover shall be eliminated around ponds,
k. The DeKalb County Airport shall be notified a minimum of 60 days prior to any Plan Commission or
Board of Zoning Appeals hearing relating to approval of any new tall structure or an increase in height of
an existing tall structure.
l. For tall structures not requiring a hearing before the Plan Commission or Board of Zoning Appeals, the
DeKalb County Airport shall be notified a minimum of 60 days prior to the issuance of any permit for the
construction of a new tall structure or to allow any increase in height of an existing tall structure. The
DeKalb County Airport, after their review, may waive any or all of the remaining 60-day notification
period by providing written notification of said waiver to the Zoning Administrator.
3. Prohibited Uses, Structures, and Materials: The following uses, structures, and materials are prohibited from
the Traffic Pattern Zone.
a. Confined feeding operations,
b. Aquaculture operations outside of totally enclosed buildings,
c. Non-residential uses that are a very high intensity use,
d. New golf courses,
e. New solid waste landfills,
f. New retention and recreational ponds,
g. New wetlands including mitigation efforts for airport projects, and
h. New wastewater treatment facilities including the discharge of wastewater or sludge onto airport
property..
Article
Article 03: Overlay Districts
03
3-15
Airport Compatibility Overlay (AC-O) District
B. Outer Compatibility Zone (AC7): The Outer Compatibility Zone encompasses an extended area beyond the
Traffic Pattern Zone wherein certain uses can impact aviation safety while distant from the airport.
1. Limited Uses, Structures, and Materials: The following uses, structures, and materials are permitted in the
Outer Compatibility Zone only under the limitations as noted below.
a. No combination of agricultural uses, golf courses, retention/recreational ponds, detention ponds,
wetlands, and/or wastewater treatment facilities shall collectively create a wildlife corridor through
airport airspace,
b. Existing solid waste landfills shall demonstrate their operations do not pose a wildlife hazard to aircraft
and shall implement a management plan to eliminate any such hazards that do exist,
c. Trash transfer stations, including all transport, processing and disposal, shall take place in a totally
enclosed environment and all odor shall be controlled (not masked),
d. Compost operations shall not include food or other municipal solid waste,
e. The DeKalb County Airport shall be notified a minimum of 60 days prior to any Plan Commission or
Board of Zoning Appeals hearing relating to approval of any new tall structure or an increase in height of
an existing tall structure.
f. For tall structures not requiring a hearing before the Plan Commission or Board of Zoning Appeals, the
DeKalb County Airport shall be notified a minimum of 60 days prior to the issuance of any permit for the
construction of a new tall structure or to allow any increase in height of an existing tall structure. The
DeKalb County Airport may, after their review, waive any or all of the remaining 60-day notification
period by providing written notification of said waiver to the Zoning Administrator.
2. Prohibited Uses, Structures, and Materials: The following uses, structures, and materials are prohibited from
the Outer Compatibility Zone.
a. New solid waste landfills.
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 03
3-16
Airport Compatibility Overlay (AC-O) District
© 2018, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Article
Planned Development Districts
04
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 04
4-2
Planned Development (PD) District
4.01 PD District Intent, Regulations, and Prerequisites
District Intent
The PD (Planned Development) District
is intended to provide flexible design
standards and development standards for
medium to large scale developments that
do not easily comply to zoning district
standards due to any of the following:
• Interest in an integrated mixed use
development;
• Existence of unique geological or natural
features; and/or
• Interest in unique or innovative development
design including zero lot line development,
traditional residential development, and/or
townhouse residential development.
• The need for waivers or variances shall
not by itself justify the pursuit of a Planned
Development.
Application of District
• Areas within the City of Auburn and areas
within the City's extra-territorial jurisdiction.
• Minimum of five (5) acres
Plan Commission
• Any parcel that meets the prerequisites
specified herein may be considered to be
rezoned to a Planned Development District
after Plan Commission review and approval,
and after the Common Council reviews and
adopts the Planned Development Ordinance
in accordance with the Auburn Comprehensive
Plan, Article 04: Planned Development
Districts, and state statue criteria.
• Under no circumstances is the Plan
Commission or Common Council required to
rezone a property to a Planned Development.
Regulations
Permitted Uses
• Predominantly in line with original zoning
district
• Predominantly in line with Comprehensive
Plan
• Compatible with surrounding land uses and
zoning districts
• Flexible only to the extent permitted in Article
04: Planned Development Districts
Development Standards
• Generally in line with the intent of the original
zoning district;
• Predominantly in line with Comprehensive
Plan;
• Compatible with surrounding land uses and
zoning districts; and
• Flexible only to the extent permitted in Article
04: Planned Development District
Design Standards
• Predominantly in compliance with the design
standards in Article 07: Design Standards
• Flexible only to the extent permitted in Article
04: Planned Development Districts
Construction Standards
• Fully in compliance with the City of Auburn's
construction standards
Prerequisites
Site Area
• The minimum site area required for a Planned
Development is five (5) acres
Standard Zoning Districts
• Only the following standard zoning districts
may be rezoned to a planned development:
R1, R2, R3, TR, M1, M2, MH, IS, C2, I1 and I2
Article
Article 04: Planned Development Districts
04
4-3
Planned Development (PD) District
4.02 General
A. Description: A Planned Development District is a special district that can be pursued by an applicant in which
a stand alone ordinance regulating the development is drafted and which binds the development to its unique
language.
B. Creation: The procedure for the creation of a Planned Development District shall be consistent with the process
set forth in Section 9.06 General Planned Developments of this Unified Development Ordinance.
C. Maps: Planned Development Districts shall be identified as such on the Official Zoning Map.
D. Regulations:
1. Development Standards and Design Standards: The requirements of Article 05: Development Standards and
Article 07: Design Standards shall apply to a Planned Development unless alternate standards are deemed
appropriate by the Plan Commission in order to accomplish the intent of the Comprehensive Plan and Unified
Development Ordinance. Any lessening of the required standards of this Unified Development Ordinance
shall be clearly beneficial to the City and directly linked to the intent of the Planned Development (i.e. to
provide a mixed use development, accommodate a creative and unique design not otherwise achievable using
standard zoning districts and subdivision regulations, or address unusual site conditions or constraints).
2. Establishment Plan: The Establishment Plan shall indicate the proposed land uses, location of all proposed
improvements, and a proposed Planned Development District Ordinance that includes development standards,
design standards, and other specifications which shall govern the Planned Development. If the Establishment
Plan and the Planned Development District Ordinance are silent or do not address a particular land use,
development standard, design standard, or other specification, this Unified Development Ordinance shall
apply.
3. Open Space: Open space shall be:
a. Conveyed to an owners' association established for the purpose of maintaining common area; or
b. Conveyed to the City if it is willing to accept all or part of the common area; or
c. Conveyed to one or more not-for-profit corporations established for conservation of natural resources.
4.03 Origination of Proposals
A proposal for a Planned Development District shall be initiated by the property owner(s). The site proposed for a
Planned Development shall be under single ownership, or if multiple owners exist, a legal document, legal partnership,
or corporation shall be provided indicating that all owners of the property support and desire to develop the land.
The legal document shall also indicate who the owners appoint as their representative.
4.04 Rules and Procedures
All proceedings brought under Article 04: Planned Development Districts are subject to the Rules and Procedures of
the Plan Commission, unless stated otherwise.
4.05 Limitation of Revisions to this Unified Development Ordinance
A. Public Health and Safety: Regulations in this Unified Development Ordinance that directly protect public health
and safety shall apply to a Planned Development.
B. Failure to Comply: If a Planned Development is no longer proceeding in accordance with its Establishment Plan
or Planned Development District Ordinance the City may deem it a violation and utilize its applicable power to
enforce the violation according to Article 10: Enforcement and Penalties. No language in a Planned Development
District Ordinance shall supersede Article 10: Enforcement and Penalties.
C. Rezoning to Standard District: All Planned Developments, or a subdistrict or phase thereof, that has reached
either ninety percent (90%) build-out or seven (7) years from its approval date are subject to being rezoned into
an appropriate standard zoning district if the City deems it necessary to better administer the development.
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 04
4-4
4.06 Designation of Permanent Open Space
A. Designation: No Planned Development District shall be approved, unless the design provides for permanent
landscaped or natural open space. Natural open space may be designated through the use of common space
or other mechanisms such as conservation easements to the satisfaction of the Plan Commission. Impervious
surfaces within rights-of-way or private street easements shall not count towards open space. Wetlands and areas
within the floodway and floodway fringe shall only count at fifty percent (50%). Open space shall be provided in
at least the following percentage of the total gross area of the Planned Development by type of use:
1. Single-Family and Multiple-Family Residential Use: 20%
2. Office Use: 15%
3. All Other Uses: 10%
B. Mixed Uses: In the case of mixed uses, permanent open space shall be allocated in proportion to the mixture of
uses that exist. Each use shall have its proportion of open space located within close proximity. The permanent
open space need not be located in proximity to the use in the case of preservation of existing natural features.
C. Development in Stages: If the Establishment Plan provides for the Planned Development to be constructed in
phases, open space shall be provided for each phase of the development relatively proportionate to that phase, and
conveyed or guaranteed.
Planned Development (PD) District
© 2018, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Article
Development Standards
05
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 05
5-2
Section Name Page Number
Accessory Dwelling Standards (AD) 5-4
Accessory Structure Standards (AS) 5-6
Architectural Standards (AR) 5-16
Confined Feeding Standards (CF) 5-21
Density and Intensity Standards (DI) 5-22
Driveway Standards (DW) 5-23
Environmental Standards (EN) 5-27
Fence and Wall Standards (FW) 5-29
Floodplain Standards (FP) 5-33
Floor Area Standards (FA) 5-34
Height Standards (HT) 5-35
Home Business Standards (HB) 5-36
Keeping of Animal (KA) 5-39
Landscaping Standards (LA) 5-40
Lighting Standards (LT) 5-41
Loading Standards (LD) 5-42
Lot Standards (LO) 5-43
Manufactured Housing Standards (MH) 5-44
Outdoor Dining Standards (OD) 5-45
Section Name Page Number
Outdoor Storage Standards (OS) 5-46
Parking Standards (PK) 5-47
Performance Standards (PF) 5-56
Permanent Outdoor Display Standards (PD) 5-57
Public Improvement Standards (PI) 5-59
Recreational Vehicle Standards (RV) 5-61
Retaining Wall Standards (PI) 5-62
Setback Standards (SB) 5-63
Sewer and Water Standards (SW) 5-65
Sexually Oriented Business Standards (SX) 5-66
Sign Standards (SI) 5-67
Solar and Alternative Energy Standards 5-93
Special Exception Standards (SE) 5-95
Storage Tank Standards (SR) 5-96
Structure Standards (ST) 5-97
Telecommunication Facility Standards (TC) 5-98
Temporary Use and Structure Standards (TU) 5-101
Trash Receptacle Standards (TR) 5-103
Vision Clearance Standards (VC) 5-104
Development Standards Overview
5.01 How to Use this Article
This Article contains development standards that are arranged by category. There are two (2) ways to determine
which development standards apply to a specific zoning district. They are:
A. Blue Boxes: Refer to the two-page layouts in Article 02: Zoning Districts for a specific zoning district. In
the “Additional Development Standards that Apply” box for that specific zoning district are listed four-digit
codes that determine which development standards apply. Only the four-digit codes noted in the “Additional
Development Standards that Apply” section apply to that zoning district.
[Example: On page 2-11, the four digit code “AS-01” can be found under the “Additional Development
Standards that Apply” section in the R1 District. Therefore, the Development Standards in the section labeled
“AS-01” (on page 5-6) would apply to the R1 zoning district.]
B. District Icons: Refer to the icons used at the top of each development standard section in this Article. Each
development standard section begins with a four-digit code and introductory sentence followed by icons with
zoning district abbreviations (e.g. R1 for the Low Density Single-family Residential District). These zoning
district icons note that the development standards written in that section apply to that zoning district.
[Example: On page 5-6, the R1 icon ( ) can be found under the AS-01 development standard section.
Therefore the language in the AS-01 section would apply to the R1 District.]
Article
Development Standards
05
5-3
5.02 Icon Key
- Parks and Recreation District
- Agricultural District
- Agricultural Commercial District
- Estate Residential District
- Low Density Single-family Residential District
- Medium Density Single-family Residential District
- High Density Single-family Residential District
M1 - Traditional Residential District
- Multiple-family Residential District
- High Density Multiple-family Residential District
- Manufactured Home Residential District
- Institutional District
- Downtown Commercial District
- Neighborhood Commercial District
- General Commercial District
- Light Industrial / High-Tech District
- Heavy Industrial District
- High Impact District
District Icons
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 05
5-4
5.03 AD-01: General Accessory Dwelling Standards
This Accessory Dwelling Standards section applies to the following zoning district:
The intent of the Accessory Dwelling Standards is provide an opportunity for an accessory dwelling while ensuring
that specific conditions are met to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the residents within the zoning jurisdiction
of the City. The following standards apply:
A. Applicability: An accessory dwelling shall meet the applicable setbacks for accessory structures and structure
height for accessory structures as indicated on the two-page layout.
1. Minimum Front Yard Setback: The minimum front yard setback shall be as indicated on the applicable
two-page layout in Article 02: Zoning Districts.
2. Minimum Side Yard Setback: The minimum side yard setback shall be as indicated on the applicable
two-page layout in Article 02: Zoning Districts.
3. Minimum Rear Yard Setback: The minimum rear yard setback shall be as indicated on the applicable
two-page layout in Article 02: Zoning Districts.
4. Maximum Structure Height: The maximum structure height shall be as indicated on the applicable two-page
layout in Article 02: Zoning Districts.
B. Permits: An Improvement Location Permit shall be required prior to the construction of an accessory dwelling or
the conversion of an accessory structure to an accessory dwelling.
C. Types: An accessory dwelling may be permitted on a lot only if the primary structure (primary dwelling) is
owner-occupied.
1. Permitted: An accessory dwelling shall include a guest house, mother-in-law suite, or any single dwelling
unit.
2. Prohibited: A mobile home, manufactured home, recreational vehicle, semi-tractor trailer, boat, motor
vehicle, or trailer; in part, in whole, or of the like, shall not be permitted as an accessory dwelling.
D. Relationship:
1. Use: An accessory dwelling shall be accessory to the primary structure (primary dwelling).
2. Timing: An accessory dwelling shall not be built on a lot prior to the construction of the primary structure
(primary dwelling).
E. Quantity and Size:
1. Maximum Number: No more than one (1) accessory dwelling shall be permitted on a lot, and it shall consist
of one (1) unit.
2. Maximum Size: An accessory dwelling shall be a minimum of 800 square feet, but shall not exceed the
square footage of the primary structure (primary dwelling).
F. Design:
1. Attachment: The accessory dwelling may be attached to or detached from the primary structure (primary
dwelling).
2. Minimum Components: The accessory dwelling shall contain bathroom, kitchen, and sleeping facilities.
3. Driveway: An accessory dwelling shall utilize the driveway of the primary structure (primary dwelling).
4. Parking: Off-street parking for an accessory dwelling shall comply with requirements for a dwelling unit in
Parking Standards (PK).
5. Utilities: An accessory dwelling shall utilize the utility connections that serve the primary structure (primary
dwelling).
6. Home Business: For the purpose of a home business, an accessory dwelling shall be considered a dwelling,
not an accessory structure. Therefore, a home business that complies with the Home Business Standards
(HB) may be conducted within an accessory dwelling.
7. Exemptions: An accessory dwelling shall be exempt from complying with the Architectural Standards (AR).
Accessory Dwelling Standards (AD)
Article
Development Standards
05
5-5
8. Accessory Structures:
a. For the purpose of accessory structures, an accessory dwelling shall be considered accessory to the
primary structure (primary dwelling). The accessory dwelling shall not be permitted to have its own
accessory structures; all accessory structures on the lot shall be considered accessory to the primary
structure (primary dwelling).
b. Accessory dwellings shall not count towards the maximum number and maximum size standards for
accessory structures included in Accessory Structure Standards (AS).
9. Physical Appearance: The exterior finish and facade of any accessory dwelling shall match, closely
resemble, or significantly complement the materials and colors used on the primary structure (primary
dwelling).
Accessory Dwelling Standards (AD)
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 05
5-6
5.04 AS-01: General Accessory Structure Standards
This Accessory Structure Standards section applies to the following zoning districts:
M1
The intent of the Accessory Structure Standards is to permit accessory structures that meet the needs of property
owners while ensuring neighborliness and aesthetic quality. These Accessory Structure Standards also protect the
health, safety, and welfare of the residents within the zoning jurisdiction of the City. The following standards apply:
A. Cross Reference: Some structures are regulated independent of the Accessory Structure Standards. The following
types of structures are regulated in other sections.
1. Accessory Dwelling: See Accessory Dwelling Standards (AD).
2. Fences and Walls: See Fence and Wall Standards (FW).
3. Signs: See Sign Standards (SI).
4. Storage Tanks: See Storage Tank Standards (SR).
5. Swimming Pools: Swimming pools shall meet the regulations within these Accessory Structure Standards
sections and the Indiana Administrative Code (675 IAC 20: Swimming Pool Code).
6. Telecommunication Facilities: See Telecommunication Facility Standards (TC).
7. Trash Receptacles: See Trash Receptacle Standards (TR).
B. Applicability:
1. Minimum Front Yard Setback: The minimum front yard setback shall be as indicated on the applicable
two-page layout in Article 02: Zoning Districts.
2. Minimum Side Yard Setback: The minimum side yard setback shall be as indicated on the applicable
two-page layout in Article 02: Zoning Districts.
3. Minimum Rear Yard Setback: The minimum rear yard setback shall be as indicated on the applicable
two-page layout in Article 02: Zoning Districts.
4. Maximum Structure Height: The maximum structure height shall be as indicated on the applicable two-page
layout in Article 02: Zoning Districts.
C. Permits: An Improvement Location Permit shall be required prior to installation or construction of an accessory
structure. In circumstances where a permit is not required, the accessory structure shall still meet all applicable
Accessory Structure Standards.
D. Types:
1. Prohibited Accessory Structures:
a. A mobile home, manufactured home, recreational vehicle, semi-tractor trailer, boat, motor vehicle, or
trailer; in part, in whole, or of the like, shall not be permitted as an accessory structure.
b. Portable On Demand Storage (PODS) units shall not be permitted as a permanent accessory structure.
See Temporary Use and Structure Standards (TU).
E. Maintenance: All accessory structures shall be properly maintained and kept in good condition.
Accessory Structure Standards (AS)
Article
Development Standards
05
5-7
5.05 AS-02: Parks and Recreation and Agricultural Accessory Structure Standards
This Accessory Structure Standards section applies to the following zoning districts:
The following standards apply:
A. Types:
1. Storage-based: Storage-based accessory structures shall be permitted. Storage-based accessory structures
shall include barns, boat houses, carports, detached garages, greenhouses, mini-barns, pole structures, pool
houses, sheds, and other structures used primarily for storage purposes.
2. Recreation-based: Recreation-based accessory structures shall be permitted. Recreation-based accessory
structures shall include decks, gazebos, hot tubs, ground-mounted satellite dishes, sport courts, swimming
pools, and other structures used primarily for recreational purposes.
B. Relationship:
1. Use: An accessory structure shall relate to the primary use of the lot or the zoning district’s permitted uses.
2. Timing: An accessory structure may be installed or built on a lot prior to the construction of the primary
structure or without the existence of the primary structure.
C. Quantity: No more than ten (10) storage-based accessory structures shall be permitted on a lot. There is no limit
on recreation-based accessory structures.
D. Location: Storage-based and recreation-based accessory structures shall only be permitted in side yards and rear
yards with the following exceptions:
1. Basketball Goals: A basketball goal along a driveway or mounted on the garage shall not be considered a
sport court. However, a basketball goal shall meet the front yard setback requirement.
2. Detached Garage: A detached garage may be placed forward of a primary structure, but only if it is side
loading and to the side of the primary structure’s facade.
Accessory Structure Standards (AS)
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 05
5-8
5.06 AS-03: Estate Residential Accessory Structure Standards
This Accessory Structure Standards section applies to the following zoning districts:
The following standards apply:
A. Types:
1. Storage-based: Storage-based accessory structures shall be permitted. Storage-based accessory structures
shall include barns, boat houses, carports, detached garages, greenhouses, mini-barns, pole structures, pool
houses, sheds, and other structures used primarily for storage purposes.
2. Recreation-based: Recreation-based accessory structures shall be permitted. Recreation-based accessory
structures shall include decks, gazebos, hot tubs, ground-mounted satellite dishes, sport courts, swimming
pools, and other structures used primarily for recreational purposes.
B. Relationship:
1. Use: An accessory structure shall relate to the primary use of the lot.
2. Timing: An accessory structure shall not be installed or built on a lot prior to the construction of the primary
structure.
C. Quantity and Size:
1. Maximum Number: No more than three (3) storage-based accessory structures shall be permitted on a lot.
There is no limit on recreation-based accessory structures.
2. Maximum Size: The cumulative square footage of all storage-based accessory structures shall not exceed
200% of the area of the footprint of the primary structure.
D. Materials: The exterior finish and facade of all storage-based accessory structures greater than 200 square feet
in area shall match, closely resemble, or significantly complement the materials and colors used on the primary
structure.
E. Location: Storage-based and recreation-based accessory structures shall only be permitted in side yard and rear
yards with the following exceptions:
1. Basketball Goals: A basketball goal along a driveway or mounted on the garage shall not be considered a
sport court. However, a basketball goal shall meet the front yard setback requirement.
2. Detached Garage: A detached garage may be placed forward of a primary structure, but only if it is side
loading, footprint of less than 700 square feet and to the side of the primary structure’s facade.
Accessory Structure Standards (AS)
Article
Development Standards
05
5-9
5.07 AS-04: Residential Accessory Structure Standards
This Accessory Structure Standards section applies to the following zoning districts:
M1
The following standards apply:
A. Types:
1. Storage-based: Storage-based accessory structures shall be permitted. Storage-based accessory structures
shall include barns, carports, detached garages, greenhouses, mini-barns, pool houses, sheds, and other
structures used primarily for storage purposes.
2. Recreation-based: Recreation-based accessory structures shall be permitted. Recreation-based accessory
structures shall include decks, gazebos, hot tubs, ground-mounted satellite dishes, sport courts, swimming
pools, and other structures used primarily for recreational purposes.
B. Relationship:
1. Use: An accessory structure shall relate to the primary use of the lot.
2. Timing: An accessory structure shall not be installed or built on a lot prior to the construction of the primary
structure.
C. Quantity and Size:
1. Maximum Number: No more than two (2) storage-based accessory structures shall be permitted on a lot.
There is no limit on recreation-based accessory structures.
2. Maximum Size: The cumulative square footage of all storage-based accessory structures shall not exceed one
hundred percent (100%) of the area of the footprint of the primary structure.
D. Materials: The exterior finish and facade of all storage-based accessory structures greater than 200 square feet
in area shall match, closely resemble, or significantly complement the materials and colors used on the primary
structure.
E. Location: Storage-based and recreation-based accessory structures shall only be permitted in side and rear yards
with the following exceptions:
1. Basketball Goals: A basketball goal along a driveway or mounted on the garage shall not be considered a
sport court. However, a basketball goal shall meet the front yard setback requirement.
2. Detached Garage: A detached garage shall not be placed forward of a primary structure.
3. Vehicular Access off Alley: Any accessory structure with vehicular access off an alley shall be set back at
least twenty (20) feet off the alley.
Accessory Structure Standards (AS)
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 05
5-10
5.08 AS-05: Multiple-family Accessory Structure Standards
This Accessory Structure Standards section applies to the following zoning districts:
The following standards apply:
A. Types:
1. Support-based: Support-based accessory structures shall be permitted. Support-based accessory structures
may include a management office, sales office, maintenance facility, indoor fitness room, indoor or outdoor
sport courts, indoor or outdoor swimming pool, indoor or outdoor play equipment, enclosed vending, laundry,
and other structures customarily incidental to the development. All support-based accessory structures
shall be subordinate to the residential component of the development; be located, designed, and intended to
serve only the needs of the development and its residents; and shall present no visible evidence of its nonresidential
nature to areas outside the development.
2. Storage-based: Except for garages and carports, storage-based accessory structures specific to each dwelling
unit shall not be permitted.
B. Relationship:
1. Use: An accessory structure shall relate to the primary use of the land and be solely used in connection with
the primary use.
2. Timing:
a. Support-based: A support-based accessory structure may be installed or built on a lot prior to the
construction of a primary structure.
b. Storage-based: A storage-based accessory structure shall not be installed or built on a lot prior to the
construction of a primary structure.
C. Quantity: No more than four (4) support-based accessory structures shall be permitted for any development.
There is no limit on storage-based accessory structures.
D. Materials: The exterior finish and facade of all accessory structures greater than 200 square feet in area shall
match, closely resemble, or significantly complement the materials and colors used on the primary structure.
E. Location: Support-based and storage-based accessory structures are not restricted to any specific yards.
Accessory Structure Standards (AS)
Article
Development Standards
05
5-11
5.09 AS-06: Manufactured Home Residential Accessory Structure Standards
This Accessory Structure Standards section applies to the following zoning districts:
The following standards apply:
A. Types:
1. Support-based: Support-based accessory structures shall be permitted. Support-based accessory structures
shall include a management office, sales office, maintenance facility, indoor fitness room, indoor and outdoor
sport courts, indoor and outdoor swimming pool, indoor and outdoor play equipment, enclosed vending,
laundry, emergency storm shelter, and other structures customarily incidental to the development. All
support-based accessory structures shall be subordinate to the residential component of the development; be
located, designed, and intended to serve only the needs of the development and its residents; and present no
visible evidence of its non-residential nature to areas outside the development.
2. Storage-based: Storage-based accessory structures in the form of detached garages, carports, and sheds shall
be permitted for dwelling sites.
3. Recreation-based: Recreation-based accessory structures in the form of decks and ground-mounted satellite
dishes shall be permitted for dwelling sites. However, decks and covered porches shall not be attached to
manufactured or mobile home dwelling.
B. Relationship:
1. Use: An accessory structure shall relate to the primary use of the land and be solely used in connection with
the primary use.
2. Timing:
a. Support-based: A support-based accessory structure may be installed or built on a lot prior to the
construction of a primary structure.
b. Storage-based and Recreation-based: Storage-based accessory structures and recreational-based accessory
structures shall not be installed or built on a dwelling site prior to the construction or installation of a
dwelling unit.
C. Quantity and Size:
1. Maximum Number per Development: No more than four (4) support-based accessory structures shall be
permitted for every 100 dwelling sites within the development. There is no limit on recreation-based accessory
structures.
2. Maximum Number per Dwelling Site: Each dwelling site shall be permitted one (1) shed in addition to a
carport or garage. No additional storage-based accessory structures shall be permitted on a dwelling site.
3. Maximum Size: The total area of storage-based accessory structures on a dwelling site shall not exceed
twenty-five percent (25%) of the dwelling site area or 600 square feet, whichever is less.
D. Materials: The exterior finish and facade of all accessory structures greater than 200 square feet in area shall
match, closely resemble, or significantly complement the materials and colors used on the primary structure with
which it is associated.
E. Location: Storage-based and recreation-based accessory structures shall only be permitted in side yards and rear
yards with the following exception:
1. Basketball Goals: A basketball goal along a driveway or mounted on the garage shall not be considered a
sport court. However, a basketball goal shall meet the front yard setback requirement.
Accessory Structure Standards (AS)
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 05
5-12
5.10 AS-07: Institutional Accessory Structure Standards
This Accessory Structure Standards section applies to the following zoning districts:
The following standards apply:
A. Types:
1. Support-based: Support-based accessory structures shall be permitted. A support-based accessory structure
shall include a maintenance facility, mechanical structure, freestanding canopy, stand-alone restroom facilities,
storage building, enclosed vending, kiosk, or structures used in support of the primary structure.
2. Recreation-based: Recreation-based accessory structures shall be permitted. A recreational-based accessory
structure shall include a deck, fountains, pavilion, picnic shelter, public art display, sport courts, terrace,
playground equipment or other structures that add a recreational element to the primary use of the land.
B. Relationship:
1. Use: An accessory structure shall relate to the primary use of the land and be solely used in connection with
the specific primary use.
2. Timing: An accessory structure shall not be installed or built on a lot prior to the construction of a primary
structure.
C. Quantity and Size: Up to eight (8) support-based accessory structures shall be permitted on a lot. There is no
limit on recreation-based accessory structures.
D. Materials: The exterior finish and facade of all accessory structures shall match, closely resemble, or significantly
complement the character of the district.
E. Location: Support-based and recreation-based accessory structures shall only be permitted in side yards and rear
yards; and shall not be placed forward of a primary structure.
Accessory Structure Standards (AS)
Article
Development Standards
05
5-13
5.11 AS-08: Downtown Commercial Accessory Structure Standards
This Accessory Structure Standards section applies to the following zoning districts:
The following standards apply:
A. Types:
1. Support-based: Support-based accessory structures shall be permitted for non-residential uses. Supportbased
accessory structures shall include a storage building, refrigeration or freezer unit, mechanical structure,
or other structure used in support of the primary structure.
2. Recreation-based: Recreation-based accessory structures shall be permitted for non-residential uses.
Recreation-based accessory structures shall include a deck, fountain, pavilion, public art display, terrace, or
other structures that add a recreational element to the primary structure that is consistent with the intent of the
district.
3. Prohibited: Accessory structures for residential uses shall not be permitted.
B. Relationship:
1. Use: An accessory structure shall relate to the primary use of the land and be solely used in connection with
the specific primary use.
2. Timing: An accessory structure shall not be installed or built on a lot prior to the construction of the primary
structure.
C. Quantity and Size:
1. Maximum Number: One (1) support-based accessory structure shall be permitted on a lot. There is no limit
on recreation-based accessory structures.
2. Maximum Size: A support-based accessory structure shall not exceed 500 square feet in area or five percent
(5%) of the area of the footprint of the primary structure, whichever is larger.
D. Materials: The exterior finish and facade of any accessory structure shall match, closely resemble, or significantly
complement the materials and color used on the primary structures and in the district.
E. Location: Support-based and recreation-based accessory structures shall only be permitted in side yards and rear
yards; and shall not be placed forward of a primary structure.
Accessory Structure Standards (AS)
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 05
5-14
5.12 AS-09: Neighborhood Commercial Accessory Structure Standards
This Accessory Structure Standards section applies to the following zoning districts:
The following standards apply:
A. Types:
1. Support-based: Support-based accessory structures shall be permitted. Support-based accessory structures
shall include a storage building, refrigeration or freezer unit, freestanding canopy, mechanical structure, or
other structure used in support of the primary structure.
2. Recreation-based: Recreation-based accessory structures shall be permitted. A recreational-based accessory
structure shall include a deck, terrace, play equipment, or other structures that add a recreational element to
the primary structure that is consistent with the intent of the district.
B. Relationship:
1. Use: An accessory structure shall relate to the primary use of the land and be solely used in connection with
the specific primary use.
2. Timing: An accessory structure shall not be installed or built on a lot prior to the construction of the primary
structure.
C. Quantity and Size:
1. Maximum Number: No more than two (2) support-based accessory structure shall be permitted on a lot.
There is no limit on recreation-based accessory structures.
2. Maximum Size: The cumulative square footage of all storage-based accessory structures shall not exceed
800 square feet in area or ten percent (10%) of the area of the footprint of the primary structure, whichever is
greater.
D. Materials: The exterior finish and facade of all accessory structures greater than 200 square feet in area shall
match, closely resemble, or significantly complement the materials and colors used on the primary structure.
E. Location: Support-based and recreation-based accessory structures shall only be permitted in side yards and rear
yards; and shall not be placed forward of a primary structure.
5.13 AS-10: General Commercial Accessory Structure Standards
This Accessory Structure Standards section applies to the following zoning districts:
The following standards apply:
A. Types:
1. Support-based: Support-based accessory structures shall be permitted. Support-based accessory structures
shall include a maintenance facility, mechanical structure, freestanding canopy, storage building, refrigeration
or freezer unit, or other structures used in support of the primary structure.
2. Recreation-based: Recreation-based accessory structures shall be permitted. Recreation-based accessory
structures shall include a deck, fountain, pavilion, picnic shelter, public art display, sport court, terrace, play
equipment, or other structures that add a recreational element to the primary use of the land.
B. Relationship:
1. Use: An accessory structure shall relate to the primary use of the land and be solely used in connection with
the specific primary use.
2. Timing: An accessory structure shall not be permitted prior to the construction of a primary structure.
C. Quantity: No more than four (4) support-based accessory structures shall be permitted on a lot. There is no limit
on recreation-based accessory structures.
D. Materials: The exterior finish and facade of all accessory structures over 200 square feet in area shall match,
closely resemble, or significantly complement the materials and color used on the primary structures.
E. Location: Support-based and recreation-based accessory structures shall only be permitted in side yards and rear
yards; and shall not be placed forward of a primary structure.
Accessory Structure Standards (AS)
Article
Development Standards
05
5-15
5.14 AS-11: Industrial Accessory Structure Standards
This Accessory Structure Standards section applies to the following zoning districts:
The following standards apply:
A. Types:
1. Support-based: Support-based accessory structures shall be permitted. Support-based accessory structures
shall include a cooling tower, maintenance facility, mechanical structure, storage building, water tower, or
other structures used in support of the primary structure.
2. Recreation-based: Recreation-based accessory structures shall be permitted. Recreation-based accessory
structures shall include a deck, fountain, pavilion, picnic shelter, public art display, sport court, terrace, play
equipment, or other structures that add a recreational element to the primary use of the land.
B. Relationship:
1. Use: An accessory structure shall relate to the primary use of the land and be solely used in connection with
the specific primary use.
2. Timing: An accessory structure shall not be installed or built on a lot prior to the construction of the primary
structures.
C. Quantity: No more than eight (8) accessory structures shall be permitted on a lot. There is no limit on recreationbased
accessory structures.
D. Materials: The exterior finish and facade of all accessory structures over 200 square feet in area shall match,
closely resemble, or significantly complement the materials used on the primary structures.
E. Location: Support-based and recreation-based accessory structures shall only be permitted in side yards and rear
yards.
F. Open Side Orientation: Support-based accessory structures may have one (1) open side if the open side faces an
existing structure and is not visible from any public right-of-way.
Accessory Structure Standards (AS)
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 05
5-16
Architectural Standards (AR)
5.15 AR-01: Residential and Neighborhood Commercial Architectural Standards
This Architectural Standards section applies to the following districts:
M1
The intent of the Architectural Standards is to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the City by
maintaining the community's character and improving the quality of life within the zoning jurisdiction of the City.
The following standards apply:
A. Project Applicability: Architectural details consistent with the requirements of this Unified Development
Ordinance shall be required when an Improvement Location Permit for a new primary structure is obtained.
B. Architectural Elements:
1. Front Facade: The front facade of single-family and two-family dwellings shall be parallel or thirty degrees
(30°) of parallel to the street to which the dwelling gains primary access, except as described below:
a. On corner lots, the front facade may face either street.
b. A single-family dwelling that is setback 200 feet or more from the street to which the dwelling gains
primary access may orient the front facade up to ninety degrees (90°) from parallel to that street.
2. Roof:
a. Single-family and two-family dwellings shall have eaves or overhangs a minimum of nine (9) inches
from the facade's siding material on at least eighty percent (80%) of the roof line. The eave or overhang
shall be measured after the installation of masonry.
3. Garages:
a. A one-car, attached garage shall be required for all single-family dwellings, and a one-car attached garage
shall be required for each unit in a two-family dwelling.
b. Front loading garages shall be limited to three vehicle access. For corner lots, front loading garages
facing the street in which the dwelling derives its address shall be limited to three vehicle access.
4. Mechanical Equipment: Mechanical equipment, central air conditioner units located on the ground, propane
tanks, and the like shall not be located in front of the front facade. On corner lots this standard applies to each
facade that faces a street.
Article
Development Standards
05
5-17
Architectural Standards (AR)
5.16 AR-02: Traditional Residential Architectural Standards
This Architectural Standards section applies to the following districts:
The following standards apply:
A. Project Applicability: Architectural details consistent with the requirements of this Unified Development
Ordinance shall be required when an Improvement Location Permit for a new primary structure is obtained.
B. Architectural Elements:
1. Front Facade: The front facade of single-family and two-family dwellings shall be parallel or up to thirty
degrees (30°) of parallel to the street to which the dwelling gains primary access, except as described below:
a. On corner lots, the front facade may face either street.
b. A single-family dwellings that is setback 200 feet or more from the street to which the dwelling gains
primary access may orient the front facade up to ninety degrees (90°) from parallel to that street.
2. Roof:
a. Single-family and two-family dwellings shall have eaves or overhangs a minimum of nine (9) inches
from the facade's siding material on at least eighty percent (80%) of the roof line. The eave or overhang
shall be measured after the installation of masonry.
3. Garages:
a. A one-car garage, attached or detached, shall be required for all single-family dwellings, and a one-car
attached garage shall be required for each unit in a two-family dwelling.
b. Front-loading garages shall not be located in front of the main living area of the dwelling by more than
four (4) feet.
c. Front loading garages shall be limited to two vehicle access. For corner lots, front loading garages facing
the street in which the dwelling derives its address shall be limited to two vehicle access. Garages facing
alleys are not considered front loading.
C. Mechanical Equipment: Mechanical equipment, central air conditioner units located on the ground, propane
tanks, and the like shall not be located in front of the front facade. On corner lots this standard applies to each
facade that faces a street.
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 05
5-18
5.17 AR-03: Downtown Commercial Architectural Standards
This Architectural Standards section applies to the following districts:
The following standards apply:
A. Project Applicability: Architectural details consistent with the requirements of this Unified Development
Ordinance shall be required when renovations or new construction necessitate a Building Permit. Only building
components that are being renovated shall be subject to these standards (eg. a new door does not necessitate an
awning be brought into compliance.)
B. Renovation Projects
1. Storefronts:
a. Maintain and repair original commercial storefronts including large glass display windows with bulkheads,
transoms, kick plates/knee walls, and side light windows.
b. When maintenance and restoration is not possible, replacement storefront elements shall match original
components using historical documentation to guide the design of replacement elements.
2. Entries and Doors:
a. The original primary entrance shall be retained including details such as transoms and side light
windows.
b. Recessed entries shall not be altered in depth.
c. When modifications have been made, a new entry door shall be designed to match the original opening in
size, scale, and materials.
3. Windows and Window Framing:
a. Encourage the preservation and maintenance of historic windows. If repair is not feasible, an original
window shall be replaced with a window of similar design.
b. Window openings and configurations (size, shape, dimensions, and rhythm) shall be retained. All
replacement windows shall retain the placement, method of operation, and arrangement of glass panes.
c. Clear window glazing that conveys the visual appearance of historic glazing shall be required.
(Transparent low-e glass is recommended.) Mirrored glass shall be prohibited.
d. Replacement windows shall be wood, vinyl, or anodized aluminum and shall compliment the color
scheme of the façade.
e. Encourage the restoration of historic window openings that have been altered when the façade containing
the windows is part of an overall renovation project.
4. Exterior Materials:
a. Repair of original building materials is encouraged and preferred.
b. When exterior materials are beyond repair, remove and replace only damaged materials. Repair materials
shall match original materials in character, texture, scale, and size.
5. Awnings:
a. Awning design and color shall be complementary to the character of the building.
b. Awnings shall not cover up or conceal significant architectural details, transom lights, or decorative
millwork.
c. Awnings shall allow for appropriate clearances from the sidewalks and not impede pedestrian
movements.
6. Façade Lighting:
a. When possible, original light fixtures should be retained; replacement fixtures should be similar in
appearance, material and scale to the original or should be compatible with the historic character of the
building. Spacing patterns between light fixtures should be retained as much as possible.
b. Light should be directed toward signage, entrances or building features. General floodlighting of any
exterior building surface shall not be permitted.
7. 7. Roof and Roof Elements:
a. Original shape and materials of historic roofs and parapets shall be retained whenever possible. The roof
line and orientation of the roof as seen from a street shall be maintained. When roof is visible from a
street, replacement roof materials shall be similar in scale, texture, finish, and color to traditional materials.
Roofs that are not visible from a street may be of any suitable material.
b. Mechanical and service equipment shall be installed where it cannot be seen from the street.
Architectural Standards (AR)
Article
Development Standards
05
5-19
c. Gutters and downspouts shall be directed to discharge away from the building foundation and be secured
to the building to prevent damage to architectural features.
d. Original stone or tile coping (found in parapet walls) shall be retained. If it is not feasible to retain
existing coping, replacement coping shall match in character, color, size, scale, and texture to the original
coping.
e. Balconies may be installed off of second or third floors of buildings, but shall be compatible with the
historic character of the building.
f. Roof top decks may be installed provided they do not interfere with street level activities and are closed
by 10 PM on Sunday through Thursday and midnight on Friday and Saturday.
g. Signs shall be permitted on rooftops in accordance with Sign Standards (SI).
C. New Construction and Building Additions
1. Setbacks and Orientation:
a. New construction shall match the setbacks of adjacent buildings. In traditional commercial areas, new
buildings shall be positioned at the sidewalk edge, maintaining a uniform street wall.
b. In former residential areas, new structures shall be placed within the established range of front yard
setbacks on the block at the discretion of the Department of Building, Planning, and Development.
2. Building Mass, Scale, and Height:
a. Widths of newly constructed buildings shall reflect the established range of traditional widths of buildings
within the district. If a building must exceed traditional building widths, façades designed to appear
as multiple facades are encouraged.
b. New construction shall convey the traditional size and scale of historic buildings as it is perceived at the
street level.
c. The height of new construction shall be compatible with the average downtown building.
3. Primary Entrances and Façade Openings:
a. Primary entrances shall be oriented towards the street and have a strong sense of entry similar to the
location, size, and type in historic buildings. Recessed entries are encouraged; exterior doors shall not
swing into the path of a public sidewalk.
b. The rhythm and ratio of openings to wall surface should reflect that found on adjacent and surrounding
historic buildings. Storefront proportions of glass shall be consistent with surrounding historic buildings,
and large surfaces of glass on street facades of upper floors shall not be permitted.
4. Materials and Features:
a. Exterior materials shall compliment or match those used on adjacent buildings. New buildings shall be
faced with traditional materials found within the district including, but not limited to brick, limestone,
and wood/hardi-plank siding. New materials may be considered if they are similar in character and
detailing to traditional materials.
b. Vinyl siding and highly reflective materials (such as mirrored glass) shall not be permitted.
c. Low quality trim materials such as anodized aluminum and vinyl shall not be used for window and/or
door trim.
d. Awnings shall meet the awning standards for Renovation Projects in Section 5.17 (B) (5) Awnings.
5. Building Additions:
a. New additions shall respect the historic character and features.
b. Only rear and side additions shall be permitted.
c. Additions shall be subordinate to the existing building.
d. Additions shall minimize damage to existing historic components of the building, including walls, roofs,
and architectural details.
Architectural Standards (AR)
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 05
5-20
5.18 AR-04: Commercial Architectural Standards
This Architectural Standards section applies to the following districts:
The following standards apply:
A. Project Applicability: Architectural details consistent with the requirements of this Unified Development
Ordinance shall be required when an Improvement Location Permit for a new primary structure is obtained.
B. Architectural Features:
1. Facades:
a. Any facade that faces a right-of-way shall be finished to a standard similar to the architectural quality of
the front facade, including building materials, architectural detail, windows, and faux windows.
b. Long facades (30 feet or greater) or large areas (420 square feet or greater) of a facade without visual
relief shall not be permitted. Visual relief may include a faux window, column, a change in materials, or
any change of the plane of the facade.
2. Entries: A building greater than 15,000 square feet in area shall have clearly defined, highly visible customer
entrances with at least two (2) of the following features:
a. Canopies or porticos.
b. Overhangs.
c. Arcades.
d. Raised corniced parapets over the door.
e. Peaked roof forms.
f. Arches.
g. Outdoor patios.
h. Architectural details such as tile work and moldings that are integrated into the building structure and
design.
i. Integral planters or wing walls that incorporate landscaped areas and/or places for sitting.
j. Columns.
k. Awnings.
l. Enframed window walls.
C. Site Planning and Layout: Lineal or strip development shall incorporate variation in building height, building
mass, roof forms, and changes in wall planes.
Architectural Standards (AR)
Article
Development Standards
05
5-21
Confined Feeding Standards (CF)
5.19 CF-01: General Confined Feeding Standards
This Confined Feeding Standards section applies to the following districts:
The intent of the Confined Feeding Standards is to protect the health, safety, and welfare of residents in the zoning
jurisdiction of the City by regulating the placement and operation of confined feeding beyond standards required by
State and federal agencies. The following standards apply:
A. Minimum Distance from Existing Uses: All confined feeding facilities, including animal barns or sheds, lagoons,
animal mortality facilities, parking areas, truck maneuvering areas, and accessory structures shall meet the
following standards:
1. Residential: The minimum separation to an existing residential use and/or residential zoning district shall be
5,000 feet measured from foundation to foundation.
2. Institutional: The minimum separation to an existing institutional use and/or institutional zoning district shall
be 5,000 feet measured from foundation to foundation.
3. Retail, Restaurant, or Entertainment Related Businesses: The minimum separation to an existing retail,
restaurant, or entertainment related business use and/or commercial zoning district shall be 5,000 feet
measured from foundation to property line.
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 05
5-22
Density and Intensity Standards (DI)
5.20 DI-01: General Density and Intensity Standards
This Density and Intensity Standards section applies to the following districts:
M1
The intent of the Density and Intensity Standards is to protect the health, safety, and welfare of residents through the
establishment of maximum density and maximum land use intensity requirements. The following standards apply:
A. Project Applicability: Any project requiring an Improvement Location Permit or Building Permit that increases
impervious surface on a lot shall meet the Density and Intensity Standards of this Unified Development
Ordinance.
B. General: If a density or intensity standard does not appear on the two-page layout in Article 02: Zoning Districts
for a zoning district, then a density or intensity standard shall not apply to that particular zoning district.
1. Maximum Lot Coverage: The maximum lot coverage shall be as indicated on the applicable two-page layout
in Article 02: Zoning Districts.
2. Minimum Main Floor Area: The minimum main floor area shall be as indicated on the applicable two-page
layout in Article 02: Zoning Districts.
3. Maximum Main Floor Area: The maximum main floor area shall be as indicated on the applicable two-page
layout in Article 02: Zoning Districts.
4. Minimum Dwelling Unit Size: The minimum dwelling unit size shall be as indicated on the applicable
two-page layout in Article 02: Zoning Districts.
5. Maximum Density: The maximum density shall be as indicated on the applicable two-page layout in Article
02: Zoning Districts.
C. Lot Coverage Rules: The cumulative area on a lot covered by structures, buildings, and surfaces that are impervious
or semi-pervious.
1. 100% Coverage: The following shall count as 100% coverage on a lot: building footprints, swimming pools,
non-porous concrete, non-porous asphalt and any other entirely impervious surface. Also, any interior space
or impervious surface that projects away (e.g. cantilevered space) from a foundation shall count toward lot
coverage.
2. 75% Coverage: The following shall count as 75% coverage on a lot: stepping stones, stone, brick pavers,
porous concrete and porous asphalt.
3. 50% Coverage: The following shall count as 50% coverage on a lot: grass pavers.
4. 0% Coverage: The following shall not be considered impervious surfaces:
a. Retaining walls.
b. Surfaces constructed using wood or composite planks for decking (e.g. wood plank decks or private
sidewalks).
Article
Development Standards
05
5-23
Driveway Standards (DW)
5.21 DW-01: General Driveway Standards
This Driveway Standards section applies to the following zoning districts:
M1
The intent of the Driveway Standards is to ensure the placement of driveways protects the health, safety, and welfare
of the residents within the zoning jurisdiction of the City. The following standards apply:
A. Project Applicability: Any new or expanded access to a right-of-way intended for vehicular or farm equipment
use shall be considered a driveway and shall meet the Driveway Standards of this Unified Development
Ordinance.
1. Residential Limits: Access to four (4) or more single-family lots or access to four (4) or more dwelling
sites within a manufactured home park shall be established as a public or private street and shall meet the
applicable standards within the City of Auburn's Construction Standards.
2. Non-residential Limits: Access to four (4) or more non-residential lots that conveys over 2,000 vehicles on
average per day shall be established as a public or private street and meet the applicable standards within the
City of Auburn's Construction Standards.
B. Cross Reference:
1. Street Classification: The classification of streets shall be based on the City of Auburn Thoroughfare Plan
Map. In addition, all State and federal highways shall be designated arterial streets.
2. Construction Standards: Driveways constructed within the zoning jurisdiction of the City shall meet or
exceed the City of Auburn's Construction Standards.
C. Permits: An Excavation Permit from the City of Auburn shall be required for all driveway cuts into rights-of-way
or onto public streets within the zoning jurisdiction of the City. The Auburn Street Superintendent reviews each
Excavation Permit and the Department of Building, Planning and Development issues the Excavation Permit.
1. State and Federal Highways: An Indiana Department of Transportation permit shall be required in lieu of the
City of Auburn's Excavation Permit for all driveway cuts onto State or federal highways.
2. Extra-Territorial Jurisdiction: Written approval from the DeKalb County Highway Department shall be
required in lieu of the City of Auburn's Excavation Permit for all driveway cuts onto public streets within the
City's extra-territorial jurisdictional area.
D. Measurement Rules:
1. Between Driveway and Street Intersection: The distance between a driveway and a street intersection shall be
determined by measuring from the edge of pavement of the driveway to the nearest right-of-way line of the
street that is parallel or mostly parallel to the driveway. This measurement shall be taken at the right-of-way
line of the street to which the driveway gains access.
2. Between Driveways: The distance between driveways shall be determined by measuring from the edge of
pavement of one (1) driveway to the nearest edge of pavement of the other driveway at the right-of-way line
of the street to which the driveways gain access.
3. Driveway Width: The width of a driveway shall be determined by measuring from one (1) edge of the
pavement to the other edge of the pavement at the right-of-way line of the street to which the driveway gains
access.
E. Depressed Curb: Installation of a depressed curb in new or expanded driveways is encouraged.
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 05
5-24
Driveway Standards (DW)
F. Positioning:
1. Alignment: The centerline of two (2) driveways for non-residential development accessing an arterial or
collector street from opposite sides of the street shall align with each another, or shall meet the separation
requirements.
2. Clear Vision of Driveways: All driveways shall be located to reasonably prevent collisions with intersecting
traffic.
a. Driveways gaining access to streets with a posted speed limit of thirty miles per hour (30 MPH) or
less shall be located such that they are visible by a driver for at least sixty (60) feet after cresting a hill,
rounding a curve, or passing any other physical barriers that prevent clear vision.
b. Driveways gaining access to streets with a posted speed limit of thirty-five miles per hour (35 MPH) to
forty-five miles per hour (45 MPH) shall be located such that they are visible by a driver for at least 120
feet after cresting a hill, rounding a curve, or passing any other physical barriers that prevent clear vision.
c. Driveways gaining access to streets with a posted speed limit of fifty miles per hour (50 MPH) or higher
shall be located such that they are visible by a driver for at least 200 feet after cresting a hill, rounding a
curve, or passing any other physical barriers that prevent clear vision.
3. Additional Separation: The Zoning Administrator, the Director of Engineering, or the Street Superintendent
may deny a proposed driveway location or require additional separation due to other safety concerns, including
but not limited to width of the right-of-way, width of the public street, condition of the public street,
lack of shoulder, natural or man-made hazards, adverse shadowing from natural or man-made features, and
adverse drainage on or around the public street.
G. Discretion: The Zoning Administrator, Director of Engineering, or Routing Committee may determine if public
improvements such as acceleration lanes, deceleration lanes, passing blisters, wider shoulders or approaches,
frontage streets, or other improvements are necessary. See Public Improvement Standards (PI).
5.22 DW-02: Agricultural Driveway Standards
This Driveway Standards section applies to the following zoning districts:
The following standards apply:
A. Separation: A driveway shall not be permitted to be installed within 100 feet of any intersecting street (see “A”
below).
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
“A” “B”
ROW
ROW “B”
Street to
Curb Cut
Minimum
Curb Cut to
Curb Cut
Minimum
Curb Cut to
Curb Cut
Minimum
B. Materials: Asphalt, concrete, other non-porous materials, or gravel shall be acceptable driveway surface
materials.
Article
Development Standards
05
5-25
5.23 DW-03: Residential Driveway Standards
This Driveway Standards section applies to the following zoning districts:
M1
The following standards apply:
A. Separation:
1. A driveway shall not be permitted to be installed within 30 feet of any intersecting street. If the lot is not
large enough to achieve the required separation, then the driveway shall be installed at the location acceptable
to the Zoning Administrator.
B. Materials: Driveways shall consist of asphalt, concrete, pavers and/or other hard-surfaced material approved by
the Zoning Administrator. Gravel or stone shall not be permitted.
C. Drainage: Driveways shall be designed and installed so there is no adverse affect from drainage onto adjacent
property.
Driveway Standards (DW)
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 05
5-26
5.24 DW-04: Non-residential Driveway Standards
This Driveway Standards section applies to the following zoning districts:
The following standards apply:
A. Quantity:
1. One (1) driveway shall be permitted on lots with less than 400 feet of frontage on a public right-of-way.
2. Two (2) driveways shall be permitted on lots with frontage on a public right-of-way that is at least 400 feet,
but less than 800 feet. The driveways shall meet the separation requirements.
3. Three (3) driveways shall be permitted on lots with frontage on a public right-of-way that is at least 800 feet,
but less than 1,200 feet. The driveways shall meet the separation requirements.
4. Four (4) driveways shall be permitted on lots with frontage on a public right-of-way that is 1,200 feet or
more. The driveways shall meet the separation requirements.
B. Separation:
1. From a Street Intersection: A driveway shall not be permitted to be installed:
a. Within 150 feet of any intersecting street if access is along an arterial or collector street (see “A” below).
b. Within 100 feet of any intersecting street if access is along a local street (see “A” below).
c. If the lot is not large enough to achieve the required separation, then the driveway shall be installed at the
location farthest from the intersection.
d. Under no circumstances shall a driveway be permitted within sixty (60) feet of any street intersection.
2. Between Driveways on the Same Lot: Two (2) or more driveways shall not be permitted to be installed within
250 feet if on the same lot (see “B” below).
3. Between Driveways on Different Lots: Two (2) or more driveways shall not be permitted to be installed
within 100 feet of one another (see “B” below).
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
“A” “B”
ROW
ROW “B”
Street to
Curb Cut
Minimum
Curb Cut to
Curb Cut
Minimum
Curb Cut to
Curb Cut
Minimum
C. Width: A driveway shall be at least nine (9) feet wide, but shall not exceed twelve (12) feet per lane and forty-two
(42) feet in overall width.
D. Materials: Driveways shall consist of asphalt, concrete, or other impervious material approved by the Zoning
Administrator. Internal driveways may be stone or gravel in the PR, I2, and HI Districts at the discretion of the
Zoning Administrator.
E. Setback: Driveways shall be setback at least five (5) feet from side property lines.
Driveway Standards (DW)
Article
Development Standards
05
5-27
5.25 EN-01: General Environmental Standards
This Environmental Standards section applies to the following zoning districts:
M1
The intent of the Environmental Standards is to protect the health, safety, and welfare of residents of the zoning
jurisdiction of the City by providing for the protection of air, soil, and water quality on a local level. The following
standards apply:
A. Cross Reference: See Storage Tank Standards (SR).
B. Prohibitive Geology: A lot or portions thereof shall be unsuitable for structures when it contains any of the
characteristics listed below. Structures may be permitted if an engineered site plan is submitted and approved
by the Routing Committee. Such engineered site plan shall show and commit to adequate measures for erosion
control; minimum site disturbance; soil stability for structural load; storm water management; aesthetic treatment
of engineered structures; and final landscaping.
1. Slope: Pre-development or post development slopes greater than twenty percent (20%).
2. Rock: Adverse rock formations.
3. Soil: Adverse soils.
4. Stability Limitations:
a. Has a low loading rate.
b. Has a low weight-bearing strength.
c. Has any other feature which will significantly accelerate the deterioration of a structure or significantly
reduce the structure’s stability.
C. Air Quality:
1. Generally: A use shall not discharge fly ash, dust, smoke, vapors, noxious toxic or corrosive matter, or
other air pollutants in such concentration as to conflict with public air quality standards or be detrimental to
humans, animals, vegetation, or property.
2. Outdoor Burners: Outdoor wood burning furnaces, corn burning furnaces, or any other detached device or
standalone structure for the purpose of burning and/or providing heat or other energy to a residential structure
and/or garage or outbuilding shall be prohibited.
D. Soil and Water Quality:
1. Erosion Control:
a. Developments shall be in compliance with the City of Auburn's Stormwater Management Ordinances.
(See Title XV: Chapter 160 Illicit Discharge and Connection to the Stormwater Drains within the City
of Auburn; Chapter 161 Construction Site Stormwater Runoff; and Chapter 162 Post Construction
Stormwater Control.)
b. Developments shall be in compliance with the filing requirements for erosion control on construction
sites as in Indiana Administrative Code 327-1 (Rule 5), when applicable.
c. Sedimentation in adjoining surfaces, drainage systems, and watercourses caused from the development
of a lot or use shall not be permitted. If such sedimentation occurs, it shall be the responsibility of the
owner of the developing lot or use to remove the sedimentation.
2. Fill:
a. All fill materials shall be free of environmentally hazardous materials, and the Zoning Administrator or
the City's MS4 Coordinator may request representative samples of the fill for testing purposes.
b. Fill that changes the final grade by more than twelve (12) inches or changes the drainage pattern of the
area shall not be permitted without approval from the Zoning Administrator and Director of Engineering.
3. Production: No use shall produce pollutants in such a quantity as to pollute soils, water bodies, adjacent
properties, or conflict with public water standards.
4. Storage: No use shall accumulate within the lot or discharge beyond the lot lines any waste, debris, refuse,
trash, discarded construction materials, discarded appliances, junk, scrap metals, or rotting wood that are in
conflict with applicable public health, safety, and welfare standards unless expressly permitted by this Unified
Development Ordinance.
5. Disposal: No waste materials such as garbage, rubbish, trash, construction material, gasoline, oil, flammables,
soils, tars, chemicals, greases, industrial or agricultural waste, or any other material of such nature,
quantity, obnoxiousness, toxicity, or temperature that it may contaminate, pollute, or harm the waters or
soils shall be deposited, located, stored, or discharged on any lot unless expressly permitted by this Unified
Development Ordinance.
Environmental Standards (EN)
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 05
5-28
E. Environmental Feature Protective Setback: Primary structures, accessory dwellings, storage-based accessory
structures, and support based-accessory structures shall be at least a twenty-five (25) feet from the delineated
boundary of a wetland or the edge of the water at normal pool of a lake, pond, creek, stream, or river.
F. Excavation Activities Within the Extra-Territorial Jurisdiction:
1. Require the extraction of sand, gravel or other minerals when done below the ground water level to be done
so with dragline, floating dredge, or alternative wet excavation method.
2. Restrict de-watering of sites utilized for mining or extraction.
3. Excavation sites shall not utilize anything other than clean natural earth fill materials to fill or alter the
contour of the site. Construction debris shall not be considered clean natural fill.
4. Restrict all fuel, oil, lubricant, hydraulic fluid, petroleum products or similar material from being stored
on-site without fully being within a secondary containment area with 110% capacity to contain a 100% spill.
G. Drainage Within the Extra-Territorial Jurisdiction:
1. Projects shall be subject to review and approval of the DeKalb County Surveyor and/or DeKalb County
Drainage Board.
Environmental Standards (EN)
Article
Development Standards
05
5-29
Fence and Wall Standards (FW)
5.26 FW-01: General Fence and Wall Standards
This Fence and Wall Standards section applies to the following zoning districts:
M1
The intent of the Fence and Wall Standards is to ensure neighborliness, visibility, and aesthetic quality; and to protect
the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the zoning jurisdiction of the City. The following standards apply:
A. Cross Reference:
1. Vision Clearance: Fences and walls shall meet all vision clearance standards in Vision Clearance Standards
(VC).
2. Covenants: Property owners within subdivisions are advised to investigate applicable Declaration of
Covenants which may impose greater restrictions than are found in this Unified Development Ordinance.
The stricter standard shall apply to lots with covenants.
B. Permits: An Improvement Location Permit shall be required prior to the installation of a fence or wall unless the
fence meets one (1) of the exemptions below.
1. Agricultural: Containment fences for livestock or produce shall be exempt from obtaining an Improvement
Location Permit, but shall still meet all the applicable Fence and Wall Standards.
2. Privacy Partitions: Privacy partitions located around decks and patios which do not exceed twenty-four
(24) lineal feet shall be exempt from obtaining an Improvement Location Permit, but shall still meet all the
applicable Fence and Wall Standards.
C. Positioning:
1. Presentation: Fences and walls shall present the non-structural face outward.
2. Property Line: Fences and walls shall be permitted on the property line, but if not on the property line are
encouraged to be at least two (2) feet from the property line so both sides of the fence can be maintained by
the owner of the fence.
3. Easement: No fence or wall shall be located within an easement unless a Utility Services Agreement is
approved by the City of Auburn Board of Public Works and Safety or written permission from the easement
holder has been granted.
D. Access: Containment fences four (4) feet in height or more shall include at least one (1) opening or operable gate.
E. Height Exemptions: Fences that surround sport courts shall be exempt from the maximum height regulations, but
shall meet the applicable setback standards in Article 02: Zoning Districts for the Accessory Structure with which
they are associated.
F. Maintenance: All fences and walls shall be properly maintained and kept in good condition.
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 05
5-30
Fence and Wall Standards (FW)
5.27 FW-02: Parks and Recreation Fence and Wall Standards
This Fence and Wall Standards section applies to the following zoning districts:
The following standards apply:
A. Types:
1. Permitted Materials: Wood, composite wood, stone, masonry, wrought iron, decorative metal, PVC, and
landscape components shall be permitted materials for fences and walls. Vinyl-coated chain link, zinc-coated
chain link, powder-coated chain link. and galvanized chain link shall only be permitted materials for fences
and walls that surround swimming pools, sport courts, playgrounds, neighborhood parks, or similar recreational
amenities.
2. Prohibited Materials: Fences and walls shall not incorporate barbed wire, above ground electrified wires,
razor wire, glass, sharpened top spikes, or similarly hazardous materials.
B. Location:
1. Front Yards: Only fences that are decorative in nature, do not serve as an enclosure, and are three (3) feet or
less in height shall be permitted in front yard, except in neighborhood parks.
2. Side and Rear Yards: Fences and walls shall be permitted in side and rear yards.
C. Height:
1. Front Yards: Fences and walls shall not exceed three (3) feet in height, except in neighborhood parks.
2. Side and Rear Yards: Fences and walls shall not exceed six (6) feet in height.
5.28 FW-03: Agricultural Fence and Wall Standards
This Fence and Wall Standards section applies to the following zoning districts:
The following standards apply:
A. Types:
1. Permitted Materials: Wood, composite wood, stone, masonry, wrought iron, decorative metal, PVC, vinylcoated
chain link, zinc-coated chain link, powder-coated chain link, galvanized chain link, and landscape
components shall be permitted materials for fences and walls. Chicken wire, wire mesh, agricultural wire,
and fences that incorporate barbed wire or above ground electrified wires shall only be permitted materials for
fences that are used for the containment of livestock or to surround fields.
2. Prohibited Materials: Fences and walls shall not incorporate razor wire, glass, sharpened top spikes, or other
similarly hazardous materials.
B. Location:
1. Front Yards: Fences and walls shall be permitted in the front yard if one (1) of the following conditions is
met.
a. The fence or wall is decorative in nature, does not serve as an enclosure, and is three (3) feet or less in
height.
b. The fence is for the containment of livestock.
c. The fence is around a field.
2. Side and Rear Yards: Fences and walls shall be permitted in side and rear yards.
C. Height:
1. Front Yards: Fences and walls shall not exceed three (3) feet in height; except containment fences and fences
around fields shall not exceed (6) feet in height within the front yard.
2. Side and Rear Yards: Fences and walls shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height.
Article
Development Standards
05
5-31
5.29 FW-04: Residential Fence and Wall Standards
This Fence and Wall Standards section applies to the following zoning districts:
M1
The following standards apply:
A. Types:
1. Permitted Materials: Wood, composite wood, stone, masonry, wrought iron, decorative metal, PVC, vinylcoated
chain link, zinc-coated chain link, powder-coated chain link, galvanized chain link, and landscape
components shall be permitted materials for fences and walls. Fences may incorporate chicken wire or mesh
wire only if the wire is within a wooden framed panel.
2. Prohibited Materials: Fences and walls shall not incorporate chicken wire, mesh wire, agricultural wire,
metal or plastic slats within chain links, barbed wire, above ground electrified wires, razor wire, glass,
sharpened top spikes, or similarly hazardous materials.
B. Location:
1. Front Yards: Only fences that are decorative in nature, do not serve as an enclosure, and are three (3) feet or
less in height shall be permitted in the front yard.
2. Side and Rear Yards: Fences and walls shall be permitted in side and rear yards.
C. Height:
1. Front Yards: Fences and walls shall not exceed three (3) feet in height.
2. Side and Rear Yards: Fences and walls shall not exceed six (6) feet in height.
5.30 FW-05: Institutional and Commercial Fence and Wall Standards
This Fence and Wall Standards section applies to the following zoning districts:
The following standards apply:
A. Types:
1. Permitted Materials: Wood, composite wood, stone, masonry, wrought iron, decorative metal, PVC, vinylcoated
chain link, zinc-coated chain link, powder-coated chain link, galvanized chain link, and landscape
component shall be permitted materials for fences and walls.
2. Prohibited Materials: Fences and walls shall not incorporate chicken wire, mesh wire, agricultural wire,
metal or plastic slats within chain links, concrete jersey barriers, barbed wire, above ground electrified wires,
razor wire, glass, sharpened top spikes, or similarly hazardous materials.
B. Location:
1. Front Yards: Fences and walls shall not be permitted in front yards and in front of the primary structure.
2. Side and Rear Yards: Fences and walls shall be permitted in side and rear yards.
C. Height: Fences and walls shall not exceed six (6) feet in height.
Fence and Wall Standards (FW)
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 05
5-32
5.31 FW-06: Downtown Commercial Fence and Wall Standards
This Fence and Wall Standards section applies to the following zoning districts:
The following standards apply:
A. Types:
1. Permitted Materials: Wood, composite wood, stone, masonry, wrought iron, decorative metal, PVC, and
landscape components shall be permitted materials for fences and walls.
2. Prohibited Materials: Fences and walls shall not incorporate chain link, chicken wire, mesh wire, agricultural
wire, metal or plastic slats within chain links, concrete jersey barriers, barbed wire, above ground electrified
wires, razor wire, glass, sharpened top spikes, or similarly hazardous materials.
B. Location:
1. Front Yards: Fences and walls shall not be permitted in front of the primary structure.
2. Side and Rear Yards: Fences and walls shall be permitted in side and rear yards.
C. Height: Fences and walls shall not exceed six (6) feet in height.
5.32 FW-07: Industrial and High Impact Fence and Wall Standards
This Fence and Wall Standards section applies to the following zoning districts:
The following standards apply:
A. Types:
1. Permitted Materials: Wood, composite wood, stone, masonry, wrought iron, decorative metal, PVC, vinylcoated
chain link, zinc-coated chain link, powder-coated chain link, galvanized chain link, and landscape
components shall be permitted materials for fences and walls.
2. Prohibited Materials: Fences and walls shall not incorporate chicken wire, mesh wire, agricultural wire,
metal or plastic slats within chain links, above ground electrified wires, glass, sharpened top spikes, or
similarly hazardous materials. While barbed wire and razor wire are generally not permitted materials,
the Zoning Administrator may permit the use of barbed wire and razor wire in special circumstances when
deemed necessary for the protection of public health and/or safety (i.e. prison).
B. Location:
1. Front Yards: Fences and walls shall not be permitted in front yards.
2. Side and Rear Yards: Fences and walls shall be permitted in side and rear yards.
C. Height: Fences and walls shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height.
Fence and Wall Standards (FW)
Article
Development Standards
05
5-33
Floodplain Standards (FP)
5.33 FP-01: General Floodplain Standards
This Floodplain Standards section applies to the following zoning districts:
M1
See the City of Auburn Floodplain Hazard Area Ordinance as adopted and amended. A copy of the official ordinance
can be viewed in Appendix B.
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 05
5-34
Floor Area Standards (FA)
5.34 FA-01: General Floor Area Standards
This Floor Area Standards section applies to the following zoning districts:
M1
The intent of the Floor Area Standards is to protect the health, safety, and welfare of residents and community character
through the establishment of minimum floor area requirements. The following standards apply:
A. Applicability: If a floor area standard does not appear on the two-page layout for a zoning district, then a standard
does not apply to that particular zoning district.
1. Minimum Main Floor Area: The minimum main floor area shall be per each two-page layout in Article 02:
Zoning Districts.
2. Maximum Main Floor Area: The maximum main floor area shall be per each two-page layout in Article 02:
Zoning Districts.
3. Minimum Dwelling Unit Size: The minimum dwelling unit size shall be per each two-page layout in Article
02: Zoning Districts.
Article
Development Standards
05
5-35
5.35 HT-01: General Height Standards
This Height Standards section applies to the following zoning districts:
M1
The intent of the Height Standards is to ensure adequate fire and life safety protection for taller structures, and to
protect the health, safety, and welfare of the residents in the zoning jurisdiction of the City. The following standards
apply:
A. Cross Reference: See Telecommunication Facilities Standards (TC).
B. Applicability: If a height standard does not appear on the two-page layout for a zoning district, then a standard
does not apply to that particular zoning district.
1. Primary Structure: The maximum height for primary structures shall be per each two-page layout in Article
02: Zoning Districts.
2. Accessory Structure: The maximum height for accessory structures shall be per each two-page layout in
Article 02: Zoning Districts.
3. Exceptions: The following types of structures or features shall be exempt or partially exempt from the
maximum structure height standards, assuming they are permitted uses or structural features, as stated:
a. Grain elevators and grain silos used for agricultural purposes may exceed the maximum structure height
but shall not exceed 150 feet in height.
b. Church steeples, bell towers, and religious symbols may exceed the maximum structure height but shall
not exceed 200% of the height of the primary structure.
c. Functional chimneys may exceed the maximum structure height but shall not extend more than ten (10)
feet above the roof's highest point.
d. Awnings shall be constructed to allow clear passage beneath the awning. Specifically, no fabric, structure
component, decorative element, or the like shall be less than eight (8) feet above the surface beneath the
awning.
e. Public utility structures and private water towers may exceed the maximum structure height, but shall not
exceed one hundred fifty (150) feet.
f. Roof-mounted antennas that are not located on the front roof plane may exceed the maximum structure
height, but shall not exceed five (5) feet over the maximum primary structure height or ten (10) feet
above the primary structure's height, whichever is less.
g. Pole-mounted antennas located in a rear yard may exceed the maximum structure height but shall not
exceed twenty (20) feet over the maximum primary structure height or thirty (30) feet above the primary
structure's height, whichever is less.
h. Roof-mounted mechanical equipment including solar and alternate energy devices and elevator bulkheads,
may exceed the maximum structure height but shall not extend any more than fifteen (15) feet
above the roof's highest point; provided that it is architecturally integrated into the building's features or
is generally screened from view by an architectural enclosure, parapet, or similar feature. Industrial uses
shall be exempt from the integration and screening requirement.
i. Flagpoles may exceed the maximum structure height, but shall not exceed forty (40) feet or the height of
the primary structure, whichever is greater.
j. Ham radio towers shall be exempt from the maximum structure height if the ham radio tower is
located on a lot owned by a ham radio operator that has a valid and active license from the Federal
Communication Commission (FCC).
k. Decorative cupolas may exceed the maximum structure height, but shall not extend more than ten (10)
feet above the highest point of the roof. Decorative cupolas shall not be accessible.
Height Standards (HT)
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 05
5-36
Home Business Standards (HB)
5.36 HB-01: Type 1 Home Business Standards
This Home Business Standards section applies to the following zoning districts:
M1
The intent of the Home Business Standards is to ensure the protection of the health, safety, and welfare of the
residents in the zoning jurisdiction of the City by allowing and regulating home-based businesses that have minimal
impact on the residential character of neighborhoods. The following standards apply:
A. Permits: An Improvement Location Permit for a type 1 home business shall not be required.
B. Permissible Home Businesses:
1. Permitted: A type 1 home business shall be limited to a home office, catalog business, telecommuting,
professional services, or internet business.
2. Discretion: Businesses not specifically listed above shall be interpreted by the Zoning Administrator as to
whether the business shall be permitted as a type 1 home business.
C. Personnel:
1. Residency: The primary operator shall reside in the dwelling unit where the home business is located.
2. Employees: Only the residents of the dwelling unit where the home business is located shall be employed in
the type 1 home business.
D. Operations:
1. Nuisance: The type 1 home business shall not generate offensive noise, vibration, smoke, odors, dust, heat,
glare, or electrical disturbances.
2. Traffic: The home business shall not generate vehicular traffic in greater volumes than would normally be
expected in the neighborhood in which it is located.
3. Customers: The home business shall not have patrons or customers visit the home business.
4. Hours: The hours of operation of the home business shall not interfere with the use and enjoyment of
adjacent properties.
E. Design:
1. Primary Structure:
a. The home business shall be conducted entirely within the primary structure.
b. The home business shall not exceed ten percent (10%) of the square footage of the primary structure.
c. There shall be no visible evidence of the home business, including but not limited to alterations to the
exterior of the residence which change the character of the residence, exterior displays, or the outdoor
storage of materials or equipment used in the home business.
2. Accessory Structure: No accessory structure shall be utilized for any part of the type 1 home business.
3. Parking and Loading: Off-street parking and loading facilities beyond what is common for a residential
structure shall not be permitted.
4. Mechanical Equipment: The home business shall not require the installation of mechanical equipment other
than that which is common in a residential structure.
5. Utility Service: The home business shall not require the installation of a sewer, water, or electrical utility
service that is beyond what is common in a residential structure. Exceeding typical phone, cable, or internet
services for residential property shall be permitted.
6. Signs: Signs shall not be permitted.
Article
Development Standards
05
5-37
5.37 HB-02: Type 2 Home Business Standards
This Home Business Standards section applies to the following zoning districts:
M1
The following standards apply:
A. Permits: An Improvement Location Permit for a type 2 home business shall be required.
B. Permissible Home Businesses:
1. Permitted: The home business shall be limited to domestic crafts, art and music teaching, tutoring, hair
cutting or styling, professional service office, clergy office, childcare home, or similar businesses as determined
by the Zoning Administrator.
2. Prohibited: The home business shall not include walk-in retail sales.
3. Discretion: Businesses not specifically listed above shall be interpreted by the Zoning Administrator as to
whether the business shall be permitted as a type 2 home business.
C. Personnel:
1. Residency: The primary operator shall reside in the dwelling unit where the home business is located.
2. Employees: One (1) employee who does not reside in the dwelling unit where the home business is located
may be employed at the home business.
D. Operations:
1. Nuisance: The home business shall not generate offensive noise, vibration, smoke, odors, dust, heat, glare, or
electrical disturbances.
2. Traffic: The home business shall not generate vehicular traffic in greater volumes than would normally be
expected in the neighborhood in which it is located.
3. Customers: The home business shall not generate visitors in the form of patrons or customers in greater
volumes than would normally be expected in the neighborhood.
4. Hours: The hours of operation of the home business shall be no earlier than 6:00 AM and no later than 9:00
PM for the employee that does not reside in the dwelling unit where the home business is located, and the
hours of operation of the home business shall not interfere with the use and enjoyment of adjacent residential
properties.
E. Design:
1. Primary Structure:
a. The home business shall be conducted entirely within the primary structure.
b. The home business shall not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the square footage of the primary
structure or 500 square feet, whichever is less.
c. There shall be no visible evidence of the home business, including but not limited to alterations to the
exterior of the dwelling unit which change the character of the dwelling unit, exterior displays, or the
outdoor storage of materials or equipment used in the home business.
2. Accessory Structure: No accessory structure shall be utilized for any part of the home business.
3. Parking and Loading:
a. Off-street parking and loading facilities beyond what is common for a residential structure shall not be
permitted.
b. The home business shall not receive more than five (5) deliveries per week. Deliveries shall be made
primarily between 8:00 AM and 5:00 PM by a vehicle not larger than a box-style truck.
4. Mechanical Equipment: The home business shall not require the installation of mechanical equipment other
than that which is common in a residential structure.
5. Utility Service: The home business shall not require the installation of a sewer, water, or electrical utility
service that is beyond what is common in a residential structure. Exceeding typical phone, cable, or internet
services for residential property shall be permitted.
6. Signs: One (1) wall sign, not to exceed four (4) square feet, shall be permitted. The sign shall be permanently
attached to the primary structures. Signs in the yard shall not be permitted.
Home Business Standards (HB)
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 05
5-38
5.38 HB-03: Type 3 Home Business Standards
This Home Business Standards section applies to the following zoning districts:
The following standards apply:
A. Permits: An Improvement Location for a type 3 home business shall be required.
B. Permissible Home Businesses:
1. Permitted: The home business shall be limited to assembly of products, automobile repair, welding,
contracting business, landscaping business, light manufacturing, or a similar use as determined by the Zoning
Administrator.
2. Prohibited: The home business shall not include any kind of walk-in retail sales.
3. Discretion: Businesses not specifically listed above shall be interpreted by the Zoning Administrator as to
whether the business shall permitted as a type 3 home business.
C. Personnel:
1. Residency: The primary operator of the home business shall reside in the dwelling on the same lot where the
home business is located.
2. Employees: Five (5) employees who do not reside in the dwelling where the home business is located may be
employed by the home business.
D. Operations:
1. Nuisance: The home business shall not generate offensive noise, vibration, smoke, odors, dust, heat, glare, or
electrical disturbances.
2. Hours: The hours of operation of the home business shall be no earlier than 6:00 AM and no later than 9:00
PM for anyone who does not reside on the premises and for any activity that involves the accessory structure
where the home business is primarily located. There are no limits on the hours of operation of the office
component of the home business.
E. Design:
1. Primary Structure:
a. The office component of the home business may be operated in the primary structure (the home).
b. The home business shall not exceed five percent (5%) of the square footage of the primary structure.
c. There shall be no evidence of the home business from alterations to the exterior of the residence.
However, the character of the property may show minimal evidence of its business use, including exterior
storage of materials, vehicles, or equipment used in the home business.
2. Accessory Structure:
a. The home business shall be primarily conducted within an accessory structure.
b. The home business may consume one hundred percent (100%) of the square footage of the accessory
structure.
3. Parking and Loading:
a. Off-street parking and loading facilities beyond what is common for a residential structure or agricultural
use shall not be permitted.
b. There shall be no more than seven (7) operable vehicles parked on the lot at any time.
4. Exterior Storage:
a. Vehicles, trailers, and other equipment used in the home business shall be stored and/or parked in an
organized manner that is in an inconspicuous location.
b. All exterior storage shall be located behind the footprint of the primary structure and behind or beside the
accessory structure that is the primary location of the home business.
c. All exterior storage shall be screened so it is nearly invisible from any right-of-way.
5. Mechanical Equipment: The home business shall not require the installation of industrial-grade mechanical
equipment. Commercial-grade mechanical equipment shall be permitted.
6. Utility Service: The home business shall not require the installation of a sewer or water utility service beyond
what is common in a residential structure. Commercial-grade electrical services and exceeding typical phone,
cable, or internet services for residential property shall be permitted.
7. Signs: One wall sign shall be permitted on the accessory structure but shall not exceed ten (10) square feet in
area, regardless of its distance from the street.
Home Business Standards (HB)
Article
Development Standards
05
5-39
Keeping of Animal Standards (KA)
5.39 KA-01 Agricultural Keeping of Animals Standards
This Keeping of Animals Standards section applies to the following zoning districts:
The intent of the Keeping of Animals Standards is to ensure the protection of the health, safety, and welfare of the
residents by regulating the number and type of animals permitted on a lot. The following standards apply:
A. Cross Reference: See Chapter 90: Animals, in the Auburn Code of Ordinances.
B. Exotic Animals: One (1) exotic animal shall be permitted per twenty-five (25) acres with the necessary State and/
or federal permits.
C. Pastured Farm Animals: Farm Animals are permitted as follows:
1. Minimum Lot Area: Six (6) acres.
2. Minimum Pasturage Area: Two (2) acres.
3. Maximum Animal Units: One (1) animal unit per fenced acre.
4. Determination of Animal Units: See table below.
Animal Type Animals Per Animal Unit
Cattle, Buffalo, and similar 2
Horse, Mule, Donkey, Camel, and similar 1
Horse (34 inches or less at withers) 5
Swine, Ostrich, Emu, and similar 5
Goat, Sheep, Llama, Alpaca, and similar 5
Mink and other similar fur-bearing animals 25
D. Fowl: Fowl are permitted as follows:
1. Minimum Lot Area: Two (2) acres.
2. Minimum Pasturage Area: One-half (1/2) acre.
3. Maximum Animal Units: Ten (10) chicken, turkey, pheasant, and similar fowl per fenced half acre.
5.40 KA-02 Estate Residential Keeping of Farm Animals Standards
This Keeping of Animals Standards section applies to the following zoning district:
The intent of the Keeping of Animals Standards is to ensure the protection of the health, safety, and welfare of the
residents by regulating the number and type of animals permitted on a lot. The following standards apply:
A. Cross Reference: See Chapter 90: Animals, in the Auburn Code of Ordinances.
B. Pastured Farm Animals: Farm Animals are permitted as follows:
1. Minimum Lot Area: Four (4) acres.
2. Minimum Pasturage Area: Two (2) acres.
3. Maximum Animal Units: One (1) animal unit per two (2) acres that are fenced.
4. Determination of Animal Units: See table below.
Animal Type Animals Per Animal Unit
Cattle, Buffalo, and similar 2
Horse, Mule, Donkey, Camel, and similar 1
Horse (34 inches or less at withers) 5
Swine, Ostrich, Emu, and similar 5
Goat, Sheep, Llama, Alpaca, and similar 5
Mink and other similar fur-bearing animals 25
C. Fowl: Fowl are permitted as follows:
1. Minimum Lot Area: Two (2) acres.
2. Minimum Pasturage Area: One-half (1/2) acre.
3. Maximum Animal Units: Ten (10) chicken, turkey, pheasant, and similar fowl per fenced half acre.
4. Prohibited: Roosters shall not be permitted.
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 05
5-40
Landscaping Standards (LA)
5.41 LA-01: General Landscaping Standards
This Landscaping Standards section applies to the following zoning districts:
M1
The intent of Landscaping Standards is to maintain community character, enhance the visual quality of developments,
screen land uses, and better integrate the built and natural environment. The following standards apply:
A. Cross Reference:
1. Vision Clearance Standards: All landscape materials shall be located to avoid interference with visibility per
the Vision Clearance Standards (VC).
B. Project Applicability: Landscape materials consistent with the requirements of this Unified Development
Ordinance shall be required when one (1) of the following conditions is met:
1. New Primary Structure: An Improvement Location Permit for a new primary structure is obtained.
2. Addition to Primary Structure: An Improvement Location Permit for an addition to the primary structure that
adds fifty percent (50%) or more square footage is obtained.
C. Placement:
1. Easements: Landscape materials shall not be planted in rights-of-way or easements without permission from
the City and/or the easement holder unless otherwise required by this Unified Development Ordinance. A tree
canopy, however, may project over a right-of-way or any type of easement.
2. Infrastructure Interference:
a. Landscape materials shall be located to avoid interference with overhead and underground utilities.
b. Landscape materials shall maintain five (5) feet of horizontal clearance from sewer and water lines.
c. Landscape materials shall not project into sidewalks, pedestrian paths, and the like below a height of
seven (7) feet.
d. Landscape materials shall not project over street curbs or pavement below a height of eight (8) feet.
D. Prohibited: Any plant species listed on the invasive species list for Indiana, Michigan, and Ohio shall be
prohibited.
1. Indiana: The Indiana Invasive Species Council maintains the official Invasive Plant List.
2. Michigan: Michigan's Invasive Species Program maintains the official Invasive Species Plant List.
3. Ohio: The Ohio Invasive Plant Council maintains the official Invasive Plants Banned in Ohio List.
5.42 LA-02: Parking Lot Planting Standards
This Landscaping Standards section applies to the following zoning districts:
The intent of this section is to require a reasonable amount of plant materials around and within parking lots to reduce
glare, reduce heat buildup, enhance visual quality of developments, screen and mitigate potential conflicts between
land uses, reduce noise pollution, reduce wind, minimize storm runoff, and improve air quality. The following
standards apply:
A. Screening: Parking lots shall be screened from adjacent non-related structures and streets with plantings, earth
berms, walls or changes in grade. A parking lot with a capacity of ten (10) or more vehicles shall have a vertical
screen consisting of structural or plant materials at least four (4) feet in height.
B. Minimum Landscaping: A minimum of ten percent (10%) of a parking area with a capacity of ten (10) or more
vehicles shall be landscaped.
Article
Development Standards
05
5-41
5.43 LT-01: General Lighting Standards
This Lighting Standards section applies to the following zoning districts:
M1
The intent of the Lighting Standards is to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the residents within the zoning
jurisdiction of the City by permitting site and facade lighting that has minimal impact on adjacent property. The
following standards apply:
A. Cross Reference:
1. Parking Lot Lighting: See Parking Standards (PK) for parking lot lighting requirements.
2. Illumination of Signs: See Sign Standards (SI) for standards regarding the illumination of signs.
B. Permits: A Building Permit shall be required for the installation of lighting, and lighting shall be in compliance
with the Indiana Electrical Code.
C. Measurement Rules: Measurements of light readings shall be taken at any point along the property line of the
subject property with a light meter facing the center of the property from a height between four (4) and eight (8)
feet above the ground.
D. Types: All lighting fixtures and poles within a single development shall be consistent in style, color, size, height,
and design.
1. Permitted:
a. Site Lighting: Pole, wall, or ground mounted fixtures shall be full-cutoff fixtures.
b. Facade Highlighting: Modest intensity up-lighting of structure facades and landscaping from groundmounted
fixtures shall be permitted.
2. Prohibited: Non-cutoff fixtures, semi-cutoff fixtures, and cutoff fixtures shall not be permitted.
3. Exemptions: Sport complexes may light fields and courts. All such lighting shall not exceed 100 feet in
height, and shall be shut-off by 10:00 PM Sunday through Thursday and 11:00 PM Friday through Saturday.
E. Glare: Light fixtures shall be fully shielded to prevent direct lighting on streets, alleys, and adjacent properties.
Any structural part of the light fixture providing this shielding shall be permanently affixed.
F. Light Trespass: The maximum allowable light at a property line shall be two (2) lux or two-tenths (.2) footcandles,
with the following exceptions:
1. Commercial Zoning Districts: When the subject property is located within a commercial zoning district
and the adjacent property is also located within a commercial zoning district or an industrial zoning district,
then the allowable light at the property line shall be twenty (20) lux or two (2) footcandles, but only along
the sides of the property that are adjacent to the specified zoning districts. However, no light shall cross an
adjacent commercial or industrial property and reach a property line with a non-commercial or non-industrial
district with greater than five (5) lux.
2. Industrial Zoning Districts: When the subject property is located within an industrial zoning district and the
adjacent property is also located within an industrial zoning district, then the allowable light at the property
line shall be thirty (30) lux or three (3) footcandles, but only along the sides of the property that are adjacent
to the specified zoning district.
Lighting Standards (LT)
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 05
5-42
5.44 LD-01: General Loading Standards
This Loading Standards section applies to the following zoning districts:
The intent of Loading Standards is to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the zoning jurisdiction
of the City by requiring loading docks to meet certain standards. The following standards apply:
A. Project Applicability: The following loading standards only apply when a project involves a loading dock.
B. Design:
1. Location:
a. Loading docks shall be located so that they do not face a public street. If such a location is not possible,
a loading dock visible from a public street shall be screened by solid structure walls and/or landscape
buffers.
b. Loading docks shall have adequate area for trucks to maneuver in and out of the facility. Trucks shall not
block rights-of-way, streets, alleys, aisles, or other internal circulation when maneuvering into or docked
at loading docks.
2. Surface Materials: Loading docks shall be paved with asphalt or concrete.
3. Drainage: Loading docks shall be constructed to allow proper drainage away from the structure.
Loading Standards (LD)
Article
Development Standards
05
5-43
5.45 LO-01: General Lot Standards
This Lot Standards section applies to the following zoning districts:
M1
The intent of the Lot Standards is to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the zoning jurisdiction of
the City by establishing area, width, and frontage requirements for lots. The following standards apply:
A. Applicability: If a lot standard does not appear on the two-page layout for a zoning district, then the standard
does not apply to that particular zoning district.
1. Minimum Dwelling Site Area: The minimum dwelling site area shall be per each two-page layout in Article
02: Zoning Districts.
2. Minimum Dwelling Site Width: The minimum dwelling site width shall be per each two-page layout in
Article 02: Zoning Districts.
3. Minimum Lot Area: The minimum lot area shall be per each two-page layout in Article 02: Zoning Districts.
4. Maximum Lot Area: The maximum lot area shall be per each two-page layout in Article 02: Zoning Districts.
5. Minimum Lot Width: The minimum lot width shall be per each two-page layout in Article 02: Zoning
Districts.
B. Minimum Lot Frontage: The minimum lot frontage shall be at least sixty percent (60%) of the Minimum Lot
Width included on each two-page layout in Article 02: Zoning Districts with the following exception:
1. Cul-de-sac Lots: The minimum lot frontage for lots established along a cul-de-sac bulb shall be at least fifty
percent (50%) of the Minimum Lot Width for the applicable district. However, under no circumstances shall
the lot frontage be less than twenty-five (25) feet in residential districts or thirty-five (35) feet in all other
districts.
Lot Standards (LO)
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 05
5-44
5.46 MH-01: Manufactured Housing and Lease-lot Development Standards
This Manufactured Housing Standards section applies to the following district:
The intent of Manufactured Housing Standards is to promote quality and safe lease-lot manufactured home and
mobile home developments. The following standards apply:
A. Exemption from Permits: An Improvement Location Permit shall not be required for each manufactured home
dwelling and each mobile home dwelling prior to installation on a dwelling site, and for all other primary or
accessory structures on the lot or dwelling sites, including fences and sheds.
B. Design:
1. Dwelling Sites
a. Each dwelling site within a lease-lot development shall have a separate concrete pad for each mobile
home and a separate foundation for each manufactured home or other habitable structure.
b. Each dwelling site within a lease-lot development shall have separate utility connections.
c. Each dwelling site within a lease-lot development with four (4) or more dwelling sites shall have direct
access onto a paved private street.
d. No more than one (1) dwelling shall be placed on a dwelling site.
2. Dwelling Units
a. Each dwelling within a lease-lot development shall be tied down and have a permanent perimeter
enclosure or have a permanent foundation.
b. Each dwelling within a lease-lot development with four (4) or more dwelling sites shall be considered a
separate residence for all purposes such as taxing, assessing of improvements, garbage collection, and
public utilities.
Manufactured Housing Standards (MH)
Article
Development Standards
05
5-45
5.47 OD-01: General Outdoor Dining Standards
This Outdoor Dining Standards section applies to the following districts:
The intent of Outdoor Dining Standards is to permit outdoor dining in appropriate areas while maintaining pedestrian
accessibility and circulation, ensuring the safety of diners and restaurant servers, and preserving or enhancing the
character of the area. The following standards apply:
A. Permits: An Improvement Location Permit shall be required prior to establishing an outdoor dining area. A new
permit shall not be required each year unless changes are proposed in the outdoor dining area.
B. Operations: Generally, outdoor dining is permitted from March 31 through December 1, and from 6:00 AM until
11:00 PM Sunday through Thursday and 6:00 AM until 12:00 midnight Friday through Saturday.
C. Design:
1. Circulation and Accessibility:
a. All outdoor dining areas shall maintain a minimum four (4) foot wide pedestrian circulation area along a
public sidewalk. The pedestrian circulation area shall be free of all obstacles including but not limited to
tree wells, fire hydrants, street light poles, and newspaper boxes. This pedestrian circulation area shall be
maintained at all times.
b. Outdoor dining areas shall not interfere with handicap accessibility, curbs, ramps, or driveways.
c. When pedestrian barriers are necessary for safety, as determined by the Zoning Administrator, they shall
meet all of the following criteria:
i. Pedestrian barriers shall be sturdy, stable, and have sufficient weight so they cannot be blown over
by wind.
ii. Pedestrian barriers shall not be permanently attached or bolted to the sidewalk within the right-ofway,
unless granted permission by the Board of Public Works and Safety.
iii. Pedestrian barriers shall be at least thirty (30) inches in height to prevent tripping hazards.
iv. Pedestrian barriers that are not permanently installed shall be removed and stored during the off
season, but not on the exterior of the building.
d. Pedestrian barriers shall be constructed of wood, composite wood, stone, masonry, wrought iron, decorative
metal, or a combination of these materials.
e. No element of the outdoor dining area shall interfere with access to any building entrance.
2. General:
a. A sufficient number of trash containers shall be provided outdoors and be readily accessible to outdoor
diners except where public trash cans are available. Full service establishments with outdoor dining
areas shall not be required to provide outdoor trash containers.
b. There shall be no storage of food trays; carts; receptacles for dirty dishes or trays; carts for utensils; or
cooking appliances in any portion of the outdoor dining area.
c. There shall be no service stations in any portion of the outdoor dining area.
3. Furniture:
a. To maintain a high quality environment, quality materials shall be used for outdoor dining areas.
Outdoor dining furniture and outdoor trash containers shall be iron, steel, aluminum, wood, or resin.
Finishes on the furniture and trash containers shall be kept relatively free of fading, chips, and rust.
b. Umbrellas are permitted, but shall be flame retardant and color-fast fabric.
c. Outdoor dining furniture, trash containers, and umbrellas shall not incorporate signs.
d. Outdoor dining furniture, trash containers, and umbrellas shall be stored during the off-season, but not on
the exterior of the building.
Outdoor Dining Standards (OD)
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 05
5-46
5.48 OS-01: General Outdoor Storage Standards
This Outdoor Storage Standards section applies to the following zoning districts:
M1
The intent of Outdoor Storage Standards is to protect the health, safety, and welfare and ensuring neighborliness and
aesthetic quality for the residents of the zoning jurisdiction of the City. The following standards apply:
A. Cross Reference:
1. Recreational Vehicle Standards: See Recreational Vehicle Standards (RV) for specific regulations for
Recreational Vehicles.
2. Junk and Trash: See Chapter 92: Littering for specific regulations for litter, junk, and trash on private
property.
B. Prohibited: The outdoor storage of equipment, product, supplies, materials, machinery, building materials, waste
or scrap, pallets, junk, and similar materials shall not be permitted.
C. Vehicles: Vehicles shall not encroach into a right-of-way or block or impede an access easement, sidewalk, or
driving aisle.
5.49 OS-02: Construction Trades Outdoor Storage Yard Standards
This Outdoor Storage Standards section applies to the following zoning districts:
The following standards apply:
A. Storage Yard: Storage yards for construction trades shall be maintained in an orderly condition, screened with an
opaque fence, and meet the setbacks for accessory structures.
5.50 OS-03: Industrial and High Impact Outdoor Storage Standards
This Outdoor Storage Standards section applies to the following zoning districts:
The following standards apply:
A. Industrial Storage: Outdoor storage of vehicles, equipment, products, supplies, materials, waste or scrap, pallets,
and the like shall only be permitted within an enclosed storage building. In cases where the storage building is
adjacent to another industrial building on the same property, one side of the storage building may be open to the
other industrial building if, and only if, the open side faces the other industrial building and the open side is not
visible from any public right-of-way.
Outdoor Storage Standards (OS)
Article
Development Standards
05
5-47
Parking Standards (PK)
5.51 PK-01: General Parking Standards
This Parking Standards section applies to the following zoning districts:
M1
The intent of Parking Standards is to require minimal parking standards in order to assure public health, safety and
welfare; minimize risks to the natural environment; and minimize conflict and promote vehicular and pedestrian safety
along streets by minimizing on-street parking. The following standards apply:
A. Project Applicability: Parking consistent with the requirements of this Unified Development Ordinance shall be
required when any of the following conditions are met.
1. New Primary Structure: An Improvement Location Permit for a new primary structure is obtained.
2. Expansion-Small Parking Lot: An Improvement Location Permit for an existing parking lot with twenty (20)
spaces or less is obtained, and the expansion adds fifty percent (50%) or more parking to the pre-existing
parking lot.
3. Expansion-Large Parking Lot: An Improvement Location Permit for an existing parking lot with twenty (21)
spaces or more is obtained, and the expansion adds ten percent (10%) or more parking to the pre-existing
parking lot.
4. Second Expansion: A legally nonconforming parking area has already been expanded one (1) time, up to
ten percent (10%) of its existing size, with a valid Improvement Location Permit, and a second expansion is
proposed for the same legal nonconforming parking area.
B. Cross Reference:
1. Setback Standards: Parking lots shall comply with the setbacks in the Setback Standards (SB).
2. Driveways: For standards regarding driveways or access to parking lots, see Driveway Standards (DW).
3. Temporary Sales in Parking Lots: For standards regarding temporary structures and temporary uses located
in existing parking lots or parking areas, see Temporary Use and Structure Standards (TU).
C. Permits: An Improvement Location Permit shall be required for new parking lots or the expansion of an existing
parking lot.
D. Design:
1. Materials: All off-street parking shall utilize a paved surface of concrete, asphalt, brick pavers, porous
concrete, or the like. Gravel, stone, rock, dirt, sand, or grass shall not be permitted as parking surfaces except
for areas dedicated to long-term land conservation.
2. Size of Spaces: Each off-street parking space shall be a minimum of nine (9) feet wide and eighteen (18) feet
in length.
3. Right-of-way: Off-street parking spaces shall not be fully or partially in a right-of-way or access easement.
4. Bike Racks: Parking lot and site design is encouraged to incorporate bike racks to accommodate bike parking.
E. Prohibited: Parking of motor vehicles shall not be permitted on yards, lawns, or similar pervious-surfaced areas
on a lot, except as may be permitted in Recreational Vehicle Standards (RV).
5.52 PK-02: Residential Parking Standards
This Parking Standards section applies to the following zoning districts:
M1
The following standards apply:
A. Quantity: A minimum of three (3) off-street parking spaces shall be required per dwelling unit.
B. Location:
1. Same Lot: The required parking spaces shall be located on the same lot as the dwelling unit.
2. Garages: The required parking spaces may include spaces within garages and/or carports.
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 05
5-48
5.53 PK-03: Traditional Residential Parking Standards
This Parking Standards section applies to the following zoning districts:
The following standards apply:
A. Quantity: A minimum of two (2) off-street parking spaces shall be required per dwelling unit.
B. Location:
1. Same Lot: The required parking spaces shall be located on the same lot as the dwelling unit.
2. Garages: The required parking spaces may include spaces within garages and/or carports.
5.54 PK-04: Multiple-family Residential Parking Standards
This Parking Standards section applies to the following zoning districts:
The following standards apply:
A. Quantity:
1. Tenants: A minimum of two (2) parking spaces shall be required per dwelling unit.
2. Visitors: One (1) parking space per every two (2) dwelling units shall be required for visitors.
B. Location:
1. Tenants: Tenant parking spaces shall be located on the same site as the dwelling unit. Tenant parking spaces
may include spaces within garages and/or carports.
2. Visitors: Visitor parking spaces shall be located in a common parking area or as on-street parking along
internal private streets, but shall be proportionately assigned to an area within 200 feet of each multiplefamily
structure.
5.55 PK-05: Manufactured Home Residential Parking Standards
This Parking Standards section applies to the following zoning districts:
The following standards apply:
A. Quantity:
1. Dwelling Site: A minimum of two (2) parking spaces shall be required per dwelling site.
2. Visitors: One (1) parking space per every three (3) dwelling sites shall be required for visitors.
B. Location:
1. Dwelling Site: The required dwelling site parking spaces shall be located on the dwelling site. The required
dwelling site parking spaces may include spaces within garages and/or carports.
2. Visitors: Visitor parking spaces shall be located in a common parking area or as on-street parking along
internal private streets, but shall be proportionately dispersed throughout the development.
5.56 PK-06: Downtown Commercial Parking Standards
This Parking Standards section applies to the following zoning districts:
The following standards apply:
A. Quantity: Off-street parking shall not be required for dwelling units.
B. Location: New off-street parking spaces shall be discouraged between the building facade with the primary
entrance and right-of-way in downtown.
C. Design: Bike racks are encouraged.
Parking Standards (PK)
Article
Development Standards
05
5-49
5.57 PK-07: Nonresidential Parking Standards
This Parking Standards section applies to the following zoning districts:
The following standards apply:
A. Quantity:
1. Minimum Number:
a. Off-street parking shall be required for all uses as shown in Table PK-A: Minimum Number Of Parking
Spaces Per Use. The land use is listed in the left column. The minimum number of parking spaces for
employees or tenants is the in middle column, and the minimum number of parking spaces for visitors,
clients, and customers is in the right column. The minimum number of parking spaces shall be the sum
of all three (3) columns. The numbers do not guarantee the quantity needed per use, only minimums are
expressed.
b. A development that combines two (2) or more uses or group of adjacent developments may provide a
shared parking area if the shared lot provides a minimum of seventy-five percent (75%) of the required
spaces for each use and the Zoning Administrator approves the shared parking area.
c. If a use is not clearly noted in Table PK-A, the Zoning Administrator shall determine a use with similar
employment and customer characteristics, therefore determining the minimum number of parking spaces
required.
2. Bicycle Parking: Developments are encouraged to provide bicycle parking areas when appropriate. If
provided, bicycle parking areas shall be within sixty (60) feet of the main entryway into the primary structure
or be located inside the primary structure. Additionally, a secured bike rack shall be installed to provide the
opportunity for secure parking of bicycles.
3. Stacking Lanes: The following uses shall provide minimum stacking lane space as indicated below to
accommodate drop-off and pick-up.
a. ATM: 3 per ATM lane.
b. Banks: 3 per drive-up window lane.
c. Car wash, automatic: 5.
d. Day Care Center, Adult: 3.
e. Day Care Center, Child: 6.
f. Fast food restaurant: 5.
g. Pick-up windows: 5.
h. School: 10.
Parking Standards (PK)
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 05
5-50
B. Design: Parking lots and parking areas shall meet the following criteria:
1. Aisle Widths: Minimum parking aisle widths shall be as follows:
a. Sixty-one degree (61º) to ninety degree (90º) angle spaces shall have a minimum eighteen (18) feet
wide parking aisle for one-way traffic or minimum twenty-four (24) feet wide parking aisle for one- or
two-way traffic.
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Min. 9 Feet
Min. 18 Feet
Min. 18 Feet
61-90 Degree Parking - One Way
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Min. 9 Feet
Min. 18 Feet
Min. 24 Feet
61-90 Degree Parking - Two Way
b. Forty-six degree (46º) to sixty degree (60º) angle spaces shall have a minimum of fifteen (15) feet wide
parking aisle for one-way traffic.
c. Up to forty-five degree (45º) angle spaces shall have a minimum twelve (12) feet wide parking aisle for
one-way traffic.
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Min. 9 Feet
Min. 18 Feet
Min. 15 Feet Max. 22.25 Feet
46-60 Degree Parking - One Way
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Min. 8.5 Feet
Min. 18 Feet
Min. 12 Feet Max. 19.5 Feet
1-45 Degree Parking - One Way
2. Aisle Exits: All parking aisles shall have an outlet or turn around. Dead-end parking aisles shall not be
permitted.
3. Driving Lanes: Driving lanes in parking lots that provide access to parking aisles shall be defined by striping,
curbs, pavement markings, arrows, or parking spaces.
4. Maneuvering: Parking areas shall be designed to prevent vehicles from maneuvering in the right-of-way.
5. Drainage: Parking areas shall be constructed to prevent ninety-five percent (95%) of a parking lots area from
ponding.
Parking Standards (PK)
Article
Development Standards
05
5-51
6. Lighting:
a. Parking lots shall be illuminated. Parking lot light fixtures and poles shall be consistent in color, size,
height, and design.
b. Parking lot lights shall not exceed twenty-five (25) feet in height, measured from the bottom of the fixture
to the ground.
c. Parking lot lights shall meet all standards in Lighting Standards (LT).
7. Connectivity:
a. Connectivity to adjacent parking lots shall be required in at least one (1) location. This may be accomplished
through an aisle connector, frontage street, access street, or stub to an adjacent lot zoned for
commercial, institutional, or industrial use.
b. Cross-access Easements:
i. Where parking lots connect or are laid out to be connected, a cross-access easement shall be
established in accordance with the requirements of Easement Standards (EA).
ii. Cross-access easements shall not be less than ten (10) feet in width per lane nor exceed twelve (12)
feet in width per lane.
8. Cart Corrals: Cart corrals shall be required for all retail businesses with more than twenty-thousand (20,000)
square feet of retail space that provide shopping carts or the like to customers. Cart corrals shall be made
of permanent materials and be anchored to the parking lot surface to prevent them from moving in wind.
Cart corrals shall not exceed ten (10) feet in width and thirty-six (36) feet in length. Cart corrals shall be
maintained in good condition, shall be aligned with parking spaces, shall not block sidewalks, and shall not
have commercial signs affixed to them.
Parking Standards (PK)
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 05
5-52
Land Use Parking Types
Employee and Tenant Parking Visitor, Client, and Customer Parking
Commercial and Service Uses
amusement park 1 space per employee on the largest shift 25 spaces per 100 persons of maximum occupancy
automobile oriented business See Specific Uses Below See Specific Uses Below
automobile accessory installation 1 space per employee on the largest shift 2 spaces per bay
automobile body shop 1 space per employee on the largest shift 2 spaces per bay
automobile gas station 1 space per employee on the largest shift 1 space per 400 sq. ft. of floor area
automobile oil change facility 1 space per employee on the largest shift 2 spaces per bay
automobile parts sales 1 space per employee on the largest shift 1 space per 300 sq. ft. of floor area
automobile rental 2 spaces per employee on the largest shift -
automobile repair or service station 1 space per employee on the largest shift 2 spaces per bay
automobile wash 1 space per employee on the largest shift -
banquet hall - 1 space per 4 persons of maximum occupancy
bar or tavern - 1 space per 3 seats
barber or beauty shop - 3 spaces per chair
billiard or arcade room - 1 space per 300 sq. ft. of floor area
bowling alley - 3 spaces per lane
camp ground - 1.5 spaces per camp site
club or lodge - 1 space per 4 persons of maximum occupancy
coffee shop - 1 space per 3 seats
coin laundry - 1 space per 300 sq. ft. floor area
commercial training facility or school - 1 space per student of maximum occupancy
country club - 1 space per 4 persons of maximum occupancy
dance or night club - 1 space per 4 persons of maximum occupancy
day care, adult 1 space per employee on the largest shift 1 space per 8 persons of licensed capacity
day care, child 1 space per employee on the largest shift 1 space per 8 persons of licensed capacity
delicatessen - 1 space per 3 seats
driving range - 2 spaces per 3 tee boxes
dry cleaner 3 spaces plus 1 space per 300 sq. ft. of floor area accessible to the public
fitness center or health club - 1 space per 400 sq. ft. of floor area
funeral home or mortuary - 1 space per 4 seats
golf course - 20 spaces per 9 holes
health spa or day spa - 3 spaces per spa suite
hotel or motel 1 space per employee on the largest shift 1 space per unit
ice cream shop - 1 space per 3 seats
kennel - 1 space per 5 pet accommodation spaces
marina - 1 space per 300 sq. ft. of floor area
miniature golf - 20 spaces per 18 hole course
movie theater - 1 space per 4 seats
office, construction trade 1 space per employee on the largest shift -
office, design services - 1 space per 300 sq. ft. of floor area
office, general services - 1 space per 300 sq. ft. of floor area
office, medical - 3 spaces per treatment room
paintball facility - 10 spaces per court or field
photographic studio - 3 spaces per studio
race track - 1 space per 4 seats
Parking Standards (PK)
5.58 Table PK-A: Minimum Number Of Parking Spaces Per Use
Article
Development Standards
05
5-53
Parking Standards (PK)
Land Use Parking Types
Employee and Tenant Parking Visitor, Client, and Customer Parking
Commercial and Service Uses
recreation center or play center - 1 space per 400 sq. ft. of floor area
restaurant 1 space per employee on the largest shift 1 space per 300 sq. ft. of floor area
shooting range - 2 spaces per target
skating rink - 1 space per 400 sq. ft. of floor area
sports complex - 20 spaces per field of court
sports complex (indoor) - 20 spaces per field of court
sports field - 20 spaces per field or court
stable, commercial - 2 spaces per stable
studio arts - 1 space per 300 sq. ft. of floor area
swimming pool - 1 space per 75 sq. ft. of water surface
tailor or pressing shop - 1 space per 300 sq. ft. of floor area
tanning salon - 1.5 spaces per bed
tattoo or piercing parlor - 1.5 spaces per chair
type 1 retail, very low intensity - 1 space per 400 sq. ft. of floor area
type 2 retail, low intensity - 1 space per 400 sq. ft. of floor area
type 3 retail, medium intensity - 1 space per 300 sq. ft. of floor area
type 4 retail, high intensity - 1 space per 300 sq. ft. of floor area
type 5 retail, very high intensity - 1 space per 300 sq. ft. of floor area
type 6 retail, special handling See Specific Use Below See Specific Use Below
fireworks sales - 1 space per 300 sq. ft. of floor area
gun sales - 1 space per 300 sq. ft. of floor area
heavy equipment rental 2 spaces per employee on the largest shift -
hunting store - 1 space per 300 sq. ft. of floor area
manufactured home sales 1 space per employee on the largest shift 1 space per 500 sq. ft. of showroom space
recreational vehicle or watercraft sales 1 space per employee on the largest shift 1 space per 500 sq. ft. of showroom space
semi tractor-trailer sales 1 space per employee on the largest shift 1 space per 500 sq. ft. of showroom space
watercraft rental 1 space per employee on the largest shift 1 spaces per every rentable watercraft
winery 1 space per employee on the largest shift 1 space per 300 sq. ft. of floor area accessible to the public
yacht club - 1 space per 4 persons of maximum occupancy
Table PK-A: Minimum Number Of Parking Spaces Per Use (continued)
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 05
5-54
Parking Standards (PK)
Table PK-A: Minimum Number Of Parking Spaces Per Use (continued)
Land Use Parking Types
Employee and Tenant Parking Visitor, Client, and Customer Parking
Industrial Uses
assembly 1 space per employee on the largest shift 1 visitor space per 10 employees
construction demolition landfill 1 space per employee on the largest shift 1 visitor space per 10 employees
distribution facility 1.5 spaces per employee on the largest shift 1 visitor space per 10 employees
electrical generation plant 1 space per employee on the largest shift 1 visitor space per 10 employees
flex-space 1.5 spaces per employee on the largest shift 1 visitor space per 10 employees
food production or processing 1.5 spaces per employee on the largest shift 1 visitor space per 10 employees
gravel or sand mining 1 space per employee on the largest shift 1 visitor space per 10 employees
heavy equipment repair 1 space per employee on the largest shift 1 visitor space per 5 employees
heavy manufacturing 1.5 spaces per employee on the largest shift 1 visitor space per 10 employees
incinerator 1 space per employee on the largest shift 1 visitor space per 10 employees
junk yard 1 space per employee on the largest shift 1 visitor space per 10 employees
light manufacturing 1.5 spaces per employee on the largest shift 1 visitor space per 10 employees
liquid fertilizer storage or distribution 1 space per employee on the largest shift 1 visitor space per 10 employees
outdoor storage 1 space per employee on the largest shift 1 visitor space per 10 employees
radio or TV station 1 space per employee on the largest shift 1 visitor space per 5 employees
recycling processing 1 space per employee on the largest shift 1 visitor space per 10 employees
rendering plant 1 space per employee on the largest shift 1 visitor space per 10 employees
research center 1 space per employee on the largest shift 1 visitor space per 5 employees
sanitary landfill or refuse dump 1 space per employee on the largest shift 1 visitor space per 10 employees
scrap metal yard 1 space per employee on the largest shift 1 visitor space per 10 employees
sewage treatment plant 1 space per employee on the largest shift 1 visitor space per 10 employees
sign painting or fabrication 1 space per employee on the largest shift 1 visitor space per 5 employees
storage tank facility 1 space per employee on the largest shift 1 visitor space per 10 employees
telecommunication facility 2 spaces per facility
testing lab 1 space per employee on the largest shift 1 visitor space per 5 employees
tool and dye shop 1 space per employee on the largest shift 1 visitor space per 10 employees
transfer station 1 space per employee on the largest shift 1 visitor space per 10 employees
utility facility, above ground
electrical generator 1 space per facility
pipeline pumping station 1 space per facility
public well 1 space per facility
telephone exchange 1 space per facility
utility substation 1 space per facility
warehouse 1.5 spaces per employee on the largest shift 1 visitor space per 10 employees
warehouse storage facility 1 space per employee on the largest shift 1 visitor space per 10 employees
water treatment plant 1 space per employee on the largest shift 1 visitor space per 10 employees
welding 1 space per employee on the largest shift 1 visitor space per 5 employees
Article
Development Standards
05
5-55
Parking Standards (PK)
Land Use Parking Types
Employee and Tenant Parking Visitor, Client, and Customer Parking
Institutional Uses
bus station - 8 spaces per bus bay
cemetery - -
child care institution - 1 visitor space per 10 children
church, temple, or mosque - 1 space per 4 seats
community center - 1 space per 400 sq.ft. of floor area
crematory 1 space per employee on the largest shift 5 visitor spaces
government office - 1 space per 400 sq. ft. of floor area
government operation (non-office) 1 space per employee on the largest shift -
hospital 1 spaces per employee on the largest shift- 1 space per bed
jail 1 space per employee on the largest shift 1 space per 8 cells
juvenile detention facility 1 space per employee on the largest shift 1 space per 8 cells
library, public - 1 space per 400 sq.ft. of floor area
municipal airport or heliport 1 space per employee on the largest shift 4 spaces per hanger
museum - 1 space per 400 sq.ft. of floor area
nature center - 1 space per 3 persons at maximum occupancy
park - 1 space per acre; 20 spaces per sport court or field;
police, fire or rescue station 1 space per employee -
pool, public - 1 space per 75 sq. ft. of water surface
post office 1 space per employee on the largest shift 1 space per 150 sq. ft. accessible to the public
prison 1 space per employee on the largest shift 1 visitor space per 15 cells
recycling collection point 1 space per employee on the largest shift -
school (P-12) 1 space per teacher, staff, administrator 3 spaces per elementary or junior high classroom;
1 space per 10 high school student enrollment capacity; and
1 space per 4 seats in the largest assembly space in the school (based on
maximum occupancy)
skate park - 1 space per 500 sq. ft. of skating surface
trade or business school 1 space per teacher, staff, administrator 1 space per 5 students of maximum occupancy
university or college - 1 space per 5 students
Table PK-A: Minimum Number Of Parking Spaces Per Use (continued)
Land Use Parking Types
Employee and Tenant Parking Visitor, Client, and Customer Parking
Residential Uses
assisted living facility 1 space per employee on the largest shift 1 space per 3 beds
boarding house 1 space per room 1 space per 10 rooms
dwelling, upper floors in DC or C1 - -
nursing home 1 space per employee on the largest shift 1 space per 3 beds
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 05
5-56
5.59 PF-01: General Performance Standards
This Performance Standards section applies to the following zoning districts:
M1
The intent of the Performance Standards section is to protect the health, safety, and welfare of residents of the zoning
jurisdiction of the City by establishing requirements for noise, vibration, odor, and other performance characteristics.
The following standards apply:
A. Cross Reference:
1. Environmental Standards: See Environmental Standards (EN) for standards relating to air quality, water
quality, and soil quality.
2. Noise: See Chapter 130 of Auburn Code of Ordinances Offenses Related to Public Peace.
B. Nuisance Characteristics: No use shall exhibit obnoxious characteristics to the extent that it constitutes a public
nuisance. No use in existence on the effective date of this Unified Development Ordinance shall be so altered or
modified to conflict with these standards.
1. Electrical Disturbance: No use shall cause electrical disturbance adversely affecting radio, television, or
other equipment in the vicinity.
2. Vibration: No use shall cause vibrations or concussions detectable beyond the lot lines without the aid of
instruments.
3. Odor: No use shall emit across the lot lines malodorous gas or odor in such quantity as to be detectable at
any point along the lot lines.
4. Heat and Glare: No use shall produce heat or glare in such a manner as to be a nuisance or create a hazard
noticeable from any point beyond the lot lines.
C. Fire Protection: Fire fighting equipment and prevention measures acceptable to the Fire Department and any
federal, State, County, City, and/or local authorities that may also have jurisdiction shall be readily available and
apparent when any activity involving the handling or storage of flammable or explosive materials is conducted.
Performance Standards (PF)
Article
Development Standards
05
5-57
Permanent Outdoor Display Standards (PD)
5.60 PD-01: Permanent Outdoor Display Standards
This Permanent Outdoor Display Standards section applies to the following zoning districts:
The intent of the Permanent Outdoor Display Standards is to permit the use of outdoor areas for display and sale of
merchandise, but to ensure that such displays are sensitive to the character of the district and do not jeopardize the
health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the zoning jurisdiction of the City. The following standards apply:
A. Project Applicability: Outdoor areas that a business or institution wants to use on a regular basis for outdoor
displays shall meet the Permanent Outdoor Display Standards. Examples include bullpen areas for sale of outdoor
products, vehicle dealerships, sale of sheds/yard barns, etc.
B. Permits: An Improvement Location Permit shall be required when a new permanent outdoor display area is
proposed. Once a permit is issued for a permanent outdoor display area, a new permit is not required each
time the merchandise changes. However, a new permit shall be required if the permanent outdoor display area
changes.
C. Cross Reference:
1. Temporary Outdoor Display Standards: See Temporary Use and Structure Standards (TU) for standards
relating to temporary outdoor displays.
D. Location:
1. Accessibility: A permanent outdoor display shall not be permitted in the right-of-way and shall not block any
sidewalk, accessibility ramp, or driveway.
2. Setbacks:
a. Front Yard: A permanent outdoor display shall meet the front yard setback for a parking lot identified in
the applicable zoning district in Article 02: Zoning Districts and Setback Standards (SB).
b. Side and Rear Yards: A permanent outdoor display shall meet the side yard and rear yard setbacks for
a parking lot as identified in the applicable zoning district in Article 02: Zoning Districts and Setback
Standards (SB).
3. Canopies: All vending machines, ice machines, propane tank displays, and other permanent fixtures that are
part of a permanent outdoor display area shall be located under a permanent canopy or awning that is attached
to the primary structure.
E. Design:
1. Maximum Area: The cumulative area of all permanent outdoor display areas shall not exceed twenty percent
(20%) of the footprint of the primary structure or tenant space to which the permanent outdoor display area is
associated.
2. Maximum Height: Products displayed outside shall not exceed the height permitted for accessory structures.
3. Surface: Outdoor displays, including vehicles and sheds, shall be parked/displayed on an asphalt or concrete
surface. Grass or gravel are not acceptable surfaces for outdoor display areas.
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 05
5-58
5.61 PD-02: Downtown Commercial Permanent Outdoor Display Standards
This Permanent Outdoor Display Standards section applies to the following zoning district:
The intent of the Permanent Outdoor Display Standards is to permit the use of outdoor areas for display and sale of
merchandise, but to ensure that such displays are sensitive to the character of the district and do not jeopardize the
health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the zoning jurisdiction of the City. The following standards apply:
A. Project Applicability: Permanent Outdoor Displays shall not be permitted. However, commercial uses may have
products for sale outside the store provided that all of the following conditions are met:
1. Daily Cleanup: Outdoor displays and products are brought inside at the close of business each day.
2. Accessibility: Outdoor displays and products shall not interfere with the accessibility of travel along the
sidewalk or into the store.
3. Location: The outdoor display area and all products are to be located directly in front of the building facade
where the front entrance is located and within three-feet from the facade.
B. Permits: An Improvement Location Permit shall not be required for outdoor displays and products that are
brought inside at the close of business each day.
Permanent Outdoor Display Standards (PD)
Article
Development Standards
05
5-59
5.62 PI-01: General Public Improvement Standards
This Public Improvement Standards section applies to the following zoning districts:
M1
The intent of the Public Improvement Standards section is to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the residents
of the zoning jurisdiction of the City by ensuring public facilities are adequate to serve development. The following
standards apply:
A. Project Applicability: Public improvements consistent with the requirements of this Unified Development
Ordinance shall be required when one (1) of the following conditions is met:
1. New Primary Structure: An Improvement Location Permit for a new primary structure is obtained.
2. Addition to Primary Structure: An Improvement Location Permit for an addition to the primary structure that
adds fifty percent (50%) or more square footage is obtained.
B. Adequate Public Facilities: Development is permitted only if public streets, public sidewalks, drainage facilities,
and public utilities are adequate to serve the proposed development.
1. Public Streets:
a. The Routing Committee or the Plan Commission may require a traffic and street impact study to determine
a proposed development's impact on public streets. If required, the City of Auburn shall conduct or
procure services for a traffic and street impact study at the expense of the developer.
b. Based on the results of the study, the Routing Committee or the Plan Commission shall make a determination
as to whether the public street(s) will sufficiently accommodate the increased traffic generated by
the development.
i. If the public street(s) is (are) determined to be insufficient, the Plan Commission may deny the
development; or
ii. The Plan Commission may approve the development with mitigating conditions. The Routing
Committee or the Plan Commission may recommend off-site improvements such as acceleration
lanes, deceleration lanes, passing blisters, wider shoulders or approaches, frontage streets, shared
driveways or other improvements that will provide sufficient facilities for the increased traffic from
the proposed development.
2. Public Pedestrian Facilities: Public sidewalks, sidepaths, and/or trails shall be required along the edge of the
right-of-way, except when the Zoning Administrator determines the development is agricultural in nature or it
is unlikely the public sidewalk will provide connectivity to future trails or sidewalks. New public sidewalks
shall closely align with existing sidewalks and be installed per the City of Auburn's Construction Standards.
3. Drainage Facilities:
a. Cross Reference: Storm drainage collection, detention, and retention facilities shall comply with the
City of Auburn's Stormwater Management Ordinances. (See Title XV: Chapter 160 Illicit Discharge
and Connection to the Stormwater Drains within the City of Auburn; Chapter 161 Construction Site
Stormwater Runoff; and Chapter 162 Post Construction Stormwater Control.)
b. Storm drainage collection, detention, and retention facilities shall have sufficient capacity to serve the
development.
c. If existing storm drainage facilities are not sufficient to serve the development, the Plan Commission may
deny the development or approve the development with mitigating conditions. The Plan Commission,
Routing Committee, Director of Engineering, MS4 Coordinator, or County Surveyor may recommend
off-site improvements that will provide sufficient facilities for the increased runoff from the proposed
development.
Public Improvement Standards (PI)
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 05
5-60
4. Public Utilities:
a. Cross Reference: Requirements for when connection to municipal sanitary sewer and water systems are
in Sewer and Water Standards (SW).
b. Sanitary Sewer: The sanitary sewer collection system and water pollution control facility shall have
sufficient capacity to serve the development. If the existing sanitary sewer collection system or
wastewater treatment facility does not have sufficient capacity to serve the development, the Plan
commission may deny the development or approve the development with mitigating conditions. The
Plan Commission, Routing Committee, or appropriate utility representative may recommend off-site
improvements that will provide sufficient facilities for the increased demand in service from the proposed
development.
c. Water: The public water supply and distribution system shall have sufficient capacity to serve the
development. If the public water supply and distribution system does not have sufficient capacity to
serve the development, improvements that will provide sufficient facilities for the increased demand in
service from the proposed development shall be required prior to approval of the development. The Plan
Commission, Routing Committee, or appropriate utility representative may recommend improvements.
C. Guarantees: When mitigating conditions are required, the developer may be required to post performance and
maintenance guarantees for such improvements.
Public Improvement Standards (PI)
Article
Development Standards
05
5-61
5.63 RV-01: Recreational Vehicle Standards
This Recreational Vehicle Standards section applies to the following zoning districts:
M1
The intent of the Recreational Vehicle Standards is to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the residents and ensure
neighborliness and aesthetic quality for residents. The following standards apply:
A. Cross Reference:
1. Setback Standards: See Setback Standards (SB) for setback standards.
2. Outdoor Storage: See standards in Outdoor Storage (OS).
B. Exclusion: Boats and watercraft shall be excluded from the Recreational Vehicle Standards in this section.
C. Types: The following type of recreational vehicles are permitted.
1. Stored RV: Stored Recreational Vehicle (i.e. not being used, cleaned or prepared; as defined)
2. Parked RV: Parked Recreational Vehicle (i.e. being used, cleaned, or prepared; as defined)
D. Quantity: No more than one (1) recreational vehicle shall be stored or parked on a lot at any one (1) time.
E. Restrictions:
1. Use: A recreational vehicle shall not be used as a dwelling unit, temporary residence, or for living, cooking,
or home business purposes.
2. Waste Disposal: A recreational vehicle shall not be connected to the municipal sewer system or an on-site
sewer system, including a dump station.
3. Power Source: Generators shall not be used as a power supply for a parked or stored recreational vehicle.
F. Stored Recreational Vehicles: A recreational vehicle shall be stored in a side yard or rear yard of a lot such that no
part of the recreational vehicle projects into the required front yard setback. Additionally, the recreational vehicle
shall be setback at least five (5) feet from the side property line and rear property line. Recreational vehicles shall
be stored on concrete, asphalt, pavers or grass.
G. Parked Recreational Vehicle:
1. Location: A recreational vehicle shall be parked in a side yard, rear yard, or on a driveway but shall be at
least ten (10) feet from the edge of the street’s pavement and shall not block the sidewalk or public pedestrian
facility.
2. Duration: A parked recreational vehicle shall not be used for camping, sleeping purposes, or loading/unloading
purposes for more than fourteen (14) days in any ninety (90) day period.
Recreational Vehicle Standards (RV)
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 05
5-62
5.64 RW-01: Retaining Wall Standards
This Retaining Wall Standards section applies to the following zoning districts:
M1
The intent of the Retaining Wall Standards Section is to protect the health, safety and welfare of the residents by
ensuring retaining walls are constructed safely and such to avoid inadvertent injury from falls. The following standards
apply:
A. Retaining Walls (not sea walls):
1. Retaining Walls Parallel to Side or Rear Property Lines, or Rights-of-way:
a. Proximity to Property Line or Right-of-way: A retaining wall parallel to or relatively parallel to the side
or rear property line or right-of way shall not be permitted within two (2) feet of a side property line or
street right-of-way.
b. Maximum Height: The maximum height of retaining walls parallel or relatively parallel to the side or
rear property lines, or rights-of-way shall not exceed a height equal to the distance it is located from the
side or rear property line, or right-of-way.
2. Retaining Walls Perpendicular to Side or Rear Property Lines:
a. Proximity to Property Line: A retaining wall perpendicular or relatively perpendicular to the side or rear
property line shall be permitted up to the side or rear property line if it does not exceed four (4) feet in
height and if it connects to an existing or proposed retaining wall.
b. Maximum Height: The maximum height of retaining walls perpendicular or relatively perpendicular to
the side or rear property lines, or rights-of-way shall not exceed a height equal to the distance it is located
from the side or rear property line, or right-of-way, excluding retaining walls that are permitted under
Section 5.69(A)(2)(a): Proximity to Property Line.
3. Maximum Height: Retaining walls shall not exceed twelve (12) feet in height. It is strongly encouraged to
tier steep slopes with retaining walls four (4) feet in height or less, rather than installing taller retaining walls.
Retaining Wall Standards (RW)
Article
Development Standards
05
5-63
5.65 SB-01: Setback Standards
This setback standards section applies to the following zoning districts:
M1
The intent of the Setback Standards is to protect the health, safety, and welfare of residents of the zoning jurisdiction
of the City by requiring structures to meet certain setbacks. The following standards apply:
A. Applicability: If a setback standard does not appear on the two-page layout for a zoning district, then the standard
does not apply to that particular zoning district.
1. Minimum Dwelling Site Front Setback: The minimum dwelling site front setback shall be per each two-page
layout in Article 02: Zoning Districts.
2. Minimum Dwelling Site Side Setback: The minimum dwelling site side setback shall be per each two-page
layout in Article 02: Zoning Districts.
3. Minimum Dwelling Site Rear Setback: The minimum dwelling site rear setback shall be per each two-page
layout in Article 02: Zoning Districts.
4. Minimum Front Setback:
a. The minimum front setback shall be as per each two-page layout in Article 02: Zoning Districts.
b. Where a subdivision has been platted and substantially built-out utilizing a front setback less than that
required by Article 02: Zoning Districts, an infill lot may utilize the established building setback as
defined in Article 11: Definitions.
5. Minimum Side Setback:
a. The minimum side setback shall be as per each two-page layout in Article 02: Zoning Districts.
b. Where a subdivision has been platted and substantially built-out utilizing a side setback less than that
required by Article 02: Zoning Districts, an infill lot may utilize the established building setback as
defined in Article 11: Definitions.
c. In a M1 District, where a subdivision includes single-family attached dwelling units in the form of a
duplex building that has been constructed using a zero side yard setback along the common wall, said
zero setback shall be applied along the common wall should the primary structure or a portion of the
primary structure need reconstructed.
6. Minimum Rear Setback:
a. The minimum rear setback shall be as per each two-page layout in Article 02: Zoning Districts.
b. Where a subdivision has been platted and substantially built-out utilizing a rear setback less than that
required by Article 02: Zoning Districts, an infill lot may utilize the established building setback as
defined in Article 11: Definitions.
B. Measurements:
1. Front Yard: All setbacks shall be measured from the property line, edge of right-of-way, or edge of pavement,
whichever results in a greater setback.
2. Side Yard: All setbacks shall be measured perpendicularly from the side property line.
3. Rear Yard: All setbacks shall be measured perpendicularly from the rear property line.
Setback Standards (SB)
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 05
5-64
C. Exceptions: The following types of structures or features are exempt or partially exempt from the setback standard
as stated:
1. Signs: Signs are exempt from the setbacks in this section, but shall abide by the location standards in Sign
Standards (SI).
2. Telecommunication Towers: Telecommunication towers are exempt from the setbacks in this section, but
shall abide by the Telecommunication Facility Standards (TC).
3. Architectural Features: Cornices, eaves, sills, canopies, or similar features shall be permitted to encroach
into a required front, side, and/or rear setback not more than three (3) feet. However, these items shall never
be closer than three (3) feet to the property line.
4. Awnings: Awnings shall be permitted to encroach into a required front, side, and/or rear setback not more
than four (4) feet, but shall not be closer than three (3) feet to the property line except in the DC District.
(See Sign Standards (SI) for standards relating to the projection of awnings in DC Districts.)
5. Chimneys: Chimneys shall be permitted to extend into a required setback not more than two (2) feet.
However, chimneys shall never be closer than three (3) feet to the property line.
6. Fences and Walls: Fences and walls shall be exempt from the setbacks in this section, but shall abide by the
fence and wall standards in Fence and Wall Standards (FW).
7. Driveways: Driveways are exempt from setbacks in this section, but shall abide by the side yard setbacks
established in Driveway Standards (DW).
8. Parking Lots: In commercial, institutional, and industrial zoning districts, parking lots shall meet the following
setbacks:
a. Front Yards: Parking lots shall be set back ten (10) feet from the property line or right-of-way.
b. Side Yards: Parking lots shall be set back ten (10) feet from the property line.
c. Rear Yards: Parking lots shall be set back ten (10) feet from the property line.
9. Utility Poles, Lines, and Junction Boxes: Utility poles, lines, and junction boxes shall be exempt from the
setbacks in this section.
10. Trash Receptacles: Trash receptacles shall meet the setback standards in Trash Receptacle Standards (TR).
11. Stairs or Open Platform: Stairs or an open platform or landing which does not extend above the level of the
floor elevation of the first floor of the structure shall be permitted to extend into a required front, side, and/or
rear setback not more than four (4) feet. However, these items shall never be closer than three (3) feet to the
side property line or ten (10) feet to the front or rear property line.
12. Storage Tanks: Storage tanks shall be exempt from the setbacks in this section, but shall comply with the
setbacks established in Storage Tank (SR).
D. Environmental Features: A twenty-five (25) foot setback shall be maintained between structures and environmental
features listed in Environmental Standards (EN)
Setback Standards (SB)
Article
Development Standards
05
5-65
5.66 SW-01: General Sewer and Water Standards
This sewer and water standards section applies to the following zoning districts:
M1
The intent of the Sewer and Water Standards is to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the zoning
jurisdiction of the City by specifying the type of utility connections required. The following standards apply:
A. Applicability: If the below listed sewer and water standard does not appear on the two-page layout for a zoning
district, then it does not apply to that particular zoning district.
1. Sewer:
a. Connection to a sanitary sewer utility shall be per each two-page layout in Article 02: Zoning Districts.
Details about the terminology on the two-page layouts is as follows.
i. Required: Connection to the City of Auburn municipal sanitary sewer system shall be required.
ii. Required Where Available: Connection to the City of Auburn municipal sanitary sewer system shall
be required when access to the municipal sanitary sewer system is available within 300 feet or less of
the property line.
iii. Municipal or Privately-owned Sewer Utility Required: A connection to either the City of Auburn
municipal sanitary sewer system or a privately-owned sanitary sewer system shall be required.
b. Cross Reference: Service and connections to the City of Auburn municipal sanitary sewer systems shall
comply with Title V: Chapter 50 Sewers of the Auburn Code of Ordinances.
2. Water:
a. Connection to a water utility shall be per each two-page layout in Article 02: Zoning Districts. Details
about the terminology on the two-page layouts is as follows.
i. Required: Connection to the City of Auburn municipal water system shall be required.
ii. Required Where Available: Connection to the City of Auburn municipal water system shall be
required when the property is located within the city limits, and for properties located outside the
city limits shall be encouraged when the municipal water system is available within 300 feet or less
of the primary structure
b. Cross Reference: Service and connections to the City of Auburn municipal water utility shall comply
with Chapter 53 Water of the Auburn Code of Ordinances.
Sewer and Water Standards (SW)
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 05
5-66
5.67 SX-01: General Sexually Oriented Business Standards
This Sexually Oriented Business Standards section applies to the following zoning districts:
The intent of the Sexually Oriented Business Standards is to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of
the zoning jurisdiction of the City by regulating the proximity of sexually oriented businesses to certain other current
and future land uses. The following standards apply:
A. Permits: A sexually oriented business shall obtain an Improvement Location Permit prior to establishing the
business.
B. Cross Reference: For business regulations regarding sexually oriented businesses, see Title XI: Business
Regulations; Chapter 117 Sexually Oriented Businesses in the Auburn City Code
C. Measurement Rules: Separation distances shall be measured in a straight line from the closest points between
property lines, without regard to intervening structures or objects.
D. Separation: Sexually oriented businesses shall have the following separation requirements:
1. Similar Businesses: Sexually oriented businesses shall be separated from other sexually oriented businesses
by at least 1,000 feet.
2. Residential Districts and Uses: Sexually oriented businesses shall be separated from residential zoning
districts by at least 1,000 feet and residential uses by 1,000 feet.
3. Public Gathering Places: Sexually oriented businesses shall be separated from public gathering places such
as schools, parks, trails, playgrounds, police stations, fire stations, libraries, religious institutions, day-care
centers, preschools, and public structures by at least 1,000 feet.
4. Family Oriented Facilities: Sexually oriented businesses shall be separated from family entertainment
facilities and family oriented restaurants by at least 1,000 feet.
E. Design:
1. Parking:
a. Parking lots shall not accommodate semi tractor trailers.
b. Overnight parking shall not be permitted.
Sexually Oriented Business Standards (SX)
Article
Development Standards
05
5-67
Sign Standards (SI)
5.68 SI-01: General Sign Standards
This Sign Standards section applies to the following zoning districts:
M1
The intent of the Sign Standards is to accomplish the goals of the Auburn Comprehensive Plan; to regulate time,
place, and manner characteristics of signs; to avoid the unnecessary proliferation of signs; to provide businesses with
appropriate identification; to create a consistent streetscape; to maintain and enhance the aesthetics of the City; to
eliminate potential hazards to motorists and pedestrians resulting from sign location, excessive distraction and clutter;
and to promote the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the zoning jurisdiction of the City of Auburn. The
following standards apply:
A. Freedom of Speech: Any permanent sign or standard temporary sign permitted by the Sign Standards may be
used for freedom of speech purposes for any length of time.
B. Permits:
1. Improvement Location Permit: An Improvement Location Permit shall be required for all permanent signs
located, erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved, or altered unless otherwise specified in this section.
2. Temporary Improvement Location Permit: A Temporary Improvement Location Permit shall be required for
all temporary signs located, erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved, or altered unless otherwise specified
in this section.
3. Easement Holder Approval: All signs proposed to be located within an easement shall obtain written
approval from the Auburn Board of Public Works and Safety or easement holder for the proposed sign prior
to seeking an Improvement Location Permit. For example, a sign proposed within a utility and drainage
easement shall obtain approval from the Auburn Board of Public Works and Safety before applying for an
Improvement Location Permit.
C. Cross Reference:
1. Election Signs: Election signs shall be exempt from quantity, size, and duration regulations in the Sign
Standards section, but shall comply with the standards in Indiana Code 36-1-3-11. These standards may be
amended from time to time.
a. Election signs shall not exceed thirty two (32) square feet in area with only one side of the sign counting.
b. Election signs may be installed sixty (60) days prior to an election, and shall be removed six (6) days
after the election.
c. Election signs shall comply with the location standards for Standard Temporary Signs for the district in
which they are located.
2. Home Businesses: Signs associated with a home business shall be exempt from the Sign Standards section,
but shall comply with the standards in Home Businesses (HB).
3. Lighting Standards: When illumination of signs is permitted by the Sign Standards, all illumination and
lighting associated with signs shall meet the glare, light trespass, and other standards in Lighting Standards
(LT).
4. Address Ordinance: Address signs shall be posted in accordance with Chapter 95 of the Auburn Code of
Ordinances.
D. Exempt Items: The following items shall be exempt from the Sign Standards because they are not considered
signs and/or are not considered a commercial message (freedom of speech). Therefore, these items are exempt
from obtaining an Improvement Location Permit as a sign, unless otherwise specified in this section.
1. Flags: A flag, pennant, or insignia of any nation, state, city, or other political unit. However, when a flag,
pennant, or insignia of any nation, state, city, or other political unit is used as an integral component of a
commercial message, it shall comply with the sign standards for the applicable zoning district. (For example
an American Flag integrated into a corporation's brand or logo.)
2. Outdoor Scoreboard: An outdoor scoreboard used in conjunction with a legally-established sport field.
However, when the scoreboard is visible from a public street and contains a commercial message, it shall
comply with the sign standards for the applicable zoning district.
3. Addresses: Posting of a street address on a mailbox, building, or other prominent location to provide
adequate property identification. However, when a street address is used as a commercial message or is
disproportionately large, it shall comply with the sign standards for the applicable zoning district. (For
example, the numbers in an address being illustrated with ladders and slides for a store selling children's
playsets, or a commercial property that brand's itself by its address and wants its address displayed using
numbers six (6) feet tall.)
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 05
5-68
Sign Standards (SI)
4. Public Safety Message: Posting of a public safety or private property message provided that no individual
posting exceeds the maximum area permitted for a standard temporary sign in the applicable zoning district or
four (4) square feet whichever is greater. (Examples include, but are not limited to "Beware of Dog," "Private
Property," "No Trespassing," "Gas Line," "Weight Limit," "Video Surveillance," and "No Turnaround.")
5. Operational Limitations or Information: An outdoor posting of operational limitations and information
provided the posting is no larger than necessary for the intended reader, with an absolute limit of four
(4) square feet. (Examples include, but are not limited to hours of operation, admittance requirements,
"Employees Only," "Men's Restroom," "Women's Restroom," "Visitor Parking," and "No deliveries.")
6. Required Postings: Messages required by a local agency, state agency, state law, federal agency, federal law,
public utility or utility regulated by the government, provided the area of the message and height of posting
be the minimum size required by the agency or law. (Examples include, but are not limited to a gas pipeline
marker)
7. Indoor Commercial Messages: Commercial messages displayed inside a building that cannot be viewed
legibly by pedestrians or drivers outside the building. (Examples include, but are not limited to a commercial
message on a scoreboard inside a gymnasium or a large banner with an image of a product mounted on the
wall of a retail store.)
8. Miniscule Commercial Messages: Miniscule commercial messages displayed on or near a primary entrance
provided that the area of each miniscule commercial message does not exceed thirty (30) square inches and
the cumulative area of all miniscule commercial messages does not exceed 240 square inches per primary
entrance. (Examples include, but are not limited to "Visa," "Master Card," "Diner's Club," "ATM," and
corporate logos.)
9. Holiday decorations: Decoration or display associated with a recognized holiday. However, when holiday
decorations are used as an integral component of a commercial message, it shall comply with the sign
standards for the applicable zoning district. (For example Christmas tree lights integrated on the facade of a
retail store that sells artificial Christmas trees and decorations.)
10. Street Banners: Street banners shall be approved at the Mayor's discretion, shall be installed by the City
Street Department per the Mayor's instructions, and a Temporary Improvement Location Permit shall be
required.
11. Entryway Feature Signs: Entryway Feature Signs for subdivisions shall be exempt, but shall comply with
Article 7: Entryway Features.
E. Prohibited Signs:
1. Types:
a. Signs that emit audible sound, odor, or visible matter.
b. Signs that have blinking, flashing, or fluttering lights; or changing light intensity, brightness, or color
where the effect takes place more than two (2) times per second.
c. Signs that "shoot" laser light, "cast" intense or visible light beams, or cast laser or projector-created light
images onto the ground, sidewalk, wall or other visible surface.
d. Vehicle Signs: Vehicles with signs greater than eight (8) square feet in cumulative area shall not be
permitted to be parked for the primary purpose of displaying the sign. Prohibited vehicle signs shall not
be construed to include vehicles with signs on them that:
i. Are lawfully parked overnight or during non-business hours in a discreet location.
ii. Are making deliveries, sales calls, transporting persons or property, or customary practices relating
to operating the business.
iii. Are used in conjunction with customary construction operations on a construction site.
e. Lights: Strobe lights, search lights, beacons, or any light or lights that rapidly flash, project light in
visible beams skyward, or project light horizontally in a circle shall not be permitted regardless if the
light is part of or independent of a sign.
f. Signs with Moving or Movable Parts: Signs or devices with visibly moving parts, including humans
holding or acting as signs, shall not be permitted.
Article
Development Standards
05
5-69
F. Prohibited Location:
1. Prohibited: Signs regardless of type, shall not be permitted in any of the following locations:
a. Right-of-way: Signs shall not be permitted in any right-of-way unless authorized by the Board of Public
Works and Safety, except as specified in Section 5.78 Downtown Commercial Sign Standards. Signs
located in right-of-way may be removed by the Zoning Administrator without notice to the sign owner
and/or adjacent property owner.
b. Poles: Signs shall not be permitted on any traffic control device, street sign, construction sign, or utility
pole.
c. Fences: Signs shall not be permitted on any fence, except sponsorship banners along playing fields.
d. Trees: Signs shall not be permitted to be attached to any tree, shrub, or other natural object.
e. Towers: Signs shall not be permitted to be attached to or integrated into any telecommunication
antennae, telecommunication tower, television antennae, or similar towers.
f. Roofs and Chimneys: Signs shall not be permitted to be attached to or be perceived to be attached to the
roof or chimney of a structure, except as may be permitted in the DC (Downtown Commercial) Zoning
District. This provision includes signs integrated into the roofing material.
g. Fire Safety Obstruction: Signs shall not be permitted on a fire escape or in a manner that substantially
blocks view from the right-of-way to a fire door.
h. Obstructs Circulation: Signs that obstruct or interfere with internal or external safe movement of vehicular
or pedestrian traffic shall not be permitted.
i. Artificial Elevation: Artificially altering the elevation of the ground to improve the height or visibility
of a sign shall not be permitted. Likewise, increasing the height of a wall or creating a parapet wall to
improve the visibility of a sign shall not be permitted.
j. Vision Clearance: Signs shall not be permitted in areas prohibited by Vision Clearance Standards (VC).
G. Maintenance: All signs and sign components shall be kept in good repair and in safe, clean, and working condition.
If landscaping is required or included around the base of a sign, it shall be maintained in living condition,
consistent in character with the approval, and not overgrown.
H. Vacant Property: When a business permanently vacates a property, all associated signs shall be removed.
Sign Standards (SI)
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 05
5-70
5.69 SI-02: Agricultural Sign Standards
This Sign Standards section applies to the following zoning district:
The following standards apply:
A. Permanent Signs:
1. Wall Signs: Wall signs shall be permitted provided the following conditions are met.
a. Quantity: One (1) wall sign shall be permitted.
b. Sign Area: The wall sign area shall not exceed twenty-five (25) square feet.
c. Projection: The wall sign shall not project more than four (4) inches from the face of the building to
which it is attached.
d. Illumination: The wall sign shall not be illuminated.
B. Temporary Signs:
1. Permits: A Temporary Improvement Location Permit shall be required prior to the installation of a temporary
sign.
2. Location: Temporary signs shall be located a minimum of five (5) feet from any right-of-way, edge of
pavement, and curb associated with a street or driveway.
3. Illumination: Temporary signs shall not be illuminated.
4. Standard Temporary Signs: Standard temporary signs shall be permitted provided the following conditions
are met.
a. Type: A standard temporary sign shall be a yard sign. (Examples of standard temporary signs include
sale of property, garage sale, and supporting high school teams.)
b. Quantity: One (1) standard temporary sign shall be permitted for each street the lot fronts.
c. Sign Area: The sign area for a standard temporary sign shall not exceed six (6) square feet per side.
d. Height Above Ground: No part of a standard temporary sign shall be more than four (4) feet above the ground.
e. Duration: A standard temporary sign may stay in place for the duration of the temporary event. The
standard temporary sign may be put in place up to five (5) days prior to the temporary event. All standard
temporary signs shall be taken down within seven (7) days after the standard temporary sign's purpose no
longer exists.
5. Special Temporary Signs: Special temporary signs shall be permitted provided the following conditions are met.
a. Type: Special temporary signs shall include inflatables, banners, streamers, posters, pennants, and the
like.
b. Quantity: One (1) special temporary sign shall be permitted per lot.
c. Height Above Ground: No part of a special temporary sign shall be more than fifteen (15) feet above the
ground.
d. Duration: A special temporary sign may stay in place for ten (10) continuous days, but no lot shall have
special temporary signs for more than fourteen (14) total days in any calendar year.
6. Temporary Marker Signs: Temporary marker signs shall only be permitted on a lot having 300 feet or more
of street frontage, provided the following conditions are met.
a. Type: Temporary marker signs shall be yard signs. (An examples of a temporary marker sign include
seed signs.)
b. Quantity: Up to thirty (30) temporary marker signs shall be permitted per lot.
c. Sign Area: A single temporary marker sign shall not exceed three (3) square feet in sign area per side.
d. Height Above Ground: No part of a temporary marker sign shall be more than eight (8) feet above the ground.
e. Duration: A temporary marker sign may stay in place for the duration of the temporary event (e.g.
planting through harvest). All temporary marker signs shall be taken down within seven (7) days after
the temporary marker sign’s purpose no longer exists.
Sign Standards (SI)
Article
Development Standards
05
5-71
5.70 SI-03: Residential Sign Standards
This Sign Standards section applies to the following zoning districts:
The following standards apply:
A. Permanent Signs: Permanent signs shall not be permitted.
B. Temporary Signs: Temporary signs shall be permitted as follows:
1. Permits: A Temporary Improvement Location Permit shall be required prior to the installation of a temporary
sign.
2. Location: Temporary signs shall be located a minimum of five (5) feet from any right-of-way, edge of
pavement, and curb associated with a street or driveway.
3. Illumination: Temporary signs shall not be illuminated.
4. Standard Temporary Signs: Standard temporary signs shall be permitted provided all of the following
conditions are met.
a. Type: A standard temporary sign shall be a yard sign. (Examples of standard temporary signs include
sale of property, garage sale, and supporting high school teams.)
b. Quantity: One (1) standard temporary sign shall be permitted for lots with frontage on one (1) street.
Two (2) standard temporary signs shall be permitted for lots with frontage on two (2) or more streets if
they have a minimum of 300 feet of combined street frontage. However, no two (2) standard temporary
signs shall be closer than eighty (80) feet to one another.
c. Sign Area: The sign area for a standard temporary sign shall not exceed six (6) square feet per side.
d. Height Above Ground: No part of a standard temporary sign shall be more than four (4) feet above the
ground.
e. Duration: A standard temporary sign may stay in place for the duration of the temporary event. The
standard temporary sign may be put in place up to five (5) days prior to the temporary event. All standard
temporary signs shall be taken down within seven (7) days after the standard temporary sign's purpose no
longer exists.
Sign Standards (SI)
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 05
5-72
5.71 SI-04: Multiple Family Residential Sign Standards
This Sign Standards section applies to the following zoning districts: M1
A. Permanent Signs: Permanent signs shall be permitted as follows:
1. Entry Feature Signs: Entry feature signs shall be permitted provided the following conditions are met.
a. An entry feature sign for a development with less than twenty (20) dwelling units or dwelling sites shall
meet the following conditions:
i. Type: The entry feature sign shall be a ground sign and may be double-sided.
ii. Quantity: One (1) entry feature sign shall be permitted per development.
iii. Sign Area: The sign area of the entry feature sign shall not exceed eight (8) square feet.
iv. Height Above Ground: No part of an entry feature sign shall be more than four (4) feet above the
ground.
v. Location: The entry feature sign shall be located a minimum of five (5) feet from any right-of-way,
edge of pavement, and curb associated with a street or driveway.
vi. Illumination: The entry feature sign may be illuminated. However, electronic readers, message
boards and/or changeable copy shall not be permitted.
vii. Materials: The sign shall be wood, metal, masonry, or other durable materials, and both sides of the
entry feature sign shall be finished using the same materials. Landscaping of the entry feature sign is
encouraged.
viii. Maintenance: The entry feature sign shall be maintained by the property owner, an owners
association, or similar legal entity.
b. An entry feature sign for a development with twenty (20) or more dwelling units or dwelling sites shall
meet the following conditions.
i. Type: The entry feature sign shall be a ground sign and may be single-sided or double-sided.
ii. Quantity: One (1) entry feature sign shall be permitted at each vehicle entrance of the development.
iii. Sign Area: The sign area for a single entry feature sign shall not exceed twenty-five (25) square feet
for developments with less than sixty (60) dwelling units or dwelling sites; or forty (40) square feet
for developments with sixty (60) or more dwelling units.
iv. Height Above Ground: No part of an entry feature sign shall be more than six (6) feet above the
ground.
v. Location: The entry feature sign shall be located a minimum of five (5) feet from any right-of-way,
edge of pavement, and curb associated with a street or driveway.
vi. Illumination: The entry feature sign may be illuminated by exterior ground lighting. However,
electronic readers, message boards and/or changeable copy shall not be permitted.
vii. Materials: Supporting apparatuses of an entry feature sign shall be at least fifty percent (50%) brick,
stone, or other masonry material. The back side of a single-sided entry feature signs shall also be
finished using the same materials to match the front of the sign. Landscaping of entry feature signs
is encouraged.
viii. Maintenance: Entry feature signs shall be maintained by the property owner, an owners association,
or similar legal entity.
Sign Standards (SI)
Article
Development Standards
05
5-73
B. Temporary Signs:
1. Permits: A Temporary Improvement Location Permit shall be required prior to the installation of a temporary
sign.
2. Location: Temporary signs shall be located a minimum of five (5) feet from any right-of-way, edge of
pavement, and curb associated with a street or driveway.
3. Illumination: Temporary signs shall not be illuminated.
4. Standard Temporary Signs: Standard temporary signs shall be permitted provided the following conditions
are met.
a. Type: Standard temporary signs shall be yard signs. (Examples of standard temporary signs include sale
of property, garage sale, and supporting high school teams.)
b. Quantity:
i. Per Development: One (1) standard temporary sign shall be permitted for developments with
frontage on one (1) street. Two (2) standard temporary signs shall be permitted for developments
with frontage on two (2) or more streets and 300 feet or more of combined street frontage. However,
no two (2) standard temporary signs shall be closer than eighty (80) feet to one another.
ii. Per Dwelling Site: One (1) standard temporary sign shall be permitted for each dwelling unit or
dwelling site.
c. Sign Area: The sign area for a standard temporary sign shall not exceed six (6) square feet per side.
d. Height Above Ground: No part of a standard temporary sign shall be more than four (4) feet above the
ground.
e. Duration: A standard temporary sign may stay in place for the duration of the temporary event. The
standard temporary sign may be put in place up to five (5) days prior to the temporary event. All standard
temporary signs shall be taken down within seven (7) days after the standard temporary sign's purpose no
longer exists.
5. Special Temporary Signs: Special temporary signs shall be permitted provided the following conditions are met.
a. Type: Special temporary signs shall include banners, streamers, posters, pennants, and the like.
b. Quantity: One (1) special temporary sign shall be permitted per development.
c. Height Above Ground: No part of a special temporary sign shall be more than fifteen (15) feet above the
ground.
d. Duration: A special temporary sign may stay in place for ten (10) continuous days, but no more than
thirty (30) total days in any calendar year.
Sign Standards (SI)
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 05
5-74
5.72 SI-05: Parks and Recreation, Agricultural Commercial and Institutional Sign Standards
This Sign Standards section applies to the following zoning districts:
The following standards shall apply:
A. Project Applicability: Any new sign or change in an existing sign shall be consistent with the requirement of the
Unified Development Ordinance. Changing panels or "skins" shall be permitted, provided there is no change to
the sign's cabinet, structure or support.
B. Building Signs:
1. Single-tenant Building:
a. Permanent Signs: Wall, awning, and display board signs shall be permitted for single-tenant buildings
provided the conditions specified for single-tenant buildings are met, and the cumulative square footage
of all permanent building signs does not exceed one (1) square foot of sign area per lineal foot of front
facade, or 150 square feet, whichever is less.
b. Temporary Signs: Standard temporary and special temporary signs shall be permitted for single-tenant
buildings provided the conditions specified for single-tenant buildings are met.
2. Multiple-tenant Building:
a. Permanent Signs: Wall, awning, and display board signs shall be permitted for multiple-tenant buildings
provided the conditions specified for multiple-tenant buildings are met, and the cumulative square
footage of all permanent building signs does not exceed one (1) square foot of sign area per lineal foot of
front facade.
b. Temporary Signs: Standard temporary and special temporary signs shall be permitted for multiple-tenant
buildings provided the conditions specified for multiple-tenant buildings are met.
C. Permanent Building Signs: Permanent building signs shall be permitted as follows:
1. Wall Signs: Wall signs shall be permitted on single-tenant buildings and multiple-tenant buildings provided
the following conditions are met. All wall signs shall count toward the maximum cumulative square footage
for permanent building signs.
Wall Signs Single-tenant Building Multiple-tenant Building
Maximum Quantity 1 per side of building, not to exceed 2 1 per tenant space
Maximum Sign Area 1 square foot per lineal foot of front facade;
maximum of 65 square feet
1 square foot per lineal foot of front facade;
maximum of 50 square feet per tenant
Changeable Copy Ratio 50% of the sign area may be changeable copy 50% of the sign area may be changeable copy
Maximum Projection From Building 12 inches 12 inches
a. Changeable Copy: If changeable copy is used, it shall be an integrated component of the sign and shall
only include static messages.
b. Illumination: Wall signs on single-tenant buildings and multiple-tenant buildings may be illuminated
internally or by externally-mounted lights.
c. Electronic Message Signs: Electronic message sign components shall not be permitted.
d. Multiple-tenant Building Consistency: The sign envelope that tenants may use and the regulations to
maintain consistent sign appearance shall be identified during the permitting process. The sign envelope
shall not exceed 150% of the allowable wall sign area for each tenant space.
2. Awning Signs: Awning signs shall be permitted on single-tenant buildings and multiple-tenant buildings
provided the following conditions are met. All awning signs shall be counted toward the maximum cumulative
square footage for permanent building signs.
Awning Sign Single-tenant Building Multiple-tenant Building
Maximum Quantity 2 1 per tenant
Maximum Sign Area 20 square feet total 20 square feet per tenant
Maximum Projection From Building 6 feet 6 feet
a. Illumination: Awning signs on single-tenant buildings and multiple-tenant buildings may be illuminated
with externally-mounted lights, but shall not be illuminated with backlighting.
b. Location: Awning signs shall be installed such that they coordinate with a building's entrance.
Sign Standards (SI)
Article
Development Standards
05
5-75
3. Display Board Signs: Display board signs shall be permitted on single-tenant and multiple-tenant buildings
provided the following conditions are met. (Examples of display board signs include permanently affixed
bulletin boards; a designated window space; or encased display boards for posting of menus, specials, events,
performances, and other temporary postings.) Display board signs shall be counted toward the maximum
cumulative square footage for permanent building signs.
Display Board Signs Single-tenant Building Multiple-tenant Building
Maximum Quantity 1 1 per tenant
Maximum Sign Area 40 square feet 20 square feet per tenant
Height Above Ground 7 feet maximum 7 feet maximum
a. Design: The display board sign shall be framed with wood, metal, or other durable material and be
permanently attached to the building; or be a designated window on the building.
b. Postings: Postings on the display board sign shall not exceed the size of the display board sign. Postings
shall not be required to obtain any type of permit.
D. Permanent Site Signs:
1. Ground Signs: Ground signs shall be permitted for single-tenant buildings provided the following conditions
are met. (See Subsection 5.77(D)(2) Gateway Signs below for multiple-tenant buildings).
Ground Sign Single-tenant Building Multiple-tenant Building
Maximum Quantity 1; or 2 for corner lots with a minimum of 200 feet of
combined street frontage.
not permitted
Maximum Sign Area 24 square feet per sign for properties one-half (1/2)
acre or less in size
40 square feet per sign for properties greater than
one-half (1/2) acre, but less than three (3) acres
in size
60 square feet per sign for properties three (3)
acres or more in size
not permitted
Changeable Copy Ratio 80% of sign area may be changeable copy not permitted
Height Above Ground 6 feet maximum not permitted
a. Double-sided: If a ground sign has two (2) identical sides, back-to-back, only one (1) side’s area counts
toward the maximum sign area.
b. Location: A ground sign shall be located a minimum of ten (10) feet from any existing or proposed
right-of-way, edge of pavement, and curb associated with a street or driveway; and a ground sign shall
be setback five (5) feet from all property lines. However, under no circumstance shall a ground sign be
closer than ten (10) feet to a residential district.
c. Sign Separation: When two (2) ground signs are permitted on the same lot, they shall be seventy (70)
feet or more from one another and located along different street frontages.
d. Changeable Copy: If changeable copy is used, it shall be an integrated component of the sign.
e. Electronic Message Sign: A ground sign may incorporate an electronic message component. Electronic
message components shall be limited to a maximum of 5,000 nits during daylight hours and 500 nits
from sunset to sunrise and include an ambient light sensor. If a sign incorporates an electronic message
component, the sign shall be at least 100-feet from any residential district.
f. Illumination: A ground sign may be illuminated internally or by externally-mounted ground lighting.
Sign Standards (SI)
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 05
5-76
2. Gateway Signs: Gateway signs shall be permitted for multiple-tenant buildings that have a minimum of six
(6) tenants, a minimum of 12,000 square feet of main floor area, and provided the following conditions are
met. (See Subsection 5.77(D)(1) Ground Signs above for single-tenant buildings).
Gateway Sign Single-tenant Building Multiple-tenant Building
Maximum Quantity not permitted 1
Maximum Overall Sign Area not permitted 24 square feet per sign for properties one-half
(1/2) acre or less in size
40 square feet per sign for properties greater than
one-half (1/2) acre, but less than three (3) acres
in size
60 square feet per sign for properties three (3)
acres or more in size
Maximum Tenant Sign Area not permitted 20 square feet
Changeable Copy Ratio not permitted 50% of sign area may be changeable copy
Height above Ground not permitted 6 feet maximum
a. Double-sided: If a gateway sign has two (2) identical sides, back-to-back, only one (1) side’s area counts
toward the maximum sign area.
b. Location: A gateway sign shall be located a minimum of ten (10) feet from any existing or proposed
right-of-way, edge of pavement, and curb associated with a street or driveway; and a gateway sign shall
be setback ten (10) feet from all property lines.
c. Changeable Copy: If changeable copy is used, it shall be an integrated component of the sign.
d. Electronic Message Sign: A gateway sign may incorporate an electronic message component. Electronic
message components shall be limited to a maximum of 5,000 nits during daylight hours and 500 nits
from sunset to sunrise and include an ambient light sensor. If a sign incorporates an electronic message
component, the sign shall be at least 100-feet from any residential district.
e. Illumination: A gateway sign may be illuminated internally or by exterior mounted ground lighting.
3. Drive-up Menu Sign: Drive-up menu signs shall be permitted for single-tenant buildings and multiple-tenant
buildings provided the lot has a permitted, operable, and in-use drive-up window and provided the following
conditions are met.
Drive-up Window Menu Sign Single-tenant Building Multiple-tenant Building
Maximum Quantity 2 1 per tenant with a drive-up window
Maximum Sign Area 20 square feet total 20 square feet total
Height Above Ground 7 feet maximum 7 feet maximum
a. Design: A drive-up menu sign shall be single-sided.
b. Location: A drive-up menu sign shall be located in the drive-up window lane, and the sign face shall not
be conspicuously visible from the right-of-way, when possible.
c. Electronic Message Sign: A drive-up menu sign shall not incorporate an electronic message component.
d. Illumination: Drive-up menu signs may be illuminated internally or by externally-mounted lights.
4. Directional Device Signs: Directional device signs shall be permitted for single-tenant buildings and
multiple-tenant buildings provided the following conditions are met.
a. Directional device signs may only be used to indicate vehicular points of entry or exit.
b. Directional device signs shall not exceed three (3) square feet in area per side per entrance. Up to forty
percent (40%) of the sign area may be a corporate logo.
c. Directional device signs shall not exceed thirty-six (36) inches in height.
d. Directional device signs may be internally illuminated, but shall not be illuminated with externallymounted
lights.
e. Directional device signs shall not interfere with safe vehicular or pedestrian traffic circulation, obstruct
the view of drivers entering or exiting, or be placed within a right-of-way.
f. No more than two (2) directional device signs shall be used per street frontage, and no more than four (4)
directional device signs shall be used per lot.
Sign Standards (SI)
Article
Development Standards
05
5-77
5. Wayfinding System Signs: Wayfinding systems may be permitted, in place of directional device signs, for
large institutions that encompass multiple lots or many buildings, provided the following conditions are met.
a. Wayfinding systems shall be used to direct vehicular and pedestrian traffic to specific destinations.
b. Wayfinding systems shall be required to have signs of consistent size, scale, and appearance.
c. Proposals for wayfinding systems shall be reviewed and approved at the discretion of the Zoning
Administrator. The Zoning Administrator may take into account the need for the wayfinding system, the
size and complexity of the development, quantity and location of signs, number of entrances and exits,
and the appearance of signs.
6. Light Pole Banner Arms: Light pole banner arms shall be permitted for single-tenant buildings and multipletenant
buildings provided the following conditions are met.
a. Qualification: Light pole banner arms shall be permitted in parking lots on permanent, operable light
poles.
b. Maximum Quantity and Area: Light pole banner arms shall accommodate no more than two (2) banners
per pole with a maximum of sixteen (16) square feet of banner area per pole. Only one side counts
toward maximum square feet if both sides are the same. No other signs shall be permitted on light poles.
c. Location: Light pole banner arms shall be set back five (5) feet from any public right-of-ways.
d. Illumination: Electronic message, changeable copy, or internally illuminated lighting shall not be
permitted.
e. Consistency: Light pole banners shall be consistent and complementary in character.
f. Maintenance: Light pole banners shall be maintained in good condition or removed.
7. Sandwich Board Signs: Sandwich board signs shall be permitted for single-tenant and multi-tenant buildings
provided the following conditions are met.
Sandwich Board Sign Single-tenant Building Multiple-tenant Building
Maximum Quantity 1 1 per tenant
Maximum Sign Area 8 square feet 8 square feet
Height Above Ground 4 feet maximum 4 feet maximum
a. Double-sided: If a sandwich board sign has two (2) identical sides, only one (1) side’s area counts
toward the maximum sign area.
b. Location: A sandwich board sign shall be located within fifteen (15) feet of a tenant's entrance and in a
manner that ensures four (4) feet of unobstructed sidewalk clearance for pedestrians.
c. Stability: Sandwich board signs shall be weighted such they will remain in place despite outdoor
conditions.
d. Removal: Sandwich board signs shall be removed each night when the tenant closes.
Sign Standards (SI)
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 05
5-78
E. Temporary Signs: Any combination of standard temporary and special temporary signs shall be permitted for
single-tenant buildings and multiple-tenant buildings provided the following conditions are met.
1. Permits: A Temporary Improvement Location Permit shall be required prior to installation of a temporary
sign.
2. Location: Temporary signs shall be located a minimum of five (5) feet from any right-of-way, edge of
pavement, and curb associated with a street or driveway.
3. Illumination: Temporary signs shall not be illuminated.
4. Standard Temporary Signs: Standard temporary signs shall be permitted for single-tenant and multiple-tenant
buildings that do not have changeable copy or electronic message signs, provided the following conditions
are met.
a. Type: A standard temporary sign shall be a yard sign or wall sign. (Examples of standard temporary
signs include sale of property, special sale, and special offer signs.)
b. Quantity:
i. Single-tenant Buildings: One (1) standard temporary sign shall be permitted for each street frontage.
Two (2) standard temporary signs shall be permitted for corner lots that have 150 feet or more of
combined street frontage. However, standard temporary signs shall be located at least eighty (80)
feet from one another.
ii. Multiple-tenant Buildings: One (1) standard temporary sign shall be permitted for each tenant.
c. Sign Area: The sign area for a standard temporary sign shall not exceed twenty-four (24) square feet per
side.
d. Height Above Ground: No part of a standard temporary sign shall be more than six (6) feet above the
ground unless.
e. Duration: A standard temporary sign may stay in place for the duration of the temporary event. The
standard temporary sign may be put in place up to seven (7) days prior to the temporary event. All
standard temporary signs shall be taken down within three (3) days after the standard temporary sign's
purpose no longer exists.
5. Special Temporary Signs: Special temporary signs shall be permitted provided the following conditions are
met. The following conditions apply to single-tenant buildings, multiple-tenant buildings, and properties
without buildings, unless otherwise specified.
a. Type: Special temporary signs shall include inflatables, banners, streamers, posters, pennants, yard signs,
self-standing signs, and the like. (Examples of special temporary signs include "now hiring" banner and
"welcome home" sign.)
b. Quantity:
i. Single-tenant Buildings: One (1) special temporary sign shall be permitted at any one (1) time for a
lot.
ii. Multiple-tenant Buildings: One (1) special temporary sign shall be permitted for each tenant.
c. Height Above Ground: A special temporary sign shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet above the ground.
d. Duration: A special temporary sign may stay in place for ten (10) continuous days, no more than four (4)
times in any calendar year.
e. Exemptions: Sponsorship banners around ball fields, courts, etc. shall be permitted during the local
playing season, provided each banner is durable vinyl, not greater than thirty-two (32) square feet and is
not visible from a public right-of-way.
Sign Standards (SI)
Article
Development Standards
05
5-79
5.73 SI-06: Neighborhood and Downtown Commercial Sign Standards
This Sign Standards section applies to the following zoning districts:
The following standards shall apply:
A. Project Applicability: Any new sign or change in an existing sign shall be consistent with the requirement of the
Unified Development Ordinance. Changing panels or "skins" shall be permitted, provided there is not change to
the sign's cabinet, structure or support.
B. Building Signs:
1. Single-tenant Building:
a. Permanent Building Signs: Wall, projecting, awning, window, display board signs, and murals shall be
permitted for single-tenant buildings provided the conditions specified for single-tenant buildings are
met, and the cumulative square footage of all permanent building signs does not exceed two (2) square
feet of sign area per lineal foot of front facade, or 150 square feet, whichever is less.
b. Temporary Signs: Standard temporary and special temporary signs shall be permitted for single-tenant
buildings provided the conditions specified for single-tenant buildings are met.
2. Multiple-tenant Building:
a. Permanent Building Signs: Wall, awning, window, display board signs, tenant listing signs, and murals
shall be permitted for multiple-tenant buildings provided the conditions specified for multiple-tenant
buildings are met, and the cumulative square footage of all permanent building signs does not exceed two
(2) square feet of sign area per lineal foot of front facade.
b. Temporary Signs: Standard temporary and special temporary signs shall be permitted for multiple-tenant
buildings provided the conditions specified for multiple-tenant buildings are met.
C. Permanent Building Signs: Permanent building signs shall be permitted as follows:
1. Wall Signs: Wall signs shall be permitted on single-tenant buildings and multiple-tenant buildings provided
the following conditions are met. All wall signs shall count toward the maximum cumulative square footage
for permanent building signs.
Wall Signs Single-tenant Building Multiple-tenant Building
Maximum Quantity 1 per side of building, not to exceed 3 1 per tenant space
Maximum Sign Area 2 square feet of sign area per lineal foot of front
facade; maximum of 60 square feet on front
facade and 25 square feet each on side or rear
facades
2 square feet of sign area per lineal foot of front
tenant facade; maximum of 60 square feet
per tenant front facade and 25 square feet per
tenant each on side or rear facades
Changeable Copy Ratio 40% maximum 40% maximum
Maximum Projection From Building 8 inches 8 inches
a. Changeable Copy: If changeable copy is used, it shall be an integrated component of the sign.
b. Illumination: Wall signs on single-tenant buildings and multiple-tenant buildings may be illuminated
internally or by externally-mounted lights.
c. Electronic Message Signs: Electronic message signs shall not be permitted.
d. Multiple-tenant Building Consistency: The sign envelope that tenants may use and the regulations to
maintain consistent sign appearance shall be identified during the permitting process. The sign envelope
shall not exceed 150% of the allowable wall sign area for each tenant space.
Sign Standards (SI)
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 05
5-80
2. Projecting Signs: Projecting signs shall be permitted on single-tenant and multiple-tenant buildings provided
the following conditions are met. All projecting signs shall be counted toward the maximum cumulative
square footage for permanent building signs.
Projecting Sign Single-tenant Building Multiple-tenant Building
Maximum Quantity 1; or 2 for corner buildings
1 per entrance per street
1 per customer entrance
Maximum Overall Sign Area 12 square feet total 12 square feet total
Changeable Copy Ratio not permitted not permitted
Height Above Ground 9 feet minimum and not to exceed the roof 9 feet minimum and not to exceed the roof
a. Double-sided: If a projecting sign has two (2) identical sides, back-to-back, only one (1) side’s area
counts toward the maximum cumulative square footage.
b. Location: A projecting sign shall be located on the same facade as a customer entrance.
c. Projection: Projecting signs and all supporting apparatuses of projecting signs shall not project more
than six (6) feet from the building facade. However, a projecting sign shall be at least two (2) feet from a
curb or driving surface. A projecting sign may encroach in the right-of-way which is owned by the Board
of Public Works and Safety. The Board of Public Works and Safety generally approves these encroachments,
but reserves the right to deny any encroachment into the right-of-way.
d. Sign Separation: No two (2) projecting signs shall be within twenty (20) feet of one another.
e. Changeable Copy: Changeable copy shall not be permitted.
f. Electronic Message Signs: Electronic message signs shall not be permitted.
g. Illumination: A projecting sign may be illuminated internally or by externally-mounted lighting.
3. Awning Signs: Awning signs shall be permitted on single-tenant buildings and multiple-tenant buildings
provided the following conditions are met. All awning signs shall be counted toward the maximum cumulative
square footage for permanent building signs.
Awning Sign Single-tenant Building Multiple-tenant Building
Maximum Quantity 2 1 per tenant
Maximum Sign Area 20 square feet total 20 square feet per tenant
a. Illumination: Awning signs on single-tenant buildings and multiple-tenant buildings may be illuminated
with externally-mounted lights, but shall not be illuminated with backlighting.
b. Projection: Awning signs and all parts of an awning shall not project more than six (6) feet from the
building facade. However, an awning shall be at least two (2) feet, measured horizontally, from a curb
or driving surface. An awning may encroach into the right-of-way which is controlled by the Board of
Public Works and Safety. The Board of Public Works and Safety generally approves these encroachments,
but reserves the right to deny any encroachment into the right-of-way.
4. Window Signs: Window signs shall be permitted on single-tenant buildings and multiple-tenant buildings
provided the following conditions are met. All window signs shall be counted toward the maximum cumulative
square footage for permanent building signs.
Window Sign Single-tenant Building Multiple-tenant Building
Maximum Quantity no limit no limit
Maximum Sign Area 50% of window area or 50 square feet, whichever
is greater
50% of window area or 50 square feet, whichever
is greater
Height Above Ground 14 feet maximum 14 feet maximum
Sign Standards (SI)
Article
Development Standards
05
5-81
5. Display Board Signs: Display board signs shall be permitted on single-tenant and multiple-tenant buildings
provided the following conditions are met. (Examples of display board signs include permanently affixed
bulletin boards, designated window, or encased display boards for posting of menus, specials, events,
performances, and other temporary postings.) Display board signs shall be counted toward the maximum
cumulative square footage for permanent building signs.
Display Board Sign Single-tenant Building Multiple-tenant Building
Maximum Quantity 1 1 per tenant
Maximum Sign Area 20 square feet 10 square feet per tenant
Height Above Ground 7 feet maximum 7 feet maximum
a. Design: The display board sign shall be framed with wood, metal, or other durable material and be
permanently attached to the building; or be a designated window on the building.
b. Postings: Postings on the display board sign shall not exceed the size of the display board sign. Postings
shall not be required to obtain any type of permit.
6. Tenant Listing Sign: A tenant listing sign shall be permitted for a multiple-tenant building that has tenant
spaces and a common area provided the following conditions are met. Tenant listing signs shall be counted
toward the maximum cumulative square footage for permanent building signs.
Tenant Listing Sign Single-tenant Building Multiple-tenant Building
Maximum Quantity not permitted 1 per common area
Maximum Sign Area not permitted 10 square feet per sign
Height Above Ground not permitted 8 feet maximum
a. Location: The tenant listing sign shall be located within view of a customer entrance.
7. Mural Sign: A mural shall be permitted for a single-tenant or multiple-tenant building provided the following
conditions are met. A mural shall not be counted toward the maximum cumulative square footage for
permanent building signs.
a. Quantity: One mural sign is permitted per building.
b. Size: A mural shall not exceed ninety percent (90%) of the wall area.
D. Permanent Site Signs:
1. Ground Signs: Ground signs shall be permitted on lots that have 150 square feet or more of area without
building, parking lot or other hard surface.
Ground Sign Single-tenant Building Multiple-tenant Building
Maximum Quantity 1 not permitted
Maximum Sign Area 24 square feet not permitted
Changeable Copy Ratio 50% of sign area may be changeable copy not permitted
Height Above Ground 5 feet maximum not permitted
a. Double-sided: If a ground sign has two (2) identical sides, back-to-back, only one (1) side’s area counts
toward the maximum sign area.
b. Location: A ground sign shall be located a minimum of five (5) feet from any existing or proposed
right-of-way, edge of pavement, and curb associated with a street or driveway; and a ground sign shall be
setback five (5) feet from all property lines.
c. Changeable Copy: If changeable copy is used, it shall be an integrated component of the sign.
d. Electronic Message Sign: A ground sign shall not incorporate an electronic message component.
e. Illumination: A ground sign may be illuminated internally or by externally-mounted ground lighting.
Sign Standards (SI)
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 05
5-82
2. Gateway Signs: Gateway signs shall be permitted on lots that have 150 square feet or more of area without
building, parking lot or other hard surface.
Gateway Sign Single-tenant Building Multiple-tenant Building
Maximum Quantity not permitted 1
Maximum Overall Sign Area not permitted 24 square feet per tenant sign
Maximum Tenant Sign Area not permitted 6 square feet per tenant
Changeable Copy Ratio not permitted 50% of sign area may be changeable copy
Height Above Ground not permitted 5 feet maximum
a. Double-sided: If a gateway sign has two (2) identical sides, back-to-back, only one (1) side’s area counts
toward the maximum sign area.
b. Location: A gateway sign shall be located a minimum of five (5) feet from any existing or proposed
right-of-way, edge of pavement, and curb associated with a street or driveway; and a gateway sign shall
be setback five (5) feet from all property lines.
c. Changeable Copy: If changeable copy is used, it shall be an integrated component of the sign.
d. Electronic Message Sign: A gateway sign shall not incorporate an electronic message component.
e. Illumination: A gateway sign may be illuminated internally or by externally-mounted ground lighting.
3. Directional Device Signs: Directional device signs shall be permitted for single-tenant buildings and
multiple-tenant buildings provided the following conditions are met.
a. Directional device signs may only be used to indicate vehicular points of entry or exit.
b. Directional device signs shall not exceed three (3) square feet in area per side per entrance. Up to forty
percent (40%) of the sign area may be a corporate logo.
c. Directional device signs shall not exceed thirty-six (36) inches in height.
d. Directional device signs may be internally illuminated, but shall not be illuminated by externallymounted
lights.
e. Directional device signs shall not interfere with safe vehicular or pedestrian traffic circulation, obstruct
the view of drivers entering or exiting, or be placed within a right-of-way.
f. No more than two (2) directional device signs shall be used per lot.
4. Light Pole Banner Arms: Light pole banner arms shall be permitted for single-tenant buildings and multipletenant
buildings provided the following conditions are met.
a. Qualification: Light pole banner arms shall be permitted in parking lots on permanent, operable light
poles.
b. Maximum Quantity and Area: Light pole banner arms shall accommodate no more than two (2) banners
per pole with a maximum of sixteen (16) square feet of banner area per pole. Only one side of each
banner counts toward maximum square feet if both sides are the same. No other signs shall be permitted
on light poles.
c. Location: Light pole banner arms shall be set back five (5) feet from any public right-of-ways.
d. Illumination: Electronic message, changeable copy, or internally illuminated lighting shall not be
permitted.
e. Consistency: Light pole banners shall be consistent and complementary in character.
f. Maintenance: Light pole banners shall be maintained in good condition or removed.
5. Sandwich Board Signs: Sandwich board signs shall be permitted for single-tenant and multi-tenant buildings
provided the following conditions are met.
Sandwich Board Sign Single-tenant Building Multiple-tenant Building
Maximum Quantity 1 1 per tenant
Maximum Sign Area 8 square feet 8 square feet
Height Above Ground 4 feet maximum 4 feet maximum
a. Double-sided: If a sandwich board sign has two (2) identical sides, only one (1) side’s area counts
toward the maximum sign area.
b. Location: A sandwich board sign shall be located within fifteen (15) feet of a tenant's entrance and in a
manner that ensures four (4) feet of unobstructed sidewalk clearance for pedestrians.
c. Stability: Sandwich board signs shall be weighted such they will remain in place despite outdoor
conditions.
d. Removal: Sandwich board signs shall be removed each night when the tenant closes.
Sign Standards (SI)
Article
Development Standards
05
5-83
E. Temporary Signs: Any combination of standard temporary and special temporary signs shall be permitted for
single-tenant buildings and multiple-tenant buildings provided the following conditions are met.
1. Permits: A Temporary Improvement Location Permit shall be required prior to the installation of a temporary
sign.
2. Location: Temporary signs shall be located on private property. The placement of a temporary sign shall
not constrain a sidewalk to less than four (4) feet of clear way for pedestrians, nor block views for vehicle or
pedestrian travel.
3. Illumination: Temporary signs shall not be illuminated.
4. Standard Temporary Signs: Standard temporary signs shall be permitted for single-tenant buildings and
multiple-tenant buildings that do not have changeable copy or electronic message signs, provided the following
conditions are met.
a. Type: A standard temporary sign shall be a self-standing sign, wall sign, or window panel. (Examples of
standard temporary signs include sale of property, special sale, and special offer signs.)
b. Quantity:
i. Single-tenant Buildings: One (1) standard temporary sign shall be permitted for each lot, except for
corner lots. Two (2) standard temporary signs shall be permitted for corner lots that have a customer
entrance on each front facade.
ii. Multiple-tenant Buildings: One (1) standard temporary sign shall be permitted for each tenant.
c. Sign Area: The sign area for a standard temporary sign shall not exceed eight (8) square feet per side.
d. Height Above Ground: No part of a standard temporary sign shall be more than five (5) feet above the
ground unless the standard temporary sign is in a first floor window.
e. Duration: A standard temporary sign may stay in place for the duration of the temporary event. The
standard temporary sign may be put in place up to seven (7) days prior to the temporary event. All
standard temporary signs shall be taken down within three (3) days after the standard temporary sign's
purpose no longer exists.
5. Special Temporary Signs: Special temporary signs shall be permitted provided the following conditions
are met. The following conditions apply to single-tenant buildings and multiple-tenant buildings unless
otherwise specified.
a. Type: Special temporary signs shall include inflatables, banners, streamers, posters, pennants, window
panels, self-standing signs, and the like.
b. Quantity:
i. Single-tenant Buildings: One (1) special temporary sign shall be permitted per lot at any one time.
ii. Multiple-tenant Buildings: One (1) special temporary sign shall be permitted for each tenant.
c. Height Above Ground: A special temporary sign shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet above the ground.
d. Duration: A special temporary sign may stay in place for ten (10) continuous days, no more than four (4)
times in any calendar year.
Sign Standards (SI)
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 05
5-84
5.74 SI-07: General Commercial Sign Standards
This Sign Standards section applies to the following zoning districts:
The following standards shall apply:
A. Project Applicability: Any new sign or change in an existing sign shall be consistent with the requirement of the
Unified Development Ordinance. Changing panels or "skins" shall be permitted, provided there is not change to
the sign's cabinet, structure or support.
B. Building Signs:
1. Single-tenant Building:
a. Permanent Building Signs: Wall, awning and display board signs shall be permitted for single-tenant
buildings provided the conditions specified for single-tenant buildings are met and the cumulative square
footage of all permanent building signs does not exceed two and one-half (2.5) square foot of sign area
per lineal foot of front facade.
b. Temporary Signs: Standard temporary and special temporary signs shall be permitted for single-tenant
buildings provided the conditions specified for single-tenant buildings are met.
2. Multiple-tenant Building:
a. Permanent Building Signs: Wall, awning and display board signs shall be permitted for multiple-tenant
buildings provided the conditions specified for multiple-tenant buildings are met and the cumulative
square footage of all permanent signs does not exceed two and one-half (2.5) square foot of sign area per
lineal foot of front facade.
b. Temporary Signs: Standard temporary and special temporary signs shall be permitted for multiple-tenant
buildings provided the conditions specified for multiple-tenant buildings are met.
C. Permanent Building Signs: Permanent building signs shall be permitted as follows:
1. Wall Signs: Wall signs shall be permitted on single-tenant buildings and multiple-tenant buildings provided
the following conditions are met. All wall signs shall count toward the maximum cumulative square footage
for permanent building signs.
Wall Signs Single-tenant Building Multiple-tenant Building
Maximum Quantity 2 per facade, not to exceed 4 1 per tenant space
Maximum Sign Area 2 square foot per lineal foot of front facade;
maximum of 200 square feet on front facade
and 70 square feet on each other facade
2 square foot per lineal foot of tenant front
facade; maximum of 150 square feet on front
facade and 50 square feet on each other
facade
Changeable Copy Ratio 50% of the sign area may be changeable copy 50% of the sign area may be changeable copy
Maximum Projection From Building 12 inches 12 inches
a. Changeable Copy: If changeable copy is used, it shall be an integrated component of the sign and shall
only include static messages, regardless if the sign includes manually or electronically changeable copy.
b. Electronic Message Sign: A wall sign may incorporate an electronic message component. Electronic
message components shall be limited to a maximum of 5,000 nits during daylight hours and 500 nits
from sunset to sunrise and include an ambient light sensor. If a sign incorporates an electronic message
component, the sign shall be at least 100-feet from any residential district.
c. Illumination: Wall signs on single-tenant buildings and multiple-tenant buildings may be illuminated
internally or by externally-mounted lights.
d. Multiple-tenant Building Consistency: The sign envelope that tenants may use and the regulations to
maintain consistent sign appearance shall be identified during the permitting process. The sign envelope
shall not exceed 150% of the allowable wall sign area for each tenant space.
2. Awning Signs: Awning signs shall be permitted on single-tenant buildings and multiple-tenant buildings
provided the following conditions are met. All awning signs shall be counted toward the maximum cumulative
square footage for permanent building signs.
Awning Sign Single-tenant Building Multiple-tenant Building
Maximum Quantity 2 1 per tenant
Maximum Sign Area 40 square feet total 30 square feet per tenant
Maximum Projection From Building 6 feet 6 feet
Sign Standards (SI)
Article
Development Standards
05
5-85
a. Illumination: Awning signs on single-tenant buildings and multiple-tenant buildings may be illuminated
with externally-mounted lights, but shall not be illuminated with backlighting.
3. Display Board Signs: Display board signs shall be permitted on single-tenant and multiple-tenant buildings
provided the following conditions are met. (Examples of display board signs include permanently affixed
bulletin boards; designated windows; or encased display boards for menus, specials, events, performances,
and other temporary postings.) Display board signs shall be counted toward the maximum cumulative square
footage for permanent building signs.
Display Board Signs Single-tenant Building Multiple-tenant Building
Maximum Quantity 1 1 per tenant
Maximum Sign Area 50 square feet 20 square feet per tenant
Height Above Ground 6 feet maximum 6 feet maximum
a. Design: The display board sign shall be framed with wood, metal, or other durable material and be
permanently attached to the single-tenant or multiple-tenant building; be a designated window on the
single-tenant building; or consist of hardware permanently affixed to the single-tenant or multiple-tenant
building for display of a consistent size posting.
b. Postings: Postings on the display board sign shall not exceed the size of the display board sign. Postings
shall not be required to obtain any type of permit.
D. Permanent Site Signs:
1. Ground Signs and Pole Signs: Ground signs and pole signs shall be permitted for single-tenant buildings
provided the following conditions are met. (See Subsection 5.79(D)(2) Gateway Signs and Pole Signs below
for multiple-tenant buildings).
Ground Sign and Pole Sign Single-tenant Building Multiple-tenant Building
Maximum Quantity 1; or 2 for corner lots with a minimum of 200 feet of
combined street frontage
not permitted
Maximum Sign Area 50 square feet per sign for properties one-half (1/2)
acre or less in size
100 square feet per sign for properties greater than
one-half (1/2) acre, but less than three (3) acres
in size
150 square feet per sign for properties three (3)
acres or more in size
not permitted
Changeable Copy Ratio 70% of sign area may be changeable copy not permitted
Height Above Ground 20 feet maximum for any portion of the sign or sign
structure
not permitted
a. Double-sided: A ground sign or pole sign may have two (2) identical sides, back-to-back.
b. Location: A ground sign or pole sign shall be located a minimum of ten (10) feet from any existing or
proposed right-of-way, edge of pavement, and curb associated with a street or driveway; and a ground
sign shall be setback ten (10) feet from all property lines.
c. Sign Separation: When two (2) ground signs or pole signs are permitted on the same lot, they shall be
seventy (70) feet or more from one (1) another and located along different street frontages.
d. Changeable Copy: If changeable copy is used, it shall be an integrated component of the sign.
e. Electronic Message Sign: A ground sign may incorporate an electronic message component. Electronic
message components shall be limited to a maximum of 5,000 nits during daylight hours and 500 nits
from sunset to sunrise and include an ambient light sensor. If a sign incorporates an electronic message
component, the sign shall be at least 100-feet from any residential district.
f. Illumination: A ground sign may be illuminated internally or by externally-mounted ground lighting. A
pole sign may be illuminated internally, but shall not be illuminated by externally mounted ground lights.
Sign Standards (SI)
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 05
5-86
2. Gateway Signs and Pole Signs: Gateway signs and pole signs shall be permitted for multiple-tenant buildings
that have a minimum of six (6) tenants, a minimum of 8,000 square feet of main floor area, and provided the
following conditions are met. (See Subsection 5.79(D)(1) Ground Signs and Pole Signs above for singletenant
buildings).
Gateway Sign Single-tenant Building Multiple-tenant Building
Maximum Quantity not permitted 1
Maximum Overall Sign Area not permitted 50 square feet per sign for properties one-half
(1/2) acre or less in size
100 square feet per sign for properties greater
than one-half (1/2) acre, but less than three (3)
acres in size
150 square feet per sign for properties three (3)
acres or more in size
Maximum Tenant Sign Area not permitted 50 square feet
Changeable Copy Ratio not permitted 70% of sign area may be changeable copy
Height above Ground not permitted 20 feet maximum for any portion of the sign or
sign structure
a. Double-sided: If a gateway sign or pole sign has two (2) identical sides, back-to-back, only one (1) side’s
area counts toward the maximum overall sign area.
b. Location: A gateway sign or pole sign shall be located a minimum of ten (10) feet from any existing or
proposed right-of-way, edge of pavement, and curb associated with a street or driveway; and a gateway
sign or pole sign shall be setback ten (10) feet from all property lines.
c. Changeable Copy: If changeable copy is used, it shall be an integrated component of the sign.
d. Electronic Message Sign: A gateway or pole sign may incorporate an electronic message component.
Electronic message components shall be limited to a maximum of 5,000 nits during daylight hours and
500 nits from sunset to sunrise and include an ambient light sensor. If a sign incorporates an electronic
message component, the sign shall be at least 100-feet from any residential district.
e. Illumination: A gateway sign may be illuminated internally or by externally-mounted ground lighting. A
pole sign may be illuminated internally, but shall not be illuminated by externally mounted ground lights.
3. Drive-up Menu Sign: Drive-up menu signs shall be permitted for single-tenant buildings and multiple-tenant
buildings provided the lot has a permitted, operable, and in-use drive-up window and provided the following
conditions are met.
Drive-up Window Menu Sign Single-tenant Building Multiple-tenant Building
Maximum Quantity 1 per drive-up lane 1 per tenant with drive-up
Maximum Sign Area 45 square feet per drive-up lane 45 square feet per drive-up
Height Above Ground 7 feet maximum 7 feet maximum
a. Design: A drive-up menu sign shall be single-sided.
b. Location: A drive-up menu sign shall be located in the drive-up window lane and the sign face shall not
be conspicuously visible from the right-of-way.
c. Illumination: Drive-up menu signs may be illuminated internally or by externally-mounted lights.
4. Directional Device Signs: Directional device signs shall be permitted for single-tenant buildings and
multiple-tenant buildings provided the following conditions are met.
a. Directional device signs may only be used to indicate vehicular points of entry or exit.
b. Directional device signs shall not exceed three (3) square feet in area per side per entrance. Up to forty
percent (40%) of the sign area may be a corporate logo.
c. Directional device signs shall not exceed thirty-six (36) inches in height.
d. Directional device signs may be internally illuminated, but shall not be illuminated with externallymounted
lighting.
e. Directional device signs shall not interfere with safe vehicular or pedestrian traffic circulation, obstruct
the view of drivers entering or exiting, or be placed within a right-of-way.
f. No more than two (2) directional device signs shall be used per street frontage, and no more than four (4)
directional device signs shall be used per lot.
Sign Standards (SI)
Article
Development Standards
05
5-87
5. Wayfinding System Signs: Wayfinding systems may be permitted, in place of directional device signs, for
large developments that encompass multiple lots or many buildings, provided the following conditions are
met.
a. Wayfinding systems shall be used to direct vehicular and pedestrian traffic to specific destinations.
b. Wayfinding systems shall be required to have signs of consistent size, scale, and appearance.
c. Proposals for wayfinding systems shall be reviewed and approved at the discretion of the Zoning
Administrator. The Zoning Administrator may take into account the need for the wayfinding system, the
size and complexity of the development, quantity and location of signs, number of entrances and exits,
and the appearance of signs.
6. Light Pole Banner Arms: Light pole banner arms shall be permitted for single-tenant buildings and multipletenant
buildings provided the following conditions are met.
a. Qualification: Light pole banner arms shall be permitted in parking lots on permanent, operable light
poles.
b. Maximum Quantity and Area: Light pole banner arms shall accommodate no more than two (2) banners
per pole with a maximum of sixteen (16) square feet of banner area per pole. Only one side of each
banner counts toward maximum square feet if both sides are the same. No other signs shall be permitted
on light poles.
c. Location: Light pole banner arms shall be set back five (5) feet from any public right-of-ways.
d. Illumination: Electronic message, changeable copy, or internally illuminated lighting shall not be
permitted.
e. Consistency: Light pole banners shall be consistent and complementary in character.
f. Maintenance: Light pole banners shall be maintained in good condition or removed.
7. Sandwich Board Signs: Sandwich board signs shall be permitted for single-tenant and multi-tenant buildings
provided the following conditions are met.
Sandwich Board Sign Single-tenant Building Multiple-tenant Building
Maximum Quantity 1 1 per tenant
Maximum Sign Area 8 square feet 8 square feet
Height Above Ground 4 feet maximum 4 feet maximum
a. Double-sided: If a sandwich board sign has two (2) identical sides, only one (1) side’s area counts
toward the maximum sign area.
b. Location: A sandwich board sign shall be located within ten (10) feet of a tenant's entrance and in a
manner that ensures four (4) feet of unobstructed sidewalk clearance for pedestrians.
c. Stability: Sandwich board signs shall be weighted such they will remain in place despite outdoor
conditions.
d. Removal: Sandwich board signs shall be removed each night when the tenant closes.
Sign Standards (SI)
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 05
5-88
E. Temporary Signs: Any combination of standard temporary and special temporary signs shall be permitted for
single-tenant buildings and multiple-tenant buildings provided the following conditions are met.
1. Permits: A Temporary Improvement Location Permit shall be required prior to the installation of a temporary
sign.
2. Location: Temporary signs shall be located a minimum of five (5) feet from any right-of-way, edge of
pavement, and curb associated with a street or driveway.
3. Illumination: Temporary signs shall not be illuminated.
4. Standard Temporary Signs: Standard temporary signs shall be permitted for single-tenant buildings and
multiple-tenant buildings that do not have changeable copy or electronic message signs, provided the following
conditions are met.
a. Type: A standard temporary sign shall be a self-standing sign, wall sign, or yard sign. (Examples of
standard temporary signs include sale of property, special sale, and special offer signs.)
b. Quantity:
i. Single-tenant Buildings: One (1) standard temporary sign shall be permitted for each lot, except for
corner lots. Two (2) standard temporary signs shall be permitted for corner lots that have 200 feet or
more of combined street frontage. However, standard temporary signs shall be located at least eighty
(80) feet from one another.
ii. Multiple-tenant Buildings: One (1) standard temporary sign shall be permitted for each tenant.
c. Sign Area: The sign area for a standard temporary sign shall not exceed twenty-four (24) square feet per
side.
d. Height Above Ground: No part of a standard temporary sign shall be more than five (5) feet above the
ground unless the standard temporary sign is in a first floor window.
e. Duration: A standard temporary sign may stay in place for the duration of the temporary event. The
standard temporary sign may be put in place up to seven (7) days prior to the temporary event. All
standard temporary signs shall be taken down within three (3) days after the standard temporary sign's
purpose no longer exists.
5. Special Temporary Signs: Special temporary signs shall be permitted provided the following conditions
are met. The following conditions apply to single-tenant buildings and multiple-tenant buildings unless
otherwise specified.
a. Type: Special temporary signs shall include inflatables, banners, streamers, posters, pennants, yard signs,
self-standing signs, and the like. (Examples of special temporary signs include "now hiring" banner and
"welcome home" sign.)
b. Quantity:
i. Single-tenant Buildings: Two (2) special temporary signs shall be permitted at any one (1) time for a
lot.
ii. Multiple-tenant Buildings: One (1) special temporary sign shall be permitted for each tenant.
c. Height Above Ground: A special temporary sign shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet above the ground.
d. Duration: A special temporary sign may stay in place for ten (10) continuous days, no more than four (4)
times in any calendar year.
Sign Standards (SI)
Article
Development Standards
05
5-89
5.75 SI-09: Industrial Sign Standards
This Sign Standards section applies to the following zoning districts:
The following standards shall apply:
A. Project Applicability: Any new sign or change in an existing sign shall be consistent with the requirement of the
Unified Development Ordinance. Changing panels or "skins" shall be permitted, provided there is not change to
the sign's cabinet, structure or support.
B. Building Signs:
1. Single-tenant Building:
a. Permanent Building Signs: Wall and awning signs shall be permitted for single-tenant buildings provided
the conditions specified for single-tenant buildings are met, and the cumulative square footage of all
permanent building signs does not exceed two (2) square foot of sign area per lineal foot of front facade,
or 250 square feet, whichever is less.
b. Temporary Signs: Standard temporary and special temporary signs shall be permitted for single-tenant
buildings provided the conditions specified for single-tenant buildings are met.
2. Multiple-tenant Building:
a. Permanent Building Signs: Wall and awning signs shall be permitted for multiple-tenant buildings
provided the conditions specified for multiple-tenant buildings are met, and the cumulative square
footage of all permanent building signs does not exceed two (2) square foot of sign area per lineal foot of
front facade, but no single tenant shall have more than 250 square feet of sign area.
b. Temporary Signs: Standard temporary and special temporary signs shall be permitted for multiple-tenant
buildings provided the conditions specified for multiple-tenant buildings are met.
C. Permanent Building Signs: Permanent building signs shall be permitted as follows:
1. Wall Signs: Wall signs shall be permitted on single-tenant buildings and multiple-tenant buildings provided
the following conditions are met. All wall signs shall count toward the maximum cumulative square footage
for permanent building signs.
Wall Signs Single-tenant Building Multiple-tenant Building
Maximum Quantity 1 per side of building; not to exceed 3 1 per tenant space
Maximum Sign Area 1.5 square foot per lineal foot of front facade;
maximum of 200 square feet on front facade
and 70 square feet on each other facade
1.5 square foot per lineal foot of front facade;
maximum of 150 square feet on front facade
and 50 square feet on each other facade
Changeable Copy Ratio not permitted not permitted
Maximum Projection From Building 12 inches 12 inches
a. Electronic Message Signs: Electronic message sign components shall not be permitted.
b. Illumination: Wall signs on single-tenant buildings and multiple-tenant buildings may be illuminated
internally or by externally-mounted lights.
c. Multiple-tenant Building Consistency: The sign envelope that tenants may use and the regulations to
maintain consistent sign appearance shall be identified during the permitting process. The sign envelope
shall not exceed 150% of the allowable wall sign area for each tenant space.
2. Awning Signs: Awning signs shall be permitted on single-tenant buildings and multiple-tenant buildings
provided the following conditions are met. All awning signs shall be counted toward the maximum cumulative
square footage for permanent signs.
Awning Sign Single-tenant Building Multiple-tenant Building
Maximum Quantity 2 1 per tenant
Maximum Sign Area 30 square feet per awning 30 square feet per tenant
Maximum Projection From Building 6 feet 6 feet
a. Illumination: Awning signs on single-tenant buildings and multiple-tenant buildings may be illuminated
with externally-mounted lights, but shall not be illuminated with backlighting.
Sign Standards (SI)
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 05
5-90
D. Permanent Site Signs:
1. Ground Signs: Ground signs shall be permitted on single-tenant buildings provided the following conditions
are met. (See Subsection 5.80(D)(2). Gateway Signs below for multiple-tenant buildings).
Ground Sign Single-tenant Building Multiple-tenant Building
Maximum Quantity 1; or 2 for corner lots with a minimum of 200 feet of
combined street frontage
not permitted
Maximum Sign Area 24 square feet per sign for properties one-half (1/2)
acre or less in size
50 square feet per sign for properties greater than
one-half (1/2) acre, but less than three (3) acres
in size
100 square feet per sign for properties three (3)
acres or more in size
not permitted
Changeable Copy Ratio 50% of sign area may be changeable copy not permitted
Height Above Ground 8 feet maximum not permitted
a. Double-sided: If a ground sign has two (2) identical sides, back-to-back, only one (1) side’s area counts
toward the maximum sign area.
b. Location: A ground sign shall be located a minimum of ten (10) feet from any existing or proposed
right-of-way, edge of pavement, and curb associated with a street or driveway; and a ground sign shall be
setback ten (10) feet from all property lines.
c. Sign Separation: When two (2) ground signs are permitted on the same lot, they shall be seventy (70)
feet or more from one another and located along different street frontages.
d. Changeable Copy: If changeable copy is used, it shall be an integrated component of the sign.
e. Electronic Message Sign: A ground sign may incorporate an electronic message component. Electronic
message components shall be limited to a maximum of 5,000 nits during daylight hours and 500 nits
from sunset to sunrise and include an ambient light sensor. If a sign incorporates an electronic message
component, the sign shall be at least 100-feet from any residential district.
f. Illumination: A ground sign may be illuminated internally or by externally-mounted ground lighting.
2. Gateway Signs: Gateway signs shall be permitted for multiple-tenant buildings that have a minimum of four
(4) tenants, a minimum of 12,000 square feet of main floor area, and provided the following conditions are
met. (See Subsection 5.80(D)(1) Ground Signs above for single-tenant buildings).
Gateway Sign Single-tenant Building Multiple-tenant Building
Maximum Quantity not permitted 1
Maximum Overall Sign Area not permitted 24 square feet per sign for properties one-half
(1/2) acre or less in size
50 square feet per sign for properties greater than
one-half (1/2) acre, but less than three (3) acres
in size
100 square feet per sign for properties three (3)
acres or more in size
Maximum Tenant Sign Area not permitted 24 square feet
Changeable Copy Ratio not permitted 50% of sign area may be changeable copy
Height above Ground not permitted 8 feet maximum
a. Double-sided: If a gateway sign has two (2) identical sides, back-to-back, only one (1) side’s area counts
toward the maximum sign area.
b. Location: A gateway sign shall be located a minimum of ten (10) feet from any existing or proposed
right-of-way, edge of pavement, and curb associated with a street or driveway; and a gateway sign shall
be setback ten (10) feet from all property lines.
c. Changeable Copy: If changeable copy is used, it shall be an integrated component of the sign.
d. Electronic Message Sign: A gateway sign may incorporate an electronic message component. Electronic
message components shall be limited to a maximum of 5,000 nits during daylight hours and 500 nits
from sunset to sunrise and include an ambient light sensor. If a sign incorporates an electronic message
component, the sign shall be at least 100-feet from any residential district.
e. Illumination: A gateway sign may be illuminated internally or by externally-mounted ground lighting.
Sign Standards (SI)
Article
Development Standards
05
5-91
3. Directional Device Signs: Directional device signs shall be permitted for single-tenant buildings and
multiple-tenant buildings provided the following conditions are met.
a. Directional device signs may only be used to indicate vehicular points of entry or exit.
b. Directional device signs shall not exceed three (3) square feet in area per side per entrance. Up to forty
percent (40%) of the sign area may be a corporate logo.
c. Directional device signs shall not exceed thirty-six (36) inches in height.
d. Directional device signs may be internally illuminated.
e. Directional device signs shall not interfere with safe vehicular or pedestrian traffic circulation, obstruct
the view of drivers entering or exiting, or be placed within a right-of-way.
f. No more than two (2) directional device signs shall be used per street frontage, and no more than four (4)
directional device signs shall be used per lot.
4. Wayfinding System Signs: Wayfinding systems may be permitted, in place of directional device signs, for
large developments that encompass multiple lots or many buildings, provided the following conditions are
met.
a. Wayfinding systems shall be used to direct vehicular and pedestrian traffic to specific destinations.
b. Wayfinding systems shall be required to have signs of consistent size, scale, and appearance.
c. Proposals for wayfinding systems shall be reviewed and approved at the discretion of the Zoning
Administrator. The Zoning Administrator may take into account the need for the wayfinding system, the
size and complexity of the development, quantity and location of signs, number of entrances and exits,
and the appearance of signs.
Sign Standards (SI)
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 05
5-92
E. Temporary Signs: Any combination of standard temporary and special temporary signs shall be permitted for
single-tenant buildings and multiple-tenant buildings provided the following conditions are met.
1. Permits: A Temporary Improvement Location Permit shall be required prior to installation of a temporary
sign.
2. Location: Temporary signs shall be located a minimum of ten (10) feet from any right-of-way, edge of
pavement, and curb associated with a street or driveway.
3. Illumination: Temporary signs shall not be illuminated.
4. Standard Temporary Signs: Standard temporary signs shall be permitted for single-tenant buildings and
multi-tenant buildings that do not have changeable copy or electronic message signs, provided the following
conditions are met.
a. Type: A standard temporary sign shall be a sandwich board, self-standing sign, wall sign, or a yard sign.
(Examples of standard temporary signs include sale of property, special sale, and special offer signs.)
b. Quantity:
i. Single-tenant Buildings: One (1) standard temporary sign shall be permitted for each lot, except for
corner lots. Two (2) standard temporary signs shall be permitted for corner lots that have 200 feet or
more of combined street frontage. However, standard temporary signs shall be located at least eighty
(80) feet from one another.
ii. Multiple-tenant Buildings: One (1) standard temporary sign shall be permitted for each tenant.
c. Sign Area: The sign area for a standard temporary sign shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet per
side.
d. Height Above Ground: No part of a standard temporary sign shall be more than five (5) feet above the
ground unless the standard temporary sign is in a first floor window.
e. Duration: A standard temporary sign may stay in place for the duration of the temporary event. The
standard temporary sign may be put in place up to seven (7) days prior to the temporary event. All
standard temporary signs shall be taken down within three (3) days after the standard temporary sign's
purpose no longer exists.
5. Special Temporary Signs: Special temporary signs shall be permitted provided the following conditions
are met. The following conditions apply to single-tenant buildings and multiple-tenant buildings unless
otherwise specified.
a. Type: Special temporary signs shall include inflatables, banners, streamers, posters, pennants, yard signs,
sandwich boards, self-standing signs, and the like. (Examples of special temporary signs include "now
hiring" banner and "welcome home" sign.)
b. Quantity:
i. Single-tenant Buildings: Two (2) special temporary signs shall be permitted at any one (1) time for a
lot.
ii. Multiple-tenant Buildings: One (1) special temporary sign shall be permitted for each tenant.
c. Height Above Ground: A special temporary sign shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet above the ground.
d. Duration: A special temporary sign may stay in place for ten (10) continuous days, no more than four (4)
times in any calendar year.
Sign Standards (SI)
Article
Development Standards
05
5-93
Solar and Alternate Energy Standards (SL)
5.76 SL-01: General Solar and Alternate Energy Standards
This Solar and Alternative Energy Standards section applies to the following zoning districts:
M1
The intent of the Solar and Alternate Energy Standards is to protect health, safety, and welfare of the residents and
ensure neighborliness and aesthetic quality for residents while ensuring solar and alternate energy can be options
when integrated appropriately.
A. Project Applicability: Installation of any new solar or alternative energy device located outside of a structure shall
meet the following standards:
B. Cross Reference:
1. Performance Standards: See Performance Standards (PF).
2. Architectural Standards: See Architectural Standards (AR).
3. Height Standards: See Height Standards (HT).
4. Fire Code Regulations: See regulations for solar photovoltaic power systems in the International Fire Code
605.11 as amended from time to time.
C. Prohibited: Solar or alternative energy devices located outside of a structure shall not be permitted in the MH
Districts.
D. Permits: An Improvement Location Permit shall be required for any new solar or alternative energy device.
5.77 SL-02: Agricultural and Estate Residential Solar and Alternate Energy Standards
This Solar and Alternative Energy Standards section applies to the following zoning districts:
The following standards apply:
A. Scale: Solar and alternative energy devices shall be of a scale to accommodate only the property on which it is
located.
B. Location:
1. Roof Top Installation: Solar and alternative energy devices may be located on the roof of the primary structure
or an accessory structure. Roof trusses shall have sufficient strength to accommodate weight of solar or
alternative energy devices installed. Proof of load strength shall be provided with the Improvement Location
Permit.
2. Ground Installation: Solar and alternative energy devices may be located on the ground, but shall meet the
setbacks for accessory structures and maximum accessory structure height as indicated in Article 2: Zoning
Districts for the district. No portion of a solar or alternative energy device shall encroach into the required
setbacks.
5.78 SL-03: Small Scale Solar and Alternate Energy Standards
This Solar and Alternative Energy Standards section applies to the following zoning districts:
M1
The following standards apply:
A. Scale: Solar and alternative energy devices shall be of a scale to accommodate only the property on which it is
located with minimal extra energy generation.
B. Location:
1. Roof Top Installation: Solar and alternative energy devices shall be located on the roof of the primary structure.
Roof trusses shall have sufficient strength to accommodate weight of solar or alternative energy devices
installed. Proof of load strength shall be provided with the Improvement Location Permit.
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 05
5-94
5.79 SL-04: Large Scale Solar and Alternate Energy Standards
This Solar and Alternative Energy Standards section applies to the following zoning districts:
The following standards apply:
A. Scale: Solar and alternative energy devices shall be of a scale to accommodate only the property on which it is
located with minimal extra energy generation.
B. Location:
1. Roof Top Installation: Solar and alternative energy devices may be located on the roof of the primary structure
or an accessory structure. Roof trusses shall have sufficient strength to accommodate weight of solar or
alternative energy devices installed. Proof of load strength shall be provided with the Improvement Location
Permit.
2. Ground Installation:
a. Solar and alternative energy devices may be located on the ground, but shall meet the setbacks for accessory
structures and maximum accessory structure height as indicated in Article 2: Zoning Districts for the
district. No portion of a solar or alternative energy device shall encroach into the required setbacks.
b. When installed on the ground, solar and alternative energy devices shall be screened from public
right-of-way.
5.80 SL-05: Solar and Alternate Energy Farm Standards
This Solar and Alternative Energy Standards section applies to the following zoning districts:
A. Scale: Solar and alternative energy farms are designed for re-sale of energy to commercial power companies.
B. Location:
1. Ground Installation: Solar and alternative energy farms shall be located on the ground, but shall meet the
setbacks for primary structures and maximum primary structure height as indicated in Article 2: Zoning
Districts for the district. No portion of a solar or alternative energy device shall encroach into the required
setbacks.
2. Buffer Yard Required: When installed on the ground, solar and alternative energy devices shall be screened
from public right-of-way.
Solar and Alternate Energy Standards (SL)
Article
Development Standards
05
5-95
5.81 SE-01: General Special Exception Standards
This Special Exception Standards section applies to the following zoning districts:
M1
The intent of the Special Exception Standards is to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the zoning
jurisdiction of the City by ensuring the most appropriate development standards are applied to special exception
requests. The following standards apply:
A. Cross Reference: The approval process and criteria for Special Exceptions is in Article 09: Processes.
B. Applicable Development Standards: The development standards assigned to each zoning district are considered
appropriate for the permitted uses within that zoning district. However, the development standards may not
be appropriate for all Special Exception uses within a zoning district. For instance, some institutional uses are
allowed in residential zoning districts as Special Exceptions. In this case, residential development standards
would not necessarily be applicable.
1. Determining Appropriate Development Standards:
a. The Zoning Administrator shall determine which development standards sections within Article 05:
Development Standards shall apply to each Special Exception application. The development standards
determined to apply shall be documented in the application and approval.
b. If the Special Exception use is a permitted use within another zoning district, the development standards
for that zoning district shall be used as a guideline. In situations where the Special Exception use is not
a permitted use in any zoning district, the most stringent development standards may be assigned by the
Zoning Administrator as appropriate.
Special Exception Standards (SE)
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 05
5-96
Storage Tank (SR)
5.82 SR-01: General Storage Tank Standards
This Storage Tank Standards section applies to the following zoning districts:
M1
The intent of the Storage Tank Standards section is to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the
zoning jurisdiction of the City by requiring outdoor storage tanks to meet certain criteria. The following standards
apply:
A. Cross Reference: See Chapter 154: Fire Prevention Code of the Auburn Code of Ordinances.
5.83 SR-02: Residential Storage Tank Standards
This Storage Tank Standards section applies to the following zoning districts:
M1
A. Prohibited: Outdoor storage tanks or drums shall not be permitted.
5.84 SR-03: Parks and Recreation and Estate Residential Storage Tank Standards
This Storage Tank Standards section applies to the following zoning districts:
The following standards apply:
A. Project Applicability: Any new outdoor storage tanks or drums installed after the effective date of this Unified
Development Ordinance shall be permitted if all of the following standards are met.
B. Cross Reference: Outdoor storage tanks and drums shall meet all applicable State and federal regulations.
C. Permits: An Improvement Location Permit shall be required prior to the installation of new outdoor storage tanks
or drums.
D. Prerequisite Criteria: No liquid or gas fuel shall be stored in bulk above ground, except tanks or drums connected
directly to energy generating devices or heating appliances located and operated on the same lot as the tanks or
drums.
E. Setbacks
1. Front Yard: Outdoor storage tanks and drums shall not be permitted in front yards.
2. Side and Rear Yard: Outdoor storage tanks and drums shall be setback at least thirty (30) feet from side and
rear property lines.
3. Structures: Outdoor storage tanks and drums shall be setback at least thirty (30) feet from primary structures
and fifteen (15) feet from accessory structures.
F. Quantity: No lot shall have more than two (2) outdoor storage tanks or drums.
5.85 SR-04: Non-residential Storage Tank Standards
This Storage Tanks Standards section applies to the following zoning districts:
The following standards apply
A. Project Applicability: Any new outdoor storage tanks or drums installed after the effective date of this Unified
Development Ordinance shall be permitted if all of the following standards are met.
B. Cross Reference: Outdoor storage tanks and drums shall meet all applicable State and federal regulations.
C. Permits: An Improvement Location Permit shall be required prior to the installation of new outdoor storage tanks
or drums.
D. Setbacks
1. Front Yard: Outdoor storage tanks and drums shall not be permitted in front yards.
2. Side and Rear Yard: Outdoor storage tanks and drums shall be setback at least thirty (30) feet from side and
rear property lines.
3. Structures: Outdoor storage tanks and drums shall be setback at least thirty (30) feet from primary structures
and fifteen (15) feet from accessory structures.
E. Quantity: No lot shall have more than one (1) outdoor storage tanks or drum per two (2) acres.
Article
Development Standards
05
5-97
5.86 ST-01: General Structure Standards
This Structure Standards section applies to the following zoning districts:
M1
The intent of the Structure Standards section is to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the zoning
jurisdiction of the City and the character of each zoning district by regulating the quantity of primary structures on a
lot. The following standards apply:
A. Applicability: The maximum allowable number of primary structures shall be one (1) unless indicated otherwise
on the applicable two-page layout in Article 02: Zoning Districts.
Structure Standards (ST)
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 05
5-98
Telecommunication Facility Standards (TC)
5.87 TC-01: General Telecommunication Facility Standards
This Telecommunication Facilities Standards section applies to the following zoning districts:
The intent of the Telecommunication Facility Standards section is to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the
residents of the zoning jurisdiction of the city by allow for the provision of adequate and reliable public and private
telecommunication service while minimizing the adverse, undesirable visual effects of such. The following standards
apply:
A. Permits: An Improvement Location Permit shall be required prior to the construction, erection, placement,
modification, or alteration of a telecommunication facility. See Article 09: Processes.
B. Location:
1. Accessory Utility Structures: The accessory utility structures of telecommunication facilities shall meet the
minimum front yard setback, minimum side yard setback, and minimum rear setback requirements in the
appropriate two-page layouts in Article 02: Zoning Districts.
2. Towers:
a. Front Yard Setback: Telecommunication towers shall be set back from any right-of-way a minimum
distance equal to seventy-five percent (75%) of the tower height, including all antennas and attachments.
b. Side and Rear Yard Setback: Telecommunication towers shall be set back from the side and rear property
lines a minimum distance equal to seventy-five percent (75%) of the tower height or sixty (60) feet,
whichever is greater, including all antennas and attachments.
c. Telecommunication towers shall not be located between the primary structure and a public street.
d. Telecommunication towers shall not be located within the boundaries of any residential zoning district,
and shall be set back from the boundaries of any residential zoning district a minimum distance equal to
one hundred ten percent (110%) of the tower height.
C. Justification: The applicant for a new telecommunication facility shall:
1. Demonstrate the tower is reasonably necessary to serve the adjacent or nearby areas.
2. Describe the purpose of the tower.
3. List and show locations of nearby towers with documentation that co-location is not possible.
D. Design:
1. Project Applicability: Proposed or modified telecommunication towers and antennas shall meet the following
design requirements:
2. Height:
a. Telecommunication towers shall not exceed one hundred ninety-nine (199) feet in height.
b. All other utility structures and antennas shall meet the height standards in the appropriate two-page
layouts in Article 02: Zoning Districts and in Height Standards (HT).
3. Professional Engineer Certification: A professional engineer's certification shall be provided for all telecommunication
towers and communication equipment to document and verify design specifications, including,
but not limited to: foundation of tower; strength of tower to withstand wind gusts of up to one hundred ten
miles per hour (110 MPH) with one-half inch (1/2") of ice, and other natural forces such as ice loading and
earth movement; conformance with Auburn Building Codes, International Building Code, Electrical Code;
and Occupational Safety and Health Administration standards.
4. Standards Compliance: All telecommunication towers and communication equipment shall meet or exceed
current standards and regulations of the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and other regulatory authorities
for telecommunication towers.
5. Appearance: Towers and antennas shall be designed to blend into the surrounding environment through the
use of color and camouflaging architectural treatment, except in an instance where the color is dictated by
State or federal authorities such as the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA).
6. Monopole Design: Towers shall be of a monopole design, unless the Board of Zoning Appeals determines an
alternative design would better blend in with the surrounding environment. Towers shall be collapsible.
7. Collocation: Any proposed telecommunication tower shall be designed structurally, electrically, and in all
respects to accommodate both the applicant’s antennas and comparable antennas for the following:
a. A minimum of one (1) additional user if the telecommunications tower is between sixty (60) and 100 feet
in height.
b. A minimum of two (2) additional users if the telecommunications tower is 100 feet or more in height.
Article
Development Standards
05
5-99
8. Accessory Utility Structures: All utility structures needed to support a telecommunications tower shall be
architecturally designed to blend in with the surrounding environment.
9. Fence Enclosure: Telecommunication facilities and all accessory utility structures shall be protected by a
security fence that shall be at least six (6) feet tall.
10. Screening: A live evergreen screen consisting of shrubs, planted three (3) feet on-center maximum or a row
of evergreen trees planted a maximum of ten (10) feet on-center shall be planted around the entire telecommunication
facility and each of the guy wires and anchors, if used. The height of all plants at the time of
planting shall be no less than five (5) feet.
11. Lighting: Telecommunication facilities shall not be illuminated by artificial means and shall not display
strobe lights, except when it is dictated by State or federal authorities such as the Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA).
12. Signs: The use of any portion of a telecommunication facility for the posting of any signs or advertisements
of any kind, other than warning or equipment information signs, shall not be permitted.
E. Construction Standards: All telecommunication facilities shall be subject to inspection by the Building
Commissioner and Zoning Administrator during the construction process.
1. Easements: If an easement is required for location of a telecommunication facility on the property, the
easement shall be staked by a licensed and registered Indiana land surveyor so as to provide proof the facility
has been constructed within the easement.
2. Footers: Footing inspections shall be required by the Building Commissioner for all telecommunication
facilities having footings.
3. Electrical Standards: All telecommunication facilities containing electrical wiring shall be subject to the
provisions of the Indiana Electric Code, as amended.
F. Inspection of Towers: The following shall apply to the inspection of telecommunications facilities:
1. Frequency: Towers may be inspected at least once every five (5) years, or more often as needed to respond to
complaints received, by the Zoning Administrator, Building Commissioner, and/or a registered, professional
engineer to determine compliance with the original construction standards.
2. Investigation: The Zoning Administrator and the Building Commissioner may enter onto the property to
investigate the matter and may order the appropriate action to bring the facility into compliance.
3. Violations: Notices of Violation will be sent in accordance with Article 10: Enforcement and Penalties for
any known violation on the telecommunication facility.
G. Abandoned Tower Removal: Any tower unused or left abandoned for six (6) months or greater shall be removed
by the property owner at its expense. Should the property owner fail to remove the tower after thirty (30) days
from the date a Notice of Violation is issued, the City may remove the tower and bill the property owner for the
costs of removal and cleanup of the site. To ensure the removal of all improvements, a ten year performance bond
or a letter of credit equal to 100% of the cost to remove the tower, the tower's foundation, and restoration of the
tower site shall be provided to the City of Auburn, Department of Building, Planning and Development prior to
permits for new towers or equipment being issued.
Telecommunication Facility Standards (TC)
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 05
5-100
5.88 TC-02: Telecommunication Micro Tower Facility Standards
This Telecommunication Facilities Standards section applies to the following zoning districts:
M1
The following telecommunication facility standards shall apply:
A. Permits: An Improvement Location Permit shall be required for telecommunication micro tower.
B. Types:
1. Permitted Micro Towers: Telecommunication micro towers shall be permitted when the following standards
are met.
a. The telecommunication micro tower shall be non-freestanding.
b. The telecommunication micro tower shall not exceed a volume of three (3) cubic feet.
c. The telecommunication micro tower shall be located in a functional, but inconspicuous place on an
existing structure such as a water tower, utility pole, or roof. The owner/operator of the telecommunication
micro tower shall obtain written permission from the owner of the existing structure. Ground level
components or equipment are not permitted.
d. The telecommunication micro tower mounted on a roof shall not exceed the maximum structure height
indicated in the appropriate two-page layout in Article 02: Zoning Districts by more than ten (10) feet.
e. The telecommunication micro tower mounted on poles and other structures shall not exceed the height of
the existing pole or structure.
2. Prohibited Micro Towers: Freestanding telecommunication towers, micro towers, and associated equipment
shall not be permitted. Installation of a new pole to accommodate a micro tower shall not be permitted.
C. Abandoned Micro Tower: Any micro tower unused or left abandoned for six (6) months or more shall be
removed by the micro tower owner at its expense. Should the micro tower owner fail to remove the micro tower
after thirty (30) days from the date a Notice of Violation is issued, the City may remove the micro tower and bill
the owner/operator for the costs of removal and cleanup of the site.
5.89 TC-03: Telecommunication Antenna Standards
This Telecommunication Facility Standards section applies to the following zoning districts:
The following standards apply:
A. Permits: An Improvement Location Permit shall not be required for telecommunication antenna.
B. Types:
1. Permitted Antenna: Telecommunication antennas shall be permitted when the following standards are met.
a. The telecommunication antennas shall be non-freestanding.
b. The telecommunication antennas shall be located in a functional, but inconspicuous place on an existing
structure such as a water tower, utility pole, or roof. The owner/operator of the telecommunication
antenna shall obtain written permission from the owner of the existing structure.
c. The telecommunication antennas mounted on a roof shall not exceed the maximum structure height
indicated in the appropriate two-page layout in Article 02: Zoning Districts by more than ten (10) feet.
d. The telecommunication antennas mounted on poles and other structures shall not exceed one hundred ten
percent (110%) of the existing pole or structure height.
2. Prohibited Antenna: Freestanding telecommunication towers and all other telecommunication facilities,
except telecommunication antennas and micro towers shall not be permitted.
C. Abandoned Antenna: Any antenna unused or left abandoned for six (6) months or more shall be removed by the
property owner at its expense. Should the property owner fail to remove the antenna after thirty (30) days from
the date a Notice of Violation is issued, the City may remove the antenna and bill the property owner for the costs
of removal and cleanup of the site.
Telecommunication Facility Standards (TC)
Article
Development Standards
05
5-101
Temporary Use and Structure Standards (TU)
5.90 TU-01: General Temporary Use and Structure Standards
This Temporary Use and Structure Standards section applies to the following zoning districts:
M1
The intent of Temporary Use and Structure standards is to protect the public health, safety, and welfare of the residents
of the zoning jurisdiction of the City by establishing standards for temporary uses and temporary structures. The
following standards apply.
A. Cross Reference:
1. Temporary Signs: See Sign Standards (SI) for temporary sign standards.
2. Farmers Market: See Chapter 116: Farmers Market, Auburn City Code.
3. Itinerate Vendors: See Chapter 112: Itinerate Vendors, Auburn City Code.
B. Permits: A Temporary Improvement Location Permit shall be obtained prior to establishing the temporary use or
structure except as indicated otherwise in this section.
C. Types:
1. Fund-raising Events: Fund-raising events such as chicken barbecues, fish fries, and car washes shall be
permitted and shall be exempt from obtaining a Temporary Improvement Location Permit if the duration of
the event is less than twenty-four (24) hours over a two (2) day period.
2. Garage and Yard Sales: Garage and yard sales shall be permitted and shall be exempt from obtaining a
Temporary Improvement Location Permit, but shall not be more than three times (3X) per calendar year, three
(3) days each time.
3. Portable On Demand Storage: Portable On Demand Storage (PODS) units shall be permitted and shall be
exempt from obtaining a Temporary Improvement Location Permit, but shall not be located outdoors for more
than fourteen (14) consecutive days, three (3) times per calendar year.
4. Construction Trailer: A Construction Trailer shall be permitted on the site where construction activity is
taking place and shall be exempt from obtaining a Temporary Improvement Location Permit. A Construction
trailer shall meet Accessory Structure Setbacks for the district in which it is located, and shall be removed
from the site once construction is complete.
D. Termination: Temporary uses shall be terminated and structures removed at the end of the permitted event period.
E. Location: Setbacks for Accessory Structures shall apply to temporary structures.
5.91 TU-02: Agricultural and Estate Residential Temporary Use and Structure Standards
This Temporary Use and Structure Standards section applies to the following zoning districts:
The following standards apply:
A. Roadside Sales of Produce: The roadside sale of farm produce shall be permitted if the following conditions are met:
1. Grown On-site: Eighty (80%) of the produce offered for sale shall be grown on the same lot the where the
roadside sale is located.
2. Duration: The roadside sale of produce shall not exceed six (6) months per calendar year.
3. Sales Stand: The sales stand shall be portable or seasonal construction, shall comply with the provisions
of Vision Clearance Standards (VC), and shall be removed so as to observe the setback line for accessory
structures when not in use.
4. Parking: The roadside sale of produce shall be arranged so that parking does not block any right-of-way.
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 05
5-102
5.92 TU-03: Residential Temporary Use and Structure Standards
This Temporary Use and Structure Standards section applies to the following zoning districts:
M1
The following standards apply:
A. Model Homes: Model homes, apartments, and condominiums that contain a sales office shall be permitted with
the following requirements:
1. Duration: The duration of a Temporary Improvement Location Permit for a model home, apartment, or
condominium shall be three (3) years and may be renewed annually after the initial three-year period.
2. Location: Model homes, apartments, and condominiums shall be on the site of the development for which
the sales are taking place.
3. Parking: The model home, apartment, or condominium shall provide the required parking in Parking
Standards (PK) for the applicable district.
4. Signs: The model home, apartment, or condominium may have a sign, but the sign shall meet the Temporary
Sign Standards for the district in which it is located.
5.93 TU-04: Nonresidential Temporary Use and Structure Standards
This Temporary Use and Structure Standards section applies to the following zoning districts:
The following standards apply:
A. Sale of Seasonal Items: The sale of seasonal items such as Independence Day fireworks, Christmas trees, and
Halloween pumpkins shall be permitted if the following standards are met:
1. Duration: The duration of a Temporary Improvement Location Permit for the sale of seasonal items shall
be no more than forty-five (45) days. All unsold merchandise shall be removed within five (5) days after the
expiration of the Temporary Improvement Location Permit.
2. Location:
a. The sale of seasonal items shall be on a lot that fronts a collector or arterial street, but shall meet Setbacks
for Accessory Structures in the district in which it is located.
b. The sale of seasonal items shall be at least fifty (50) feet from residential zoning districts.
c. The sale of seasonal items may be in a parking lot, but shall not displace parking such that the property is
not compliant with the minimum number of parking spaces.
3. Additional Requirements: The sale of seasonal items must comply with all requirements of applicable State laws.
Temporary Use and Structure Standards (TU)
Article
Development Standards
05
5-103
5.94 TR-01: General Trash Receptacle Standards
This Trash Receptacle Standards section applies to the following zoning districts:
M1
The intent of the Trash Receptacle Standards section is to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of
the zoning jurisdiction of the City by requiring outdoor trash receptacles to meet certain standards and to enhance the
aesthetic environment of the City. The following standards apply:
A. Project Applicability: Any new outdoor trash receptacle, dumpster, compactor, or similar container placed after
the effective date of this Unified Development Ordinance shall be permitted if all of the following standards are met.
1. Exemptions: Outdoor trash receptacles, dumpsters, compactors, or similar containers temporarily placed (i.e.
construction projects) shall be exempt from the standards in this section.
B. Design:
1. Screening:
a. Outdoor trash receptacles, dumpsters, compactors, or similar containers shall be screened on all sides by
a fence or wall that is constructed with wood, brick, vinyl or stone.
b. Outdoor trash receptacles, dumpsters, compactors, or similar containers shall be accessible by gates
which aesthetically coordinates with screening.
c. The screening of outdoor trash receptacles, dumpsters, compactors, or similar containers shall meet the
location and setback requirements in Fence and Wall Standards (FW).
2. Surface Materials: Outdoor trash receptacles, dumpsters, compactors, or similar containers shall be placed
on a paved surface.
C. Setbacks:
1. Front Yard: Trash receptacles shall not be located in a front yard.
2. Side Yard: Trash receptacles shall meet the setbacks for Parking Lots for the district in which they are
located.
3. Rear Yard: Trash receptacles shall meet the setbacks for Parking Lots for the district in which they are
located.
D. Maintenance: All trash receptacles and screening associated with trash receptacles shall be properly maintained
and kept in good condition.
Trash Receptacle Standards (TR)
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 05
5-104
5.95 VC-01: General Vision Clearance Standards
This Vision Clearance Standards section applies to the following zoning districts:
M1
The intent of the Vision Clearance Standards section is to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the
zoning jurisdiction of the City by eliminating visual obstructions at intersections. The following standards apply:
A. Vision Clearance Triangle: A vision clearance or sight triangle shall be maintained at every intersection of two (2)
or more streets, intersection of a street and alley, and intersection of a street and driveway.
1. Horizontal Area:
a. Arterial Streets: The vision clearance triangle leg lengths shall be twenty-five (25) feet as measured
from the edge of right-of-way (see “A” in the illustration below) when one (1) or more of the intersecting
streets is an arterial street
b. Other Streets: The vision clearance triangle leg lengths shall be fifteen (15) feet as measured from the
edge of right-of-way (see "A" in the illustration below) when one (1) or more of the intersecting streets is
a collector or local street.
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Sight
Triangles
A
ROW Line
A
B
B
2. Vertical Area: No primary or accessory structures, landscaping, fences, walls, or signs shall be permitted to
be placed or to project into the vision clearance triangle between the heights of two and one-half (2.5) feet
and nine (9) feet above the crown of the adjacent roadway.
3. Exemptions: Public street signs and utility poles shall be exempt from the vision clearance standards.
Vision Clearance Standards (VC)
© 2018, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Article
Subdivision Types
06
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 06
6-2
6.01 Residential Subdivision Intent
Residential Subdivision (RS)
6.02 Residential Subdivision Prerequisites
Base Zoning
• AG, ER, R1, R2, R3, TR, M1 or M2
Minimum Parent Tract:
• No minimum
Maximum Parent Tract:
• No maximum
The Standard Subdivision type is intended
to provide a development option with the
following features:
Land Use
• 100% residential
Applicability
• Residential subdivisions of all sizes that may or
may not require new streets
Pedestrian Network
• Safe and efficient pedestrian circulation within
the subdivision
• Safe and efficient pedestrian accessibility to
perimeter streets
Vehicular Network
• Connectivity to adjacent development, adjacent
undeveloped parcels, and the existing street
network
• Large radius corners and curves
Site Feature Preservation
• Strive to save existing quality tree stands
Article
Article 06: Subdivision Types
06
Additional Design Standards that Apply
6-3
6.03 Residential Subdivision Standards
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP © 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Cul-de-sac
Length
Block
Length
Stub
Street
R.O.W.
Stub Street
Residential Subdivision (RS)
Required Open Space
• 15%
Minimum Perimeter Landscaping
• 25 feet along perimeter streets for entire
depth of entry lots
Minimum Block Length
• 140 feet
Maximum Block Length
• 1,000 feet
Minimum Cul-de-sac Length
• 140 feet
Maximum Cul-de-sac Length
• 600 feet; or maximum of 20 lots
Minimum ROW on Local Streets
• 60 feet
Design Speed
• 20 to 30 mph
Minimum Pavement Width
• 32 feet
Curb
• Rolled or vertical curb required
On-street Parking
• Required on at least one side
Minimum Tree Plot Width
• 5 feet
Minimum Sidewalk/Sidepath Width
• 5 feet sidewalks along both sides of
internal streets
• 6 feet sidepaths or sidewalks along
perimeter streets
• 8 feet trail if along a proposed trail route
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Development Name (DN)
• DN-01.......................... Page 7-4
Dedication of Public
Improvement (DD)
• DD-01.......................... Page 7-5
Easement (EA)
• EA-01........................... Page 7-6
Entryway Feature (EF)
• EF-01........................... Page 7-8
Erosion Control (EC)
• EC-01........................... Page 7-9
Floodplain (FP)
• FP-01......................... Page 7-10
Lot Establishment (LT)
• LT-01...........................Page 7-11
Monument and Marker (MM)
• MM-01........................ Page 7-14
Open Space (OP)
• OP-01........................ Page 7-15
Owners' Association (OA)
• OA-01........................ Page 7-16
Pedestrian Network (PN)
• PN-01......................... Page 7-18
Perimeter Landscaping (PL)
• PL-01......................... Page 7-19
Prerequisite Standards (PQ)
• PQ-01........................ Page 7-20
Storm Water Standards (SM)
• SM-01........................ Page 7-21
Street and Access (SA)
• SA-01......................... Page 7-23
• SA-02......................... Page 7-27
• SA-04......................... Page 7-28
• SA-06......................... Page 7-30
Street Lighting (SL)
• SL-01......................... Page 7-31
Surety (SY)
• SY-01......................... Page 7-32
Utility Standards (UT)
• UT-01......................... Page 7-34
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 06
6-4
The Commercial District Subdivision type is
intended to provide a development option
with the following features:
Land Use
• At least 90% non-residential
Applicability
• Commercial subdivisions regardless of
the number of lots and regardless if new
infrastructure improvements are required
Pedestrian Network
• Safe movement to primary structures from
streets
• Safe movement between primary structures
• Safe accessibility to perimeter streets
Vehicular Network
• Connectivity to adjacent development, adjacent
undeveloped parcels, and the existing street
network
• Adequate accessibility for deliveries
• Use of frontage roads when necessary
• Minimal curb cuts
Site Feature Preservation
• Strive to save quality existing tree stands
Base Zoning
• AC, IS, DC, C1 or C2
Minimum Parent Tract
• 2 acres (87,120 square feet)
Maximum Parent Tract
• No maximum
Commercial District Subdivision (CD)
6.04 Commercial District Subdivision Intent
6.05 Commercial District Subdivision Prerequisites
Article
Article 06: Subdivision Types
06
Additional Design Standards that Apply
6-5
Design Speed
• 20 to 35 mph
Minimum Pavement Width
• 32 feet
Curb
• Rolled or vertical curb required
On-street Parking
• Not permitted
Minimum Tree Plot Width
• 5 feet
Minimum Sidewalk/Sidepath Width
• 5 feet sidewalks along both sides of
internal streets
• 6 feet sidepaths or sidewalks along
perimeter streets
• 8 feet trail if along a proposed trail route
Minimum Block Length
• 140 feet
Maximum Block Length
• 1,000 feet
Minimum Cul-de-sac Length
• 140 feet
Maximum Cul-de-sac Length
• 600 feet
Minimum ROW on Local Streets
• 60 feet
Required Open Space
• 10%
Commercial District Subdivision (CD)
6.06 Commercial District Subdivision Standards
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP © 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Cul-de-sac
Length
Block
Length
Stub
Street
R.O.W.
Stub Street
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Development Name (DN)
• DN-01.......................... Page 7-4
Dedication of Public
Improvement (DD)
• DD-01.......................... Page 7-5
Easement (EA)
• EA-01........................... Page 7-6
Entryway Feature (EF)
• EF-01........................... Page 7-8
Erosion Control (EC)
• EC-01........................... Page 7-9
Floodplain (FP)
• FP-01......................... Page 7-10
Lot Establishment (LT)
• LT-02.......................... Page 7-12
Monument and Marker (MM)
• MM-01........................ Page 7-14
Open Space (OP)
• OP-01........................ Page 7-15
Owners' Association (OA)
• OA-01........................ Page 7-16
Pedestrian Network (PN)
• PN-01......................... Page 7-18
Perimeter Landscaping (PL)
• PL-01......................... Page 7-19
Prerequisite Standards (PQ)
• PQ-01........................ Page 7-20
Storm Water Standards (SM)
• SM-01........................ Page 7-21
Street and Access (SA)
• SA-01......................... Page 7-23
• SA-02......................... Page 7-27
• SA-05......................... Page 7-29
• SA-06......................... Page 7-30
Street Lighting (SL)
• SL-02......................... Page 7-31
Surety (SY)
• SY-01......................... Page 7-32
Utility Standards (UT)
• UT-01......................... Page 7-34
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 06
6-6
The Industrial Park Subdivision type is
intended to provide a development option
with the following features:
Land Use
• 100% nonresidential
• At least 60% industrial uses
Applicability
• Industrial subdivisions of all sizes that may or
may not require new streets
Pedestrian Network
• Safe movement to primary structures from
streets
• Safe movement between primary structures
• Safe accessibility to perimeter streets
Vehicular Network
• Connectivity to adjacent lots
• Use of frontage streets when necessary
• Safe and efficient integration of vehicular and
truck traffic
• Minimal curb cuts
Site Feature Preservation
• Strive to save quality existing tree stands
Base Zoning
• I1, I2, or HI
Minimum Parent Tract
• No minimum
Maximum Parent Tract
• No maximum
Industrial Park Subdivision (IP)
6.07 Industrial Park Subdivision Intent
6.08 Industrial Park Subdivision Prerequisites
Article
Article 06: Subdivision Types
06
Additional Design Standards that Apply
6-7
Design Speed
• 20 to 35 mph
Minimum Pavement Width
• 28 feet
Curb
• Rolled or vertical curb required
On-street Parking
• Not permitted
Minimum Tree Plot Width
• 5 feet
Minimum Sidewalk/Sidepath Width
• 5 feet sidewalks along both sides of
internal streets
• 6 feet sidepaths or sidewalks along
perimeter streets
• 8 feet trail if along a proposed trail route
Minimum Block Length
• No minimum
Maximum Block Length
• No maximum
Cul-de-sac Length
• Cul-de-sacs not permitted
Minimum ROW on Local Streets
• 60 feet
Minimum Open Space
• 10%
Industrial Park Subdivision (IP)
6.09 Industrial Park Subdivision Standards
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP © 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Cul-de-sac
Length
Block
Length
Stub
Street
R.O.W.
Stub Street
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Development Name (DN)
• DN-01.......................... Page 7-4
Dedication of Public
Improvement (DD)
• DD-01.......................... Page 7-5
Easement (EA)
• EA-01........................... Page 7-6
Entryway Feature (EF)
• EF-01........................... Page 7-8
Erosion Control (EC)
• EC-01........................... Page 7-9
Floodplain (FP)
• FP-01......................... Page 7-10
Lot Establishment (LT)
• LT-02.......................... Page 7-12
Monument and Marker (MM)
• MM-01........................ Page 7-14
Open Space (OP)
• OP-01........................ Page 7-15
Owners' Association (OA)
• OA-01........................ Page 7-16
Pedestrian Network (PN)
• PN-01......................... Page 7-18
Perimeter Landscaping (PL)
• PL-01......................... Page 7-19
Prerequisite Standards (PQ)
• PQ-01........................ Page 7-20
Storm Water Standards (SM)
• SM-01........................ Page 7-21
Street and Access (SA)
• SA-01......................... Page 7-23
• SA-02......................... Page 7-27
• SA-05......................... Page 7-29
• SA-06......................... Page 7-30
Street Lighting (SL)
• SL-02......................... Page 7-31
Surety (SY)
• SY-01......................... Page 7-32
Utility Standards (UT)
• UT-01......................... Page 7-34
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 06
6-8
© 2018, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Article
Design Standards
07
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 07
7-2
7.01 Using This Section
The following pages contain the design standards for site and infrastructure improvements associated with subdivisions,
Planned Developments, and development plan approval. These requirements shall also apply to planned
developments associated with subdivision approval. Each section represents the regulations for a specific category.
There are two ways to determine which design standards apply to a specific type of petition. They are:
A. Using Two-Page Layouts: Refer to the two-page layouts in Article 06: Subdivision Types for a specific subdivision
type. Applicable design standards for that specific subdivision type are identified by four-digit codes in the
"Additional Design Standards that Apply." Only the four-digit codes noted in the "Additional Design Standards
that Apply" section apply to that subdivision type.
B. Using Icons: Refer to the project icons used at the top of each design standards section in Article 07: Design
Standards. Each design standard section begins with a four-digit code and introductory sentence followed by
square icons that stand for subdivision or project type. These project icons note that the design standards written
in that section applies to that type of application.
7.02 Purpose of Design Standards
A. Intent: It is the purpose of Article 07: Design Standards to establish and define design standards that shall be
required by the City for any subdivision of land, development plan approval, and Planned Development.
Design Standards
Article
Article 07: Design Standards
07
7-3
7.03 Icon Key
- Residential Subdivision
- Commercial District Subdivision
- Industrial Park Subdivision
- Development Plan
- Planned Development
Icon Key
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 07
7-4
7.04 DN-01: General Development Name Standards
This Development Name Standards section applies to the following types of development:
A. Proposed Development Name: The applicant shall propose a unique name for the development.
1. Root Name: The proposed root name of the development shall not duplicate, or closely approximate phonetically,
the name of any other development within the zoning jurisdiction of the City.
2. Suffix Name: Deviations in suffix names (e.g. Place, Woods, or Glen) shall not constitute a unique name (for
example, if Preston Place exists, the name Preston Woods shall not be permitted).
3. Large Developments: Unique subareas within a large development or separate developments within close
proximity may be authorized to use the same root name by the Plan Commission.
B. Approval Authority: While the development name proposed by the applicant shall be considered, the Plan
Commission has authority to approve or deny the proposed name.
C. Renaming Authority:
1. Existing Development Names: Existing development names and development names that have been approved
by the Plan Commission shall not be changed without Plan Commission approval.
2. Proposed Development Names: The Plan Commission shall have authority to require a new unique name for
a development if the name proposed by the applicant is unacceptable. If an acceptable and unique development
name is not proposed by the applicant, the Plan Commission shall rename the development prior to final
approval.
Development Name Standards (DN)
Article
Article 07: Design Standards
07
7-5
7.05 DD-01: General Dedication of Public Improvement Standards
This Dedication of Public Improvement Standards section applies to the following types of development:
A. Project Applicability:
1. Right-of-way: Any right-of-way shown on an approved secondary plat (subdivisions), approved final plan
(planned developments), or on an approved development plan shall be considered dedicated upon approval
of the as-built plans by the Board of Public Works and Safety. In the City's Extra-Territorial Jurisdiction,
right-of-way shall be considered dedicated upon approval of the as-built plans by the DeKalb County
Commissioners.
2. Streets and Sidewalks: The intent of the City is to take ownership of streets and sidewalks located within a
right-of-way and that have been constructed to meet or exceed the City of Auburn's Construction Standards.
In the City's Extra-Territorial Jurisdiction, it is the intent of the County to take ownership of streets and sidewalks
located within a right-of-way and that have been constructed to meet or exceed the City of Auburn's
Construction Standards. However, the City or County may choose not to take ownership of specialty access
improvements, including but not limited to alleys, driveway aprons, driving aisles, unusual on-street parking,
or eyebrows.
3. Electric and Essential Services: Projects within Auburn Electric's service territory and/or Auburn Essential
Services Service Area shall coordinate with the utility. Agreements for in aid construction assistance for new
infrastructure shall be executed prior to the installation of the utility infrastructure.
4. Other Facilities: Other infrastructure or facilities may, at the election of the Board of Public Works and
Safety, be dedicated to the City. A developer's intentions for dedicating infrastructure and/or public facilities
shall be identified upon filing the primary plat or development plan. These facilities may include parks, open
space, retention ponds, drainage facilities, utilities, street lighting, or other facilities in which the City may
have interest.
B. Maintenance Surety: A maintenance surety may be required by the City at the time of dedication. See Surety
Standards (SY).
Dedication of Public Improvement Standards (DD)
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 07
7-6
Easement Standards (EA)
7.06 EA-01: Easement Standards
This Easement Standards section applies to the following types of development:
A. Cross-Reference:
1. Private Street Easements: For details concerning private street easements, see Street and Access Standards
(SA).
2. Temporary Turnaround Easements: For details concerning temporary turnaround easements, see Street and
Access Standards (SA).
3. Utility Easements: For details concerning utility easements, see Utility Standards (UT).
4. Drainage Easements: For details concerning drainage easements, see Storm Water Standards (SM).
5. Pedestrian Easements: For details concerning pedestrian easements, see Pedestrian Network Standards (PN).
B. Cross-access Easements:
1. Instrument Specifications: When required by this Unified Development Ordinance, each property owner
of record shall execute a cross-access easement instrument in favor of the adjoining property owner. The
cross-access easement instrument shall be signed by the owner or an authorized representative of the owner
of all associated properties. The cross-access easement instrument shall include the following language:
a. Identify the development with which the cross-access easement is associated.
b. The cross-access easement shall grant the general public the right to utilize the easement for purpose of
accessing adjoining parking lots.
c. The cross-access easement shall prohibit any person from parking vehicles within the easement.
d. The cross-access easement shall prohibit any person, including the property owner, from placing any
obstruction within the easement.
e. The cross-access easement shall be binding on all heirs, successors, and assigns to the property on which
the cross-access easement is located.
f. The cross-access easement shall be enforceable by the owners of each associated property, the City, and
any other specially affected persons identified in the cross-access easement.
g. The cross-access easement shall provide for modification or termination in a manner specified in this
Unified Development Ordinance.
h. The cross-access easement shall be cross-referenced to the most recently recorded deeds of the associated
properties.
i. The cross-access easement shall include a metes and bounds description of the easement.
2. Cross-access Easement Certificate:
a. When a secondary plat (subdivision), development plan, or final plan (planned development) is being
recorded, the applicant may forego a separate cross-access easement instrument in favor of printing
the following Cross-access Easement Certificate on the recordable instrument: “Areas on these plans
designated as a Cross-access Easement are established in favor of the adjoining property owner, and
grant the public the right to enter the easement for purposes of accessing adjoining lots. These easements
prohibit any person from parking vehicles within the easement, and prohibit the property owners or any
other person from placing any obstruction within the easement. These easements are binding on all heirs,
successors, and assigns to the property on which they are located. The grantee or the City may enforce
the provisions of the easement. The easement shall only be modified or vacated in the manner stipulated
in this Unified Development Ordinance, or its successor ordinance.”
b. The dedication and acceptance of any cross-access easements shown on a recordable instrument shall be
accomplished via a Certificate of Dedication and Acceptance signed by the appropriate property owners,
or their agents.
c. If the Declaration of Covenants is included on the recordable instrument, the Cross-access Easement
Certificate clearly shall be separate from the Declaration of Covenants.
Article
Article 07: Design Standards
07
7-7
C. General Easements:
1. Instrument Specifications: When an easement is required by this Unified Development Ordinance or an
easement is required per a commitment or condition of approval, but the standards for the easement type are
not specified, the property owner of record shall execute the easement instrument in favor of the appropriate
parties (for example, the general public, City, specific abutting property owner, etc.). The easement instrument
shall include the following language:
a. Identify the project or development with which the easement is associated.
b. Identify the size of the easement, a minimum of 10-feet on each side of a property line, unless otherwise
specified by this Unified Development Ordinance or the Plan Commission.
c. Specify those activities the appropriate parties are authorized to perform in the easement.
d. Specify those activities the property owner of record is prohibited from performing in the easement.
e. Be binding on all heirs, successors, and assigns to the property on which the easement is located.
f. Be enforceable by the property owner of record, any appropriate parties, and the City.
g. Provide for modification in the manner stipulated in this Unified Development Ordinance.
h. Be cross-referenced to the most recently recorded deed to the property on which the easement is to be
established.
i. Include a metes and bounds description of the easement.
j. Be signed by an authorized representative of the property owner of record granting the easement and by
an authorized representative of the grantee accepting the easement.
2. Easement Certificate:
a. When a secondary plat, development plan, or final plan of a planned development is being recorded, the
applicant may forego a separate easement instrument in favor of printing an easement certificate, the
content of which has been approved by the Plan Commission Attorney, on the recordable instrument.
b. The dedication and acceptance of any easements shown on a recordable instrument shall be accomplished
via a Certificate of Dedication and Acceptance signed by the appropriate property owners, or their agents.
c. If the Declaration of Covenants is included on the recordable instrument, the easement certificate clearly
be shall separate from the Declaration of Covenants.
Easement Standards (EA)
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 07
7-8
Entryway Feature Standards (EF)
7.07 EF-O1: General Entryway Feature Standards
This Entryway Feature Standards section applies to the following types of development:
A. Applicability:
1. Residential: Residential developments may establish an entryway feature.
2. Non-residential: Non-residential developments may establish an entryway feature.
B. Location: Entryway features shall be located at vehicular entrances to a development, but shall not be located
within any right-of-way without approval from the Board of Public Works and Safety.
C. Quantity and Size: The quantity and size of entryway features shall depend on the number of entrances and
classification of the street where the entrance is located.
1. Residential:
a. Residential developments with less than twenty (20) lots or units shall be permitted one (1) entryway
feature. The identification portion of the entryway feature shall not exceed twenty (20) square feet in area.
b. Residential developments with twenty (20) or more lots or units shall be permitted one (1) entryway
feature. The identification portion of the entryway feature shall not exceed forty (40) square feet in area.
c. Residential developments with 100 or more lots or units shall be permitted one (1) entryway feature for
the primary entrance, and one (1) entryway feature for one (1) secondary entrance. The identification
portion of the primary entrance's entryway feature shall not exceed forty (40) square feet; the identification
portion of the secondary entrance's entryway feature shall not exceed twenty (20) square feet.
2. Non-residential:
a. Non-residential developments with four (4) or less lots or that do not have private streets shall be permitted
one (1) entryway feature. The identification portion of the entryway feature shall not exceed twenty
(20) square feet in area.
b. Non-residential developments with more than four (4) lots and private streets shall be permitted one (1)
entryway feature. The identification portion of the entryway feature shall not exceed forty (40) square
feet in area.
D. Landscaping: The identification portion of the entryway feature shall be significantly subordinate to the
landscaping.
Article
Article 07: Design Standards
07
7-9
7.08 EC-01: General Erosion Control Standards
This Erosion Control Standards section applies to the following types of development:
A. Cross Reference: All proposed subdivisions, planned developments, and development plans shall be in compliance
with Chapter 160: Rules Related to the Illicit Discharge and Connection to Stormwater Drains Within the
City of Auburn, IN; and Chapter 161: Storm Water Runoff Control.
B. Permits:
1. MS4 Permit: No changes shall be made in the contour of the land, nor shall grading, or excavating begin until
an Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan has been reviewed and approved by the City's MS4 Coordinator;
and an MS4 Permit is obtained (when required).
2. Rule 5 Permit: Any development over one (1) acre shall obtain a Rule 5 Permit through DeKalb County Soil
and Water. Any development one (1) acre or less shall be exempt from obtaining a Rule 5 Permit, but shall
comply with Indiana's Rules.
C. Off-site Sedimentation: Whenever sedimentation is caused by stripping of vegetation, regrading, or other
development activities, it shall be the responsibility of the applicant to remove sedimentation from all adjoining
surfaces, drainage systems, and watercourses, and to repair any damage. This work shall be done at the applicant's
expense.
D. Fill Material: All fill material shall be compacted to meet the specifications in the City of Auburn's Construction
Standards.
1. Off-site Fill Material: Off-site fill material shall be free of environmentally hazardous materials. The
applicant shall ensure that fill material hauled from an off-site location is free of environmental contaminants.
The source of fill material shall be identified prior to application for a MS4 Permit. The MS4 Coordinator or
Zoning Administrator may request the applicant have testing performed on representative samples of the fill
material to determine if environmentally hazardous materials are present.
2. Organic Material: Detrimental amounts of organic material shall not be permitted in fill material.
3. Irreducible Material: No rock or similar irreducible material with a maximum dimension greater than twelve
(12) inches shall be buried or placed in fills unless included and approved as part of the MS4 Permit.
E. Health, Safety and Welfare: If the MS4 Coordinator, Director of Engineering, or Zoning Administrator determines
that any existing excavation or embankment or fill is hazardous, the property owner or the owner's agent
shall be notified in writing and shall, within the period specified, repair or eliminate the hazard or be subject to
Article 10: Enforcement and Penalties.
F. Disturbance of Protected Areas: If any “no disturb” area is driven over, altered, disturbed, or damaged in any way,
the applicant or property owner shall be subject to Article 10: Enforcement and Penalties.
Erosion Control Standards (EC)
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 07
7-10
7.09 FP-01: General Hazard Reduction Floodplain Standards
This Floodplain Standards section applies to the following types of development:
A. Cross-Reference: Appendix B: Flood Hazard Area Ordinance.
Floodplain Standards (FP)
Article
Article 07: Design Standards
07
7-11
7.10 LT-01: Residential Lot Establishment Standards
This Lot Establishment Standards section applies to the following types of development:
A. Project Applicability: The shape, location, and orientation of lots within a residential subdivision, residential
planned development, or residential development plan shall be appropriate for the uses proposed and be consistent
with the intent of the subdivision as indicated in Article 06: Subdivision Types or as indicated in Article 04:
Planned Developments for planned developments. Lot sizes shall also be consistent with those indicated for the
appropriate zoning district in Article 02: Zoning Districts.
B. Lot Design: Lots shall meet the following conditions.
1. Interior Street Frontage: Residential lots shall be laid out to front interior streets, which may include frontage
streets. Subdivisions shall be designed such that residential lots shall not front onto a perimeter street.
2. Side Lot Lines: Residential lots shall have side lot lines that are within fifteen degrees (15°) of a right angle if
the street the lot fronts is straight. Side lot lines shall be radial if the street lot fronts is curved.
3. Corner Lots: Residential corner lots smaller than 20,000 square feet shall be twenty-five percent (25%) larger
than the minimum lot area. This shall include lots at the corner of a development entrance and a perimeter
street, even if common areas exist.
4. Through Lots: Through lots are discouraged, and shall only be permitted if the lot does not establish access to
both frontages.
5. Special Lots: Residential lots abutting a watercourse, drainage way, channel, or stream shall be twenty-five
percent (25%) larger than the minimum lot area. This space shall be allocated on the side of the lot that abuts
the water feature as a “no-build” zone.
6. Property Line Corners: At intersections of streets, property line corners shall be rounded by arcs of at least
twenty (20) feet in radius or by chords of such arcs.
7. Pond Lots: Finished grade of residential lots abutting a pond (wet detention basin) shall be such that the lot is
usable without additional fill.
C. Lot Width: Lot width shall be determined by the distance between the two (2) side property lines, measured at the
minimum front setback line.
Lot Establishment Standards (LT)
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 07
7-12
7.11 LT-02: Non-residential Lot Establishment Standards
This Lot Establishment Standards section applies to the following types of development:
A. Project Applicability: The shape, location, and orientation of lots within a non-residential subdivision, nonresidential
planned development, or non-residential development plan shall be appropriate for the uses proposed
and be consistent with the intent of the subdivision as indicated in Article 06: Subdivision Types or as indicated
in Article 04: Planned Developments for planned developments. Lot sizes shall also be consistent with those
indicated for the appropriate zoning district in Article 02: Zoning Districts.
B. Lot Design: Lots shall meet the following conditions.
1. Interior Street Frontage: Non-residential lots shall be laid out to front interior streets, which may include
frontage streets. Individual lots shall only be laid out to have access onto perimeter streets if expressly
permitted by the Plan Commission.
2. Side Lot Lines: Non-residential lots shall have side lot lines that are within fifteen degrees (15°) of a right
angle if the street the lot fronts is straight. Side lot lines shall be radial if the street the lot fronts is curved.
Side lot lines shall extend in a straight line from the street for at least twenty percent (20%) of the property’s
depth.
3. Corner Lots: Non-residential corner lots shall be fifteen percent (15%) larger than the minimum lot area
indicated for the zoning district. If there is a maximum lot area, that maximum may also be increased by
fifteen percent (15%).
4. Special Lots: Non-residential lots abutting a watercourse, drainage way, channel, or stream shall be twentyfive
percent (25%) larger than the minimum lot area indicated for the zoning district. This space shall be
allocated on the side of the property that abuts the water feature as a “no-build” zone and may serve as the
Environmental Feature Protective Setback established in Environmental Standards (EN).
5. Cohesive Design: Non-residential developments (e.g. shopping centers, commercial areas, and office parks)
shall be designed holistically as a single project no matter how many lots are generated. Cross-access easements
to allow access between parking lots shall be included where appropriate. See Easement Standards
(EA) for details on Cross-access Easements.
6. Sensitivity to Context: Non-residential developments shall be laid out to be sensitive to neighboring residential
developments, if built, or residential zoning districts if undeveloped.
7. Property Line Corners: At intersections of streets, property line corners shall be rounded by arcs of at least
twenty (20) feet in radius or by chords of such arcs.
Lot Establishment Standards (LT)
Article
Article 07: Design Standards
07
7-13
Mixed-use Development Standards (MX)
7.12 MX-01: General Mixed-use Development Standards
This Mixed Used Development Standards section applies to the following types of development:
A. Project Applicability: Any development that incorporates a mix of uses, either as a development plan or a planned
development, shall meet the standards in this section. A mix of uses may be proposed within the same building
and/or on the same parent tract.
B. Development Plan:
1. Minimizing On-site Conflicts: Mixed uses shall be arranged on the site to minimize conflicts between other
uses on-site or off-site.
C. Planned Development:
1. Minimizing On-site Conflicts: Mixed uses shall be arranged on the site to minimize conflicts between other
uses on-site or off-site.
2. Buffering Adjacent Properties: Any land use within the development that borders a differing land use outside
the development shall be reviewed to determine if a buffer yard is necessary. If a buffer yard is required, the
planned development shall install the buffer yard to specifications approved by the Plan Commission.
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 07
7-14
7.13 MM-01: General Monument and Marker Standards
This Monument and Marker Standards section applies to the following types of development:
A. Installation of Monuments and Markers: All monument and marker improvements shall be installed per 865 IAC
1-12-18 and the City of Auburn's Construction Standards, as amended. The standards call for twenty-four inch
(24") long five-eighths inch (5/8") rebar with a plastic identification cap with the survey/engineering firm's name
and number with eighteen inches (18") set below grade.
B. Centerline Monuments: Monuments conforming to 865 IAC 1-12-18(a)(2) shall be set on street center lines at
the beginning and end of curves and at the intersection of center lines. When it is not practical to set a centerline
monument in accordance with 865 IAC 1-12-18(a)(2), a centerline monument conforming to 865 IAC 1-12-18(a)
(3) shall be set.
C. Reporting: Upon completion of the infrastructure, as-built drawings shall be submitted showing where monuments
and markers were placed.
Monument and Marker Standards (MM)
Article
Article 07: Design Standards
07
7-15
7.14 OP-01: General Open Space Standards
This Open Space Standards section applies to the following types of development:
A. Applicability:
1. Residential: The minimum open space requirements indicated on the two page layouts in Article 06:
Subdivision Types or as indicated in Article 04: Planned Development for planned developments shall apply
to residential subdivisions that include a new public right-of-way and/or ten (10) or more lots.
2. Non-residential: The minimum open space requirements indicated on the two page layouts in Article 06:
Subdivision Types or as indicated in Article 04: Planned Development for planned developments shall apply
to non-residential subdivisions that include a new public right-of-way and/or five (5) or more lots.
3. Partial Exemptions: The minimum open space requirements indicated on the two page layouts in Article 06:
Subdivision Types or as indicated in Article 04: Planned Development for planned developments shall be
reduced by fifty percent (50%) if the proposed development provides connectivity to an existing trail, park, or
recreational facility.
B. Ownership: Open space areas shall retain private ownership whether that be a single land owner or an owners'
association.
C. Qualifying Areas: The following features count toward the minimum open space requirements:
1. Conservation Areas: Any required preservation or conservation area.
2. Man-made Water Features: Any man-made water feature, including a retention facility, if it supports aquatic
life and provides native habitat that meets the following conditions:
a. A surface area at normal pool elevation of at least 32,670 square feet (¾ acre); and
b. A buffer area around the perimeter of the water feature that is at least twenty-five (25) feet in width that
is open space and not part of a platted lot. The buffer area shall be planted and maintained as wildlife
habitat.
3. Man-made Dry Detention Facilities: Any man-made storm water dry detention facility that meets the
following conditions:
a. At least 10,890 square feet (¼ acre) of flat bottom area.
b. Depth of the detention facility shall not exceed four (4) feet from top of bank.
c. Slopes within the detention facility shall not exceed a 4:1 ratio.
d. A buffer area around the perimeter of the facility that is at least twenty-five (25) feet from the top of
bank that is open space and is not part of a platted lot. The buffer area (and facility) shall be planted and
maintained as usable area. This includes use of prairie grasses, native species, native ground cover, or
lawn grass. Tree planting shall not be within the basin area or on the slopes of the bank.
4. Regulated Floodplain: The regulated floodplain of any stream, regulated drain, or river.
5. Required Perimeter Landscaping: Fifty percent (50%) of the perimeter landscaping areas required in
Perimeter Landscaping (PL).
6. Other: Other common areas set aside to meet open space requirements.
Open Space Standards (OP)
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 07
7-16
Owners' Association Standards (OA)
7.15 OA-01: Owners' Association Standards
This Owners' Association Standards section applies to the following types of development:
A. Project Applicability: Any subdivision or development with common area, private streets, shared parking,
amenity centers, shared or private utilities, community retention pond, and the like shall meet the Owners'
Association Standards.
B. Establishment of Owners' Association:
1. Perpetuity: An owners' association shall be created in perpetuity to make decisions about and to maintain all
common property and/or common facilities.
2. Organization: An owners' association shall be a legally incorporated entity or shall be created by other legal
mechanisms which provides shared ownership or shared responsibility of common property and/or common
facilities. A board of directors or other means for representation in decision-making shall be established.
3. Recording of Legal Mechanism: The legal mechanism binding all property owners or vested parties shall be
recorded in the Office of the DeKalb County Recorder, and shall be cross referenced to each applicable lot or
property.
4. Declaration of Covenants: The owners' association shall be responsible for the administration of any
covenants utilized to further restrict improvements and uses in the development. The "Declaration of
Covenants" shall be recorded in the Office of the DeKalb County Recorder following secondary plat approval
(subdivisions) or Final Development Plan approval (planned developments or development plans) and prior
to selling a lot or unit.
5. Commitments or Conditions of Approval: Any covenant language that resulted as a commitment or condition
of approval shall be included in the covenants or other legal document, and shall be clearly denoted as
non-amendable by the owners' association.
6. Association Fee: An association fee or other financial mechanism shall be included in the legal mechanism
and be equal to the financial needs of the owners' association to maintain common property and/or
common facilities, and to accumulate a reserve account for long-term large expenditures, emergencies, and
contingencies.
C. Required Language: The following language shall be required in the legal mechanism establishing the owners'
association:
1. Street Lighting: Should the City not accept the street lights, the City shall bear no financial responsibility for
operation or maintenance costs associated with street lighting. The owners' association shall bear the cost
of operation and maintenance. In the event the owners' association fails to maintain street lighting, the City
may make the improvements and assess each property for the project cost plus administration costs.
2. Retention Pond and Drainage Systems: When a retention pond and/or other drainage systems are required
or installed, the City shall not, now or in the future, be obligated to accept them as public infrastructure or to
maintain those facilities. The owners' association shall bear the cost of such maintenance. In the event the
owners' association fails to maintain the retention pond and/or other drainage facilities, the City may make
the improvements and assess each property for the project cost plus administration costs.
3. Private Streets: When private streets are installed, the City shall not, now or in the future, be obligated to
accept private streets as public property. The City shall bear no financial responsibility for maintenance or
replacement costs associated with private streets. The owners' association shall bear the cost of maintenance
and replacement. In the event the owners' association fails to maintain private streets, the City may make the
improvements and assess each property for the project cost plus administration costs.
4. Sidewalks: When sidewalks are installed outside of a right-of-way, the City shall not, now or in the future, be
obligated to accept the sidewalks as public property. The City shall bear no financial responsibility for maintenance
or replacement costs. The owners' association shall bear the cost of maintenance and replacement.
In the event the owners' association fails to maintain the sidewalks, the City may make the improvements and
assess each property for the project cost plus administration costs.
Article
Article 07: Design Standards
07
7-17
5. Landscaping: When landscaping installed in common areas or easements, the owners' association shall be
responsible for maintaining the plant material in healthy condition, removal of dead or diseased vegetation,
and/or replacement of landscaping, as necessary.
6. Right-of-way: Once rights-of-way are platted, the City obtains ownership of the area within the right-of-way
and retains the right to reasonably remove any tree or shrub impeding necessary work to be performed by
the City and/or all public utilities, or other properly authorized users, regardless if the owners association is
assigned financial, maintenance, or replacement responsibility. However, City action shall not result in an
unnecessary or unfair financial burden to the owners' association.
7. Improvements Within Easements: Improvements, such as sheds, fences, and extensive retaining walls or
landscaping shall obtain approval from the Board of Public Works and Safety through a Utility Service
Agreement.
8. Defunct Clause: Language to be added.
D. Contractual Obligations: Prior to the transition from the developer being responsible for common property and/or
common facilities to the owner's association being responsible for common property and/or common facilities, the
developer shall not enter into any contractual obligation on behalf of the owners' association that exceeds one (1)
year. Once the owners' association is responsible, the renewal of such a contract shall be at the discretion of the
owners' association.
E. Transition from Developer to Owners: The developer shall begin transitioning the responsibility for the owner's
association to the lot owners when sixty percent (60%) of the lots are developed. Responsibility shall be shared
between the developer and lot owners until ninety percent (90%) of the lots are developed. Once ninety percent
of the lots are developed, the owner's association responsibility shall fall to the lot owners.
F. Enforcement: Failure of the developer and/or owners' association to maintain an effective legal mechanism or
failure of the developer and/or owners' association to fulfill its responsibilities within that legal mechanism shall
be deemed a violation of this Unified Development Ordinances and may be subject to Article 10: Enforcement
and Penalties.
Owners' Association Standards (OA)
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 07
7-18
7.16 PN-01: General Pedestrian Network Standards
This Pedestrian Network Standards section applies to the following types of development:
A. Applicability: Developments shall integrate an interior and exterior pedestrian network comprised of concrete
sidewalks and/or asphalt sidepaths for pedestrian transportation and recreation. This network shall consist of
sidewalks along street frontages and sidepaths between developments and public destinations (e.g. schools, parks,
hospitals), nearby trails, other developments, and undeveloped properties.
1. Required: Details about when and where sidewalks are required shall be as indicated on the two-page layout
for each subdivision type in Article 06: Subdivision Types, as indicated in Article 04: Planned Developments
for planned developments, or as indicated in Public Improvement Standards (PI) for development plans. If
not indicated, the Plan Commission shall determine the appropriate sidewalk or sidepath requirements if a
development is heard by the Plan Commission. If a development is not heard by the Plan Commission, the
Zoning Administrator shall determine the appropriate sidewalk and/or sidepath requirement.
a. Location: To the extent possible, sidewalks or sidepaths shall be located one (1) foot inside the rightof-
way to be dedicated to the City. If utility poles, trees, or other features complicate installation, then
the sidewalk or sidepath may extend into common areas or private property if a pedestrian easement is
created and executed.
b. Sidewalks shall be spaced away from the curb to create a tree plot and to provide pedestrian separation
from vehicles. The minimum tree plot width shall be as indicated on the two-page layout for each
subdivision type in Article 06: Subdivision Types or as indicated in Article 04: Planned Developments for
planned developments.
2. Width: The minimum sidewalk or sidepath width shall be as indicated on the two-page layout for each
subdivision type in Article 06: Subdivision Types or as indicated in Article 04: Planned Developments for
planned developments. If not indicated, the Plan Commission and/or Zoning Administrator shall determine
the appropriate sidewalk or sidepath width.
B. Cross Reference: Sidewalks and sidepath improvements shall be constructed to meet or exceed the City of
Auburn's Construction Standards.
C. Pedestrian Easement: A pedestrian easement shall be required if a sidewalk or sidepath extends into a common
area or private property. There is no minimum width for a pedestrian easement; the pedestrian easement can
be for whatever portion of the sidewalk or sidepath is in common area or on private property. A pedestrian
easement shall be binding on all heirs, successors, and assigns to the property on which the easement is located;
be cross-referenced to the most recently recorded deed to the property on which the easement is to be established;
and be signed by an authorized representative of the property owner of record granting the easement and by an
authorized representative of the grantee accepting the easement.
D. Up-sizing: Up-sizing pedestrian infrastructure shall be considered by the City and the developer depending
on future development of adjacent parcels. Agreements concerning up-sizing utility infrastructure shall be in
accordance with appropriate Indiana Statutes and executed prior to the installation of the pedestrian infrastructure.
Pedestrian Network Standards (PN)
Article
Article 07: Design Standards
07
7-19
7.17 PL-01: General Perimeter Landscaping Standards
This Perimeter Landscaping Standards section applies to the following types of development:
A. Applicability: Perimeter landscaping shall be installed as indicated in the minimum perimeter landscaping
standards on the two-page layout for each subdivision type in Article 06: Subdivision Types or as indicated in
Article 04: Planned Developments for planned developments. If not indicated, the Plan Commission or Zoning
Administrator shall determine the appropriate perimeter landscaping requirements for the development.
B. Ownership: Perimeter landscaping areas shall retain private ownership whether that be a single land owner or an
owners' association.
C. Landscaping Design:
1. Size: Perimeter landscape areas shall extend the entire depth of the lots located at the development's entrance
right-of-way.
2. Plantings and Features: Perimeter landscaping shall be sufficient to create an aesthetically pleasing entrance
and provide privacy to lots along the perimeter. Perimeter landscaping may include existing, natural
vegetation, deciduous, evergreen, shrubbery, trees, mounding and/or fencing. Fencing shall be high quality
materials: wood, natural stone or metal, and not exceed six (6) feet in height.
D. Qualifying as Required Open Space: Fifty percent (50%) of the perimeter landscaping areas may count towards
open space required in Open Space Standards (OP).
Perimeter Landscaping Standards (PL)
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 07
7-20
Prerequisite Standards (PQ)
7.18 PQ-01: General Prerequisite Standards
This Prerequisite Standards section applies to the following types of development:
A. Applicability: If any the of the prerequisite do not appear for a particular type of subdivision (in Article 06:
Subdivision Types) or for a planned development (in Article 04: Planned Developments), then that prerequisite
does not exist for that particular subdivision type or planned development.
1. Base Zoning: The base zoning of the parent tract for a subdivision shall be as indicated on the two-page
layout for each type of subdivision in Article 06: Subdivision Types prior to consideration of the subdivision
by the Plan Commission. If a parent tract is in multiple zoning districts, each of those zoning districts must
be listed. Likewise, the base zoning of a property proposed for a planned development shall be as indicated
in Article 04: Planned Developments for planned developments prior to consideration of the planned development
by the Plan Commission.
2. Minimum Parent Tract: The minimum parent tract area shall be as indicated on the two-page layout for each
type of subdivision in Article 06: Subdivision Types or as indicated in Article 04: Planned Developments for
planned developments.
3. Maximum Parent Tract: The maximum parent tract area shall be as indicated on the two-page layout for each
type of subdivision in Article 06: Subdivision Types or as indicated in Article 04: Planned Developments for
planned developments.
4. Special Qualifications: All special qualifications indicated on the two-page layout for each type of subdivision
in Article 06: Subdivision Types or as indicated in Article 04: Planned Developments for planned
developments shall be met prior to consideration of the subdivision or planned development by the Plan
Commission.
Article
Article 07: Design Standards
07
7-21
7.19 SM-01 General Storm Water Standards
This Storm Water Standards section applies to the following types of development
A. Applicability: Subdivisions, planned developments, and development plans shall provide for the collection and
management of all storm and surface water drainage.
B. Cross Reference:
1. City Standards: Developments within the zoning jurisdiction of the City shall meet or exceed the City of
Auburn's Stormwater Management Ordinance. (See Chapter 160, Chapter 161 and Chapter 162 of the City of
Auburn's Code of Ordinances). All developments within the City's zoning jurisdiction shall meet or exceed
the requirements of the DeKalb County Drainage Board and/or Surveyor.
2. DeKalb County Drainage: Developments of the City's limits and developments accessing a county legal
drain shall meet or exceed the standards of DeKalb County per the DeKalb County Surveyor’s Office.
3. Construction: Drainage facilities shall be constructed to meet or exceed the City of Auburn's Construction
Standards.
C. Existing Drainage Facilities:
1. Protection: If any stream or surface drainage course is located in the area to be developed, an easement
shall be established along the stream or surface drainage course that extends a minimum of twenty (20) feet
per side or as required by the DeKalb County Surveyor. The applicant may propose re-routing the surface
drainage course, but shall obtain approval from the MS4 Coordinator, Director of Engineering, DeKalb
County Drainage Board, Indiana Department of Natural Resources, Indiana Department of Environmental
Management, and/or Army Corps of Engineers, whichever entities have jurisdiction.
2. Obstruction: The applicant shall not block, impede the flow of, alter, construct any structure, deposit any
material or object, or commit any act which will affect normal or flood flow in any ditch, stream, or watercourse
without having obtained prior approval from the MS4 Coordinator, Director of Engineering, DeKalb
County Drainage Board, Indiana Department of Natural Resources, Indiana Department of Environmental
Management, and/or Army Corps of Engineers, whichever entity has jurisdiction.
3. Restoration: The applicant shall restore any stream, watercourse, swale, tile, floodplain, or floodway that is
disturbed during development and return these areas or facilities to their original or equal condition.
D. Proposed Drainage Facilities: All developments shall be required to provide drainage facilities separate and
independent of sanitary sewers, for stormwater runoff. Drainage facilities shall meet the following conditions.
1. Location: Drainage facilities shall be located in common areas or on private property if the necessary
drainage easements (or utility and drainage easements) are created and executed.
2. Design:
a. Drainage facilities shall be designed to accommodate a 10-year storm event.
b. Drainage facilities shall be durable, easily maintained, retard sedimentation, and retard erosion.
c. Drainage facilities shall not endanger the public health and safety, or cause significant damage to
property.
d. Drainage facilities shall have sufficient capacity to accept the current water runoff from areas upstream
and accept the water runoff from the site after it is developed.
e. Drainage facilities shall be designed such that there will be no increase in the peak discharge runoff rate
as a result of the proposed development unless the existing downstream drainage facilities are adequate to
accept the increased runoff.
f. Surface water shall be conveyed in drainage facilities located in a right-of-way or in a storm drainage
easement. Drainage facilities shall be provided under driveways sot that the flow of water in ditches is
not impeded.
g. When the municipal storm sewer system is accessible, drainage inlets and pipe shall connect to said
system. When the municipal storm sewer system is not accessible, runoff shall be collected on-site.
There shall be adequate capacity to retain and/or retain that stormwater or approval from the Director of
Engineering or DeKalb County Surveyor to outlet to an off-site drainage facility.
Storm Water Standards (SM)
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 07
7-22
Storm Water Standards (SM)
3. Storm Drainage Easements:
a. When a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainage way, channel or stream, a storm drainage
easement which conforms to the lines of the water course shall be required.
b. An open drainage easement shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet in width unless the Director of
Engineering or DeKalb County Surveyor require it to be wider.
c. Public utility infrastructure and/or permanent structures shall not be permitted in a storm drainage
easement. If the easement is established as a "Utility and Storm Drain Easement" utility infrastructure
shall be permitted.
E. As-built Drawings and Maintenance Surety: As-built drawings of all drainage facilities associated with a
development and a maintenance surety in accordance with Surety Standards (SY) shall be submitted to the Zoning
Administrator and Director of Engineering upon completion of construction.
Article
Article 07: Design Standards
07
7-23
Street and Access Standards (SA)
7.20 SA-01: General Street and Access Standards
This Street and Access Standards section applies to the following types of development:
A. General: All developments shall provide adequate access to the existing street network and allocate adequate
areas for new streets that is consistent with the Auburn Comprehensive Plan.
B. Cross Reference: All street improvements, private or public, shall be designed, constructed, and installed to meet
or exceed the City of Auburn's Construction Standards. This includes cul-de-sacs, passing blisters, acceleration
lanes, and deceleration lanes.
C. Design Principles: Streets shall create conditions favorable to health, safety, convenience, and the harmonious
development of the community; shall give consideration to connectivity to adjacent parcels; shall provide access
to the City's existing street network. All public streets and associated rights-of-way and all private streets and
associated easements shall meet the following design criteria.
1. Applicability:
a. Block Length: The maximum block length shall be as indicated on the two-page layout for each type
of subdivision in Article 06: Subdivision Types or as indicated in Article 04: Planned Developments
for planned developments. If not indicated, the Zoning Administrator shall determine the appropriate
maximum block length.
b. Cul-de-sac Length: The minimum cul-de-sac length and maximum cul-de-sac length shall be as indicated
on the two-page layout for each type of subdivision in Article 06: Subdivision Types or as indicated
in Article 04: Planned Developments for planned developments. If not indicated, cul-de-sacs shall not be
permitted in that type of development.
c. Right-of-way: The minimum right-of-way on local streets shall be as indicated on the two-page layout
for each type of subdivision in Article 06: Subdivision Types or as indicated in Article 04: Planned
Developments for planned developments. If not indicated, the Zoning Administrator shall utilize the
Auburn Comprehensive Plan to determine an appropriate width.
d. Street Width: The minimum street width shall be as indicated on the two-page layout for each type
of subdivision in Article 06: Subdivision Types or as indicated in Article 04: Planned Developments
for planned developments. If a minimum street width is not indicated, the Zoning Administrator shall
utilize the Auburn Comprehensive Plan to determine the appropriate street width. Street width shall be
determined by measuring from back of curb to back of curb or, when curb does not exist, from edge of
pavement to edge of pavement.
e. Curb: Curb requirements shall be as indicated on the two-page layout for each type of subdivision in
Article 06: Subdivision Types or as indicated in Article 04: Planned Developments for planned developments.
If curb requirements are not indicated, the Zoning Administrator shall determine which type of
curb is required, if any.
f. On-street Parking: On-street parking shall be as indicated on the two-page layouts for each type of
subdivision in Article 06: Subdivision Types or as indicated in Article 04: Planned Developments for
planned developments. If on-street parking requirements are not indicated, the Zoning Administrator
shall determine appropriate on-street parking requirements for the development.
i. On-street parking shall meet the following criteria when it is included in a development.
[1] On-street parking installed on arterial streets shall be striped to indicate each parking space.
[2] On-street parking spaces shall be at least thirty (30) feet from an intersection unless the Director
of Engineering determines a greater distance is necessary.
[3] On-street parking shall not be permitted at street intersections.
g. Tree Plots: Tree plots shall be provided to meet or exceed the minimum tree plot width as indicated
on the two-page layouts for each type of subdivision in Article 06: Subdivision Types or as indicated
in Article 04: Planned Developments for planned developments. If a minimum tree plot width is
not indicated, the Zoning Administrator shall determine appropriate minimum tree plot width for the
development.
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 07
7-24
Street and Access Standards (SA)
2. Prohibited Street Designs:
a. Permanent dead end streets shall not be permitted. Cul-de-sacs and stub streets are not considered dead
end streets.
3. Grades: Streets shall be adjusted to the contour of the land to produce reasonable grades and produce usable lots.
4. Connectivity: All developments shall provide stub streets to connect to adjacent properties that meet the
following criteria:
a. Where the development abuts land that has established stub streets, built or platted, the applicant shall
design the street system to connect to those stub streets.
b. Where the development abuts undeveloped land, stub streets may be proposed by the applicant.
Generally, each side of the development that does not border a public street shall have at least one
(1) stub street. In large developments, additional stub streets may be necessary to provide adequate
connectivity to adjacent properties. Ultimately, the final number and location of stub streets shall be
recommended by the Zoning Administrator and the Director of Engineering, with the Plan Commission
making the final determination.
c. Regard shall be given to the Auburn Comprehensive Plan.
5. Stub Streets: Stub streets shall be constructed when other streets are built within the development.
Article
Article 07: Design Standards
07
7-25
6. Temporary Turnarounds: A temporary turnaround shall be established for each stub street, and a temporary
turnaround easement shall be recorded as part of the plat.
a. Temporary Turnaround Easements: When a temporary turnaround is required, the applicant shall execute
a temporary turnaround easement instrument in favor of the general public by including the following
information, "a temporary turnaround easement certificate," on the plat that is to be recorded.
i. Identify the development with which the temporary turnaround easement is associated.
ii. The temporary turnaround easement shall grant the general public the right to access the easement
for purpose of maneuvering vehicles.
iii. The temporary turnaround easement shall grant the City the right to alter, repair, maintain, or remove
the improvements.
iv. The temporary turnaround easement shall prohibit any person from parking vehicles within the
easement.
v. The temporary turnaround easement shall prohibit any person, including the property owner, from
placing any obstruction within the easement.
vi. The temporary turnaround easement shall be binding on all heirs, successors, and assigns to the
property on which the temporary turnaround easement is located.
vii. The temporary turnaround easement hall be enforceable by the Common Council, the Director of
Engineering, the Plan Commission, the Zoning Administrator, the City Attorney.
viii. The temporary turnaround easement shall automatically terminate upon the City's acceptance of
a connecting street. Otherwise, the temporary turnaround easement shall only be modified or
terminated in a manner specified in this Unified Development Ordinance.
7. Boulevard Entrances: Developments may have a boulevard entrance, but the boulevard entrance shall extend
at least fifty (50) feet from the perimeter street’s right-of-way. The width of the center planting strip shall be
at least ten (10) feet. Boulevard entrances shall be privately maintained.
8. Intersections:
a. All intersections of two (2) streets shall be within fifteen degrees (15°) of right angles to each other as
measured at the street center lines.
b. Intersections of more than two (2) streets at one (1) point shall not be permitted.
c. Where ever possible, new local streets shall be aligned with existing local streets. Local street intersections
with centerline offsets of less than one hundred twenty-five (125) feet shall not be permitted.
d. Radii shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet.
Street and Access Standards (SA)
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 07
7-26
D. Naming and Addressing Principles: All streets, public and private, shall meet the following street name criteria.
1. Proposed Street Name: The applicant shall propose a unique name for each street within the development at
the time of initial application. The proposed street names shall meet the following criteria.
a. Extensions: Streets which are extensions, continuations, or in alignment with any existing street, platted
right-of-way, or recorded access easement, shall bear the name of the existing street.
b. Root Name: The root street name (e.g. Maple) shall not duplicate or be phonetically similar to any
existing street name.
c. Suffix Name: Deviations in suffix names (e.g. Street, Court, or Avenue) shall not constitute a unique
name (for example, if Maple Street existed, the name Maple Court would not be permissible).
d. Large Developments: Streets within a large development or separate developments within close proximity
may be authorized to use the same root name by the Plan Commission.
2. Proposed Address Numbers: Street address numbers for all lots that are consistent with the City's existing
address scheme shall be required and provided by the Zoning Administrator.
3. Approval Authority: While street names and address numbers proposed by the applicant shall be considered,
the Plan Commission has authority to approve or deny any proposed street name or address number.
4. Renaming Authority:
a. Existing Street Names and Address Numbers: Existing street names and address numbers that have been
approved by the Plan Commission shall not be changed without Plan Commission approval.
b. Proposed Street Names and Address Numbers: The Plan Commission shall have authority to require a
new unique name for any street if the name proposed by the applicant is unacceptable. If an acceptable
and unique street name is not proposed by the applicant, the Plan Commission shall rename the street
prior to final approval.
E. Additional Rights-of-way Required: When developments abut or include existing streets that do not meet the
minimum right-of-way widths established in the Auburn Comprehensive Plan, the applicant shall dedicate additional
width along either one (1) or both sides of such streets sufficient to meet the requirements of the Auburn
Comprehensive Plan. If the applicant only controls property on one (1) side of the street, sufficient right-of-way
shall be dedicated to bring the half right-of-way up to the width required.
1. Off-site Street Improvements: When a development requires off-site street improvements, such as a passing
blister, acceleration lane, or deceleration lane, and inadequate right-of-way exists to install the off-site street
improvement, the applicant shall make a good faith effort to acquire property sufficient for the installation of
the off-site improvement. If the owner of the property on which the off-site improvement is to be installed
refuses to sell the property to the applicant, the applicant shall provide the Zoning Administrator with copies
of all surveys; appraisals; written offers made by the applicant; and correspondence from the property owner.
2. Eminent Domain: When the installation of off-site street improvements is required, it is because those
off-site street improvements are vital to the health, safety, and welfare of the motoring public. As a result,
the City may begin eminent domain proceedings in accordance with IC 32-24: Eminent Domain for the
acquisition of public right-of-way sufficient for the installation of the off-site street improvement upon receipt
of the aforementioned documentation illustrating the applicants failure to acquire the needed property. Upon
completion of the eminent domain proceedings, the applicant shall reimburse the City in an amount equal to
the cost of the land, cost for any condemnation on that land, and the cost to relocated any features.
3. Installation of Improvements: The applicant shall then install the off-site street improvement to meet or
exceed the City of Auburn's Construction Standards.
Street and Access Standards (SA)
Article
Article 07: Design Standards
07
7-27
7.21 SA-02: Private Street and Access Standards
This Street and Access Standards section applies to the following types of development:
A. Project Applicability: Private streets shall be permitted, but shall meet or exceed the standards for public streets
established within this Unified Development Ordinance and the construction standards for public streets within
the City of Auburn's Construction Standards.
B. Required Language: When a private street easement appears on a plat, the following language shall be printed on
the plat, "The developer of this real estate covenants and warrants on behalf of itself and all future owners of lots
within this subdivision or development that because the streets are private, all maintenance, repairs, and replacement,
now and forever, shall be undertaken at the expense of the lot owners (or unit owners) in accordance with
the terms and conditions set forth in the owners' association by-law and articles. No governmental entity has any
duty or responsibility to maintain, repair, or replace any private street."
C. Location: Private streets shall be located within private street easements, rather than rights-of-way. All
private street easements shall meet or exceed all the standards for rights-of-way established within this Unified
Development Ordinance, the Auburn Comprehensive Plan, and the City of Auburn's Construction Standards.
1. Private Street Easement Instrument Specifications: The applicant shall execute a private street easement
instrument in favor of the future lot owners or unit owners to which the private street provides access. The
following language shall be included on the private street easement instrument.
a. Identify the development with which the private street easement is associated.
b. Grant future lot or unit owners the right to access the easement for purposes of accessing their lot or unit.
c. Specify the financial responsibilities of the future lot or unit owners with respect to the alteration, repair,
maintenance, and removal of the improvements.
d. Prohibit future lot or unit owners or any other person from placing any obstruction within the easement.
e. Require that the private street be built to the City of Auburn's Construction Standards.
f. Be binding on all heirs, successors, and assigns to the property on which the easement is located.
g. Be enforceable by the future lot or unit owners, the City, and any other specially affected persons entitled
to enforce the easement.
h. Provide for modification or termination in the manner stipulated in this Unified Development Ordinance.
i. Be cross-referenced to the most recently recorded deeds to the properties on which the easement is to be
established.
j. Include a metes and bounds description of the easement.
k. Be signed by a each property owner granting the easement and by an authorized representative of future
lot or unit owners accepting the easement.
2. Private Street Easement Certificate:
a. When a plan (e.g. secondary plat, development plan, etc.) is being recorded, the applicant may forego a
separate easement instrument in favor of printing the following private street easement certificate on the
recordable instrument: “Areas show on this plan that are designated as a "Private Street Easement" (PSE)
shall be established in favor of the adjoining property owners that are hereby granted the right to enter
the easement for purposes of accessing their lot. The easement prohibits the property owners or any other
person from placing any obstruction within the easement. The easements are binding on all heirs, successors,
and assigns to the property on which they are located. The adjoining property owners or the City
may enforce the provisions of the easement. The easement shall only be modified or vacated in the manner
stipulated in this Unified Development Ordinance.”
b. If a Declaration of Covenants is included on the recordable instrument, the Private Street Easement
Certificate shall be clearly separate from the Declaration of Covenants.
Street and Access Standards (SA)
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 07
7-28
7.22 SA-03: Other Residential Street and Access (Alley) Standards
This Street and Access Standards section applies to the following types of development:
A. General: In order to better allow diversity in residential planned developments, alleys may be used to provide
access to up to fifty percent (50%) of all lots intended for single-family dwelling units to accommodate sideloading
garages, rear-loading garages, or detached garages.
B. Design Principles:
1. Associated Right-of-way or Easement: Alleys shall be located in a right-of-way or easement that is at least
sixteen (16) feet in width.
2. Pavement Width: Alleys shall have pavement that is at least twelve (12) feet in width.
3. Curb: Alleys shall not be required to have curb except when the alley is within a right-of-way or private
street easement where the associated street is required to have curb. In cases where an alley and curbed street
intersect, the minimum curb radius shall be eight (8) feet.
4. Intersections: Alley intersections with streets shall not exceed fifteen degrees (15°) from perpendicular to
said streets.
C. Construction Standards: Alleys, public or private, shall be constructed to meet or exceed the City of Auburn's
Construction Standards.
7.23 SA-04: Residential Street and Access Standards
This Street and Access Standards section applies to the following types of development:
A. Connectivity Index: The connectivity index is the ratio of linkages to nodes. The connectivity index supports
the creation of a highly-connected transportation system to enhance traffic circulation and efficiency, connect
neighborhoods, reduce emergency response times, and is typically considered during the primary plat phase.
1. Minimum Required: Residential subdivisions shall have a connectivity index of 1.25 or greater.
2. Calculations: The connectivity index is determined by taking the number of links (street segments) within
the primary plat divided by the number of nodes within the primary plat. Links include street segments
between intersections, street segments between cul-de-sacs and intersections, stub streets, and entrances
from perimeter streets. Nodes shall include intersections, cul-de-sacs, and eyebrows. An intersection with a
perimeter street (or the subdivision entrance) is not counted as a node.
3. Discretion: The Plan Commission may use discretion in situations where topography, existing development,
and/or natural features impede connectivity. The Plan Commission may also consider pedestrian
connectivity.
4. Exempt: Subdivisions that do not involve new streets shall be exempt from connectivity index.
Street and Access Standards (SA)
Article
Article 07: Design Standards
07
7-29
7.24 SA-05: Nonresidential Access Standards
A. This Access Streets Standards section applies to the following types of development:
B. Quantity: An applicant shall propose the minimal quantity of ingress/egress points to provide safe, efficient, and
adequate access for the various types of vehicular traffic that will access the development. The Plan Commission
shall make the final determination.
C. Specialty Access:
1. Access Streets and Rear Access Streets: Any non-residential development that fronts an arterial street and
has two (2) or more lots or a multiple tenant building shall provide an access street or rear access street as
the primary access. Commonly, an access street is perpendicular to the arterial street and accesses lots that
front the arterial street. An access street may also lead or turn into a rear access street, which is generally
parallel to the arterial street. A rear access street is generally located behind the first tier of commercial lots,
but in front of the second tier of commercial lots (often the anchor lots), but provides access to both. The
Plan Commission shall have discretion in requiring rear access streets in other circumstances to ensure a safe
and efficient future transportation network. Access streets and rear access streets shall meet the following
conditions.
a. Design:
i. Access streets shall generally run perpendicular to the arterial street.
ii. Rear access streets shall generally run parallel to the arterial street and be at least one hundred fifty
(150) feet from the arterial street (measured from the edge of pavement to the edge of pavement).
Frontage streets shall not be permitted.
iii. Access streets and rear access streets shall accommodate two-way traffic.
iv. Right-of-way or private street easement for an access street or a rear access street shall be at least
forty (40) feet in width.
v. Pavement width for an access street or rear access street shall be a minimum of thirty (30) feet.
vi. Parking shall not be permitted on rear access streets.
vii. Sidewalks shall be on one side of access streets and rear access streets and be integrated into the
overall pedestrian network of the development.
b. Points of Ingress/Egress: An access street or rear access streets serving developments less than fifteen
(15) acres shall be permitted two ingress/egress points onto a perimeter street. Developments with fifteen
(15) acres or more shall have a maximum of three (3) ingress/egress points onto a perimeter street.
Street and Access Standards (SA)
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 07
7-30
7.25 SA-06: Street and Access (Signs) Standards
This Street and Access (Signs) Standards section applies to the following types of development:
A. General: All streets, public or private, shall have signs necessary to provide a safe environment for drivers and
pedestrians and provide information for located streets, addresses, or development amenities.
B. Cross Reference: The City’s policies and the Indiana Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and
Highways (current version adopted by the Indiana Department of Transportation) shall be used to determine the
type, size, height, and location of each of these signs.
C. Public Safety Signs: The developer shall coordinate with the Street Superintendent before purchasing and installing
any public safety related street sign. The Street Superintendent shall make the final determination regarding
the final location and height of each sign. All public safety related street signs shall be installed prior to any street
being open to the public.
D. Street Name Signs: The developer shall coordinate with the Street Superintendent before purchasing and installing
any street name sign. One (1) street name sign shall be required for each intersection within the development
and on all perimeter intersections. The Street Superintendent shall make the final determination regarding the
final location and height of each sign. All street name signs shall be installed prior to any street being open to the
public.
E. Wayfinding System Signs: The applicant may propose a wayfinding system of signs.
1. Purpose: Wayfinding system signs shall be used to direct vehicular and pedestrian traffic to specific
destinations.
2. Appearance: Wayfinding systems shall be required to have signs of consistent size, scale and appearance.
3. Location: Wayfinding system signs shall be located on primarily on private property and not block view of
traffic. Should it become necessary to locate wayfinding system signs in public right-of-way, approval for
said signs shall be granted by the Board of Public Works and Safety prior to installation.
4. Review and Approval: Proposals for wayfinding systems shall be reviewed and approved at the discretion
of the Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator may take into account the need for the wayfinding
system, the size and complexity of the development, quantity and location of signs, number of entrances and
exists and the appearance of signs.
Street and Access Standards (SA)
Article
Article 07: Design Standards
07
7-31
Street Lighting Standards (SL)
7.26 SL-01: Residential Street Lighting Standards
This Street Lighting Standards section applies to the following types of development:
A. Project Applicability: Street lights shall be installed at all intersections, entrances, and along internal streets
within residential developments whether approved as a subdivision, development plan, or planned development.
B. Ownership: A developer's intention for maintenance and ownership of street lights shall be identified in the
application. Should the developer desire for the City to take control of street lights, that intention shall be stated
in the application and on the plans.
C. Street Light System Design: The proposed street light system shall meet the following conditions:
1. Glare: Street lights shall be shielded to prevent glare on neighboring properties.
2. Continuity: Street lights shall be a consistent style throughout the entire development.
3. Height: Street lights shall not exceed twenty-five (25) feet in height.
4. Intersections: One or more street lights shall be installed at all major intersections, including entrances,
and shall provide the minimum amount of light necessary for vehicular and pedestrian safety at those major
intersections.
5. Between Intersections: Street lights shall be installed between intersections at intervals no greater than every
400 feet on one side of the street.
6. Energy Conservation: Street lights, if applicable, shall be turned on by a photo cell that detects darkness,
preventing the lights from being turned on too early or staying on too long.
7.27 SL-02: Non-residential Street Lighting Standards
This Street Lighting Standards section applies to the following type of development:
A. Project Applicability: Street lights shall be installed at all intersections, entrances, and along internal streets
within non-residential developments whether approved as a subdivision, development plan, or planned
development.
B. Ownership: A developers intention for maintenance and ownership of street lights shall be identified in the
application. Should the developer desire for the City to take control of street lights, that intention shall be stated
in the application and on the plans.
C. Street Light System Design: The proposed street light system shall meet the following conditions:
1. Glare: Street lights shall be shielded to prevent glare on neighboring properties.
2. Continuity: Street lights shall be a consistent style throughout the entire development.
3. Height: Street lights shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height.
4. Intersections: One or more street lights shall be installed at all intersections, including entrances, and shall
provide the minimum amount of light necessary for vehicular and pedestrian safety at those intersections.
5. Between Intersections: Street lights shall be installed between intersections at intervals no greater than every
400 feet on one side of the street.
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 07
7-32
Surety Standards (SY)
7.28 SY-01: General Surety Standards
This Surety Standards section applies to the following types of development:
A. Construction and Performance Surety: A developer shall provide a Performance Surety to the City for any street,
sidewalk, path, utility, drainage facility, or any other facility that is intended to be dedicated to the City, but
will not be completed prior to final approval of the development. All such facilities, any off-site improvements
committed to by the developer, and any off-site improvements required as a condition of approval shall be
included in the performance surety.
1. Timing: Generally, the Performance Surety shall be accepted by the Board of Public Works and Safety prior
to final approval of the development by the Plan Commission and/or prior to issuance of building permits.
Plan Commission may grant conditional approval prior to the Performance Surety being accepted, but
building permits shall not be issued.
2. Requirements: The surety shall:
a. Be in an amount equal to 125% of an engineer's estimated cost for the project.
b. Be submitted on contractor or engineer's letterhead and approved by the City's Director of Engineering.
c. Run to and be in favor of the City if the improvement is inside the city limits or ultimately accepted by
the City. An additional surety shall run to and be in favor of the County if the improvement is outside the
city limits or ultimately accepted by the County.
d. Specify the date that the improvements are required to be completed by, both on- and off-site.
e. Be approved by the Board of Public Works and Safety (e.g. bond or letter of credit).
f. Be valid for two (2) years with one (1) year extension.
3. Phasing of Development: In the event a development is intended to be built-out in phases, either of the
following options may be approved by the Board of Public Works and Safety.
a. The developer shall propose a phase plan prior to final approval by the Plan Commission. If the proposal
is accepted, the developer shall provide a Performance Surety for the first phase of the development and
shall sign a binding agreement with the Board of Public Works and Safety stating that the developer shall
maintain ownership of all lots or land outside of each phase that has been approved for development.
Absolutely no lot or property shall be sold or committed in phases of the development that have not
been approved for commencement and that are not subject to a performance surety. Additionally, the
developer shall sign a contract with the Board of Public Works and Safety stating that it will support and
not interfere with the vacation of plat, vacation of right-of-way, and/or reversion of approval granted
to the applicant for any phases of the development yet to be authorized in the event that the developer
defaults on any authorized phase of the project requiring the Board of Public Works and Safety to claim
the surety for its completion. Once default has occurred, at the request of the Board of Public Works and
Safety or at the discretion of the Plan Commission, the Plan Commission may vacate the plat, vacate the
right-of-way, and/or revert any approval granted to the developer for phases left undeveloped in order to
protect the City of Auburn from having to pay for improvements to any phases that were left without a
performance surety.
4. Duration of Surety: All Performance Sureties shall be effective from the date of the Plan Commission's
approval of the secondary plat or development plan, and shall not terminate until:
a. As-built drawings, stamped by an engineer have been submitted to the Director of Engineering,
b. The final construction has been inspected and certified by the Director of Engineering,
c. The as-built drawings and infrastructure have been approved and accepted by the Board of Public Works
and Safety,
d. The infrastructure has been formally dedicated to the City, and
e. A maintenance surety has been approved and accepted by the Board of Public Works and Safety.
Article
Article 07: Design Standards
07
7-33
B. Maintenance Surety: Maintenance Surety shall be required as part of approval and acceptance of as-built plans
and infrastructure. The developer shall provide a maintenance surety to the City for any improvement that will be
dedicated to and accepted by the City.
1. Requirements: The maintenance surety shall:
a. Be for ten percent (10%) of the total cost to complete the improvements. The costs shall be documented
on contractor letterhead and approved by the Director of Engineering.
b. Be a type satisfactory to the Board of Public Works and Safety (e.g. bond or letter of credit).
c. Run to and be in favor of the City if the improvement is inside the city limits or ultimately accepted by
the City. An additional surety shall run to and be in favor of the County if the improvement is outside the
city limits or ultimately accepted by the County.
d. Specify that it shall expire after three (3) years from the date the improvement was approved and
dedicated.
e. Be submitted in a form approved or provided by the Board of Public Works and Safety.
f. Warrant the workmanship and all materials used in the construction, installation, and completion of said
improvements and that the installations are of good quality and have been constructed and completed
in a workmanlike manner in accordance with standards, specifications and requirements of this Unified
Development Ordinance and the City of Auburn's Construction Standards.
2. Release of Surety: The maintenance surety shall be released upon its expiration date without formal action
by the City, unless a claim has been filed against the maintenance surety prior to the expiration date. Once all
claims have been settled, the maintenance surety shall be released by the City.
Surety Standards (SY)
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 07
7-34
7.29 UT-01: General Utility Standards
This Utility Standards section applies to the following types of development:
A. Project Applicability:
1. Sanitary Sewer: Sanitary sewer utility infrastructure shall be provided for subdivisions, developments subject
to development plan review, and planned developments by the developer. Connection to the City of Auburn
sanitary sewer utility and collection system shall be required for each lot and/or primary structure.
2. Water: Water utility infrastructure shall be provided for subdivisions, developments subject to development
plan review, and planned developments by the developer. Connection to the City of Auburn municipal water
system shall be required for each lot and/or primary structure. In addition to a potable water distribution
systems fire hydrants for fire protection shall also be provided by the developer.
a. A private well may be permitted within the City's extra-territorial jurisdiction (i.e. outside the city limits)
if:
i. The nearest accessible water line is over 300 feet from the edge of the new development, and
ii. The cost of connecting to the water system is three times (3X) the cost of the installation of all
private wells necessary to provide water to all lots, primary structures and future phases of the
project, and
iii. The private well is approved by the DeKalb County Health Department.
3. Wells: Wells within the City limits shall be in accordance with Chapter 53: Water.
B. Location: Sanitary sewer utility infrastructure and water utility infrastructure shall be located in a right-of-way
or within an area designated as a utility easement (or a utility and drainage easement). The location of proposed
utilities and any utility easements shall be approved by the Director of Engineering and the appropriate utility
department prior to the final approval of any plan and prior to any installation.
C. Utility Easements: Utility easements shall extend ten (10) feet on each side of a property line.
D. Construction:
1. City Standards: All utility improvements and utility infrastructure intended to be dedicated to and accepted
by the City shall be designed and installed to meet or exceed the City of Auburn's Construction Standards and
each component (hydrants, valves, etc.) shall be approved by the City.
2. Sanitary Sewer Standards: Service and connections to the City of Auburn municipal sanitary sewer system
shall comply with Chapter 50 Sewer Service of the Auburn Code of Ordinances and any other City standards
applicable to the sanitary sewer systems and connections.
3. Water System Construction Standards:
a. Service and connections to the City of Auburn municipal water utility shall comply with Chapter 53
Water of the City of Auburn Code of Ordinances and any other City standards applicable to water utility
systems and connections.
b. A water line shall be a minimum eight-inch (8") diameter, except a residential street where a water line
deadends. In this case, a water line shall be a minimum be six-inch (6") diameter for no more than 300
feet.
c. Fire hydrants shall be located at every street intersection; at intervals that do not exceed 500 feet in
residential areas; at intervals that do not exceed 300 feet in non-residential areas; no more than 500 feet
from the furthest point of any habitable structure; and approved by the Auburn Fire Department.
4. State Approval: The Indiana Department of Environmental Management shall approve plans via a Notice of
Intent (NOI) for the water and sanitary sewer utility infrastructure after Primary Plat approval, but prior to
any installation or Secondary Plat approval.
5. Coordination: The developer shall be responsible for coordinating the installation of the utilities. Conflicts
with prior constructed utilities and damage to them shall be repaired before allowing any work to continue.
E. Up-sizing: Up-sizing sanitary sewer utility infrastructure and/or water utility infrastructure shall be considered
by the City and the developer depending on future development of adjacent parcels. Agreements concerning
up-sizing utility infrastructure shall be in accordance with appropriate Indiana Statutes and executed prior to the
installation of the utility infrastructure.
Utility Standards (UT)
© 2018, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Article
Nonconformances
08
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 08
8-2
Nonconforming Structures, Uses and Lots
8.01 Intent
As new zoning regulations are adopted or zoning map changes are made, lots, structures, and uses that were previously
compliant with zoning regulation are sometimes made noncompliant. Article 08: Nonconformance specifies the
provisions that apply to these legal nonconforming (informally referred to as “grandfathered”) lots, structures, and uses.
8.02 Distinction Between Conforming, Illegal Nonconforming, and Legal Nonconforming
Each structure, use, and lot is either "conforming" or "nonconforming." Conforming is used to describe a structure,
use, or lot as being in full compliance with the current Unified Development Ordinance. Nonconforming is used to
describe a structure, use, or lot that is in violation of the current Unified Development Ordinance. Nonconforming
structures, uses, and lots are either "illegal nonconforming" or "legal nonconforming." The following sections
determine the nonconforming status of a structure, use, or lot:
A. Illegal Nonconforming:
1. Structure: A structure constructed in violation of the zoning ordinance that was in effect when the structure
was constructed and which remains in violation of the current Unified Development Ordinance is an illegal
nonconforming structure.
2. Use: A use that was in violation of the zoning ordinance that was in effect when the use was initiated and
which remains in violation of the current Unified Development Ordinance is an illegal nonconforming use.
In addition, a use that was legally established and is not permitted under the current Unified Development
Ordinance, but has been abandoned or discontinued for a period of at least one (1) year, is an illegal nonconforming
use.
3. Lot: A lot established in violation of the zoning or subdivision control ordinance that was in effect at the time
of establishment and which remains in violation of the current Unified Development Ordinance is an illegal
nonconforming lot.
B. Legal Nonconforming
1. Structure: A structure that does not meet one (1) or more development standards of this Unified Development
Ordinance, but was legally established prior to the effective date of this Unified Development Ordinance
shall be deemed a legal nonconforming structure. Generally, a structure is rendered legal nonconforming by
an amendment to the zoning regulations or a zoning map change. However, a legal nonconformity may be a
result of government use of eminent domain or right-of-way acquisition.
2. Use: The use of a structure or land (or a structure and land in combination) that was legally established and
has since been continuously operated, that is no longer permitted by this Unified Development Ordinance
in the zoning district in which it is located, shall be deemed a legal nonconforming use. Generally, a use is
rendered legal nonconforming by an amendment to the zoning regulations or a zoning map change.
3. Lot: A lot that does not meet one (1) or more lot standards of this Unified Development Ordinance, but was
legally established and recorded prior to the effective date of this Unified Development Ordinance shall be
deemed a legal nonconforming lot of record. Generally, a lot is rendered legal nonconforming by an amendment
to the zoning regulations or a zoning map change. However, a legal nonconformity may be a result of
government use of eminent domain or right-of-way acquisition.
8.03 Illegal Nonconforming Structures, Uses, and Lots
An illegal structure, use, or lot is subject to the enforcement procedures and penalties of this Unified Development
Ordinance as amended. The enforcement and penalties of the zoning ordinance in place at the time the violation
occurred shall no longer be in effect.
Article
Article 08: Nonconformances
08
8-3
Nonconforming Structures
8.04 Legal Nonconforming Structures
The following provisions apply to legal nonconforming structures, structures associated with legal nonconforming
uses, and structures associated with legal nonconforming lots.
A. Legal Nonconforming Building Provisions: The provisions for legal nonconforming buildings, a subcategory of
structures, are as follows:
1. Building Expansion: A legal nonconforming building shall be permitted to expand in area and height as long
as the nonconformity is not increased and the expansion otherwise meets the current Unified Development
Ordinance. For example, if a building is in violation of the maximum height standard, it can be expanded in
area as long as the new addition does not exceed the maximum height standard and is otherwise in compliance
with current Unified Development Ordinance.
2. Building Exterior Alteration: The exterior walls of a building shall not be moved except as provided in the
previous clause. Otherwise, the roof and exterior walls may be maintained, repaired, re-faced, and modified,
resulting in the original aesthetic character or an altered exterior character, as long as the building's nonconformity
is not increased and the alteration otherwise meets the current Unified Development Ordinance.
3. Building Interior Alteration: Ordinary repair and replacement of interior finishes, heating systems, fixtures,
electrical systems, or plumbing systems; and interior wall modifications are not regulated by this Unified
Development Ordinance.
4. Building Relocating: A legal nonconforming building may be relocated if, by moving the building, it
decreases the legal nonconformity and the relocation otherwise meets the current Unified Development
Ordinance.
B. Legal Nonconforming Structure Provisions: The provisions for legal nonconforming structures, excluding the
subcategories of buildings, signs, and driveways are as follows:
1. Structure Alteration: A legal nonconforming structure shall be permitted to be altered in height, area, mass,
and time as long as the nonconformity is not increased and the alteration otherwise meets the current Unified
Development Ordinance.
2. Structure Relocating: A legal nonconforming structure may be relocated if, by moving the structure, it
decreases the legal nonconformity and the relocation otherwise meets the current Unified Development
Ordinance.
3. Conversion for Longevity: Converting a structural component of a legal nonconforming structure to a more
permanent material in order to prolong legal nonconformity shall not be permitted.
C. Legal Non-Conforming Sign Provisions: The provisions for legal nonconformng signs are as follows:
1. Sign Alteration: A legal nonconforming sign shall not be permitted to be altered in height, area, mass (e.g.
cabinet shape or size), or time unless the alteration brings the sign into full compliance with the current
Unified Development Ordinance.
2. Sign Relocating: A legal nonconforming sign shall not be relocated unless, by moving the sign, it brings the
sign into full compliance with the current Unified Development Ordinance.
3. Conversion for Longevity: Converting a structural component of a legal nonconforming sign to a more
permanent material in order to prolong legal nonconformity shall not be permitted. For example, a legal
nonconforming permanent pole sign would not be permitted to replace its existing wood posts with metal
posts even if dimensionally the same size.
D. Legal Nonconforming Driveway Provisions: A legal nonconforming driveway shall be permitted to be expanded
in width and/or length as long as the nonconformity is not increased and the new portion of the driveway otherwise
meets the current Unified Development Ordinance.
E. Loss of Legal Nonconforming Structure Status: The following provisions apply to all types of structures:
1. Condemned Structures: If a structure, through lack of maintenance, is declared by an authorized official to
be condemned due to its physical or unsafe condition, it shall lose its legal nonconforming status and become
illegal nonconforming; unless the structure is restored or repaired within three (3) months of the declaration.
The Zoning Administrator may grant an appropriate extension of time if work was started within the initial
three (3) month period and reasonable attempts are being made by the owner to remedy the condemnation.
2. Removal of Permanent Structures: If a permanent structure is fully or significantly removed or razed (i.e.
eighty percent (80%) or more of the structure), the remaining permanent structure shall lose its legal nonconforming
status and become illegal nonconforming; unless by significantly removing or razing the permanent
structure the remaining permanent structure is in compliance or more in compliance with the current Unified
Development Ordinance.
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 08
8-4
3. Removal of Temporary Structures: If a temporary structure is removed (e.g. moved inside, taken off-site, or
replaced by a new temporary structure), the temporary structure shall lose its legal nonconforming status and
become illegal nonconforming.
4. Flood:
a. If a structure is severely damaged from a flood, resulting in a loss of either fifty percent (50%) of its
market value or fifty percent (50%) of its structure, all reconstruction shall be required to meet the current
Unified Development Ordinance. All other flood damaged structures shall be allowed to rebuild the
structure that previously existed.
b. If a structure is in the floodplain, see also Appendix B: Flood Hazard Areas.
5. Acts of God: If a structure is severely damaged from an act of God, excluding flooding, resulting in a loss of
either seventy percent (70%) of its market value or seventy percent (70%) of its structure, all reconstruction
shall be required to meet the current Unified Development Ordinance. All other structures damaged by an act
of God shall be allowed to rebuild the structure that previously existed.
F. Maintenance and Repair: Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent the maintenance or repair of a
structure to keep it in a safe, aesthetic, and functional condition.
Nonconforming Structures
Article
Article 08: Nonconformances
08
8-5
8.05 Legal Nonconforming Lots
The following provisions apply to legal nonconforming lots:
A. Legal Nonconforming Lot Provisions: A legal nonconforming lot shall be permitted to be developed as long as
the desired structure(s) and use(s) meets the current Unified Development Ordinance. If the application of the
current Unified Development Ordinance renders the lot undevelopable (e.g. the current setbacks do not permit
a developable building envelope), the owner shall apply for reasonable variances from the Board of Zoning
Appeals, and the City shall waive fees associated with said application.
B. Loss of Legal Nonconforming Lot Status:
1. Combining Lots Results in Conformity: If a legal nonconforming lot is combined with an adjacent lot
resulting in conformity with the current Unified Development Ordinance, it shall lose its legal nonconforming
status. Therefore, future division of the combined lot shall conform to the current Unified Development
Ordinance.
2. Lots in Combination: If a legal nonconforming lot is owned by the same person as the adjacent lot, and the
owner uses both lots in combination for a duration of more than five (5) years, the legal nonconforming lot
shall lose its legal nonconforming status; provided the two (2) or more lots in combination would constitute a
single conforming lot.
3. Permanent Structure Across Property Lines: If a legal nonconforming lot is owned by the same person as the
adjacent lot, and the owner constructs a permanent structure across the property line, thus permanently using
two (2) lots in combination, the legal nonconforming lot shall lose its legal nonconforming status; provided
the two (2) lots in combination would constitute a single conforming lot.
Nonconforming Lots
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 08
8-6
8.06 Legal Nonconforming Use
The following provisions apply to legal nonconforming uses:
A. Cross Reference:
1. Agricultural: With respect to agricultural legal nonconforming uses, nothing in this section shall be interpreted
in a manner that is inconsistent with IC 36-7-4-616: Zoning ordinance; agricultural nonconforming
use.
B. Legal Nonconforming Use Provisions: The provisions for legal nonconforming uses are as follows:
1. Utilizing Existing or Expanded Building: A legal nonconforming use shall be permitted to occupy or use
an existing building, expand an existing building one time, not to exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the
building's footprint, provided the building meets the current Unified Development Ordinance.
2. Utilizing Existing or Altered Structures: A legal nonconforming use shall be permitted to utilize an existing
structure or an altered existing structure, provided the structure meets the current Unified Development
Ordinance.
3. Utilizing Land: Any legal nonconforming use shall be permitted to utilize its lot, or lots owned in combination
upon the effective date of this Unified Development Ordinance, provided the utilization of land meets the
current Unified Development Ordinance.
4. Increase in Nonconformity: No legal nonconforming use shall be permitted to increase its nonconformity.
The size of operation, number of employees, increase to vehicular traffic and similar increases in size does
not increase nonconformity of a use. For example, a five (5) acre legal nonconforming junkyard that expands
its operations onto five (5) more acres of land it previously owned, does not qualify as an increase in nonconformity,
it's still a junkyard. However, if the same junkyard adds a compactor facility which previously did
not exist, that would qualify as an increase in nonconformity.
C. Loss of Legal Nonconforming Use Status:
1. Abandonment of Use: If a legal nonconforming use is abandoned or is discontinued for six (6) or more
months, except when a government action impedes access to the premises, it shall lose its legal nonconforming
status. Any subsequent use shall conform to the provisions of the current Unified Development
Ordinance.
2. Change of Use: When a legal nonconforming use is changed, altered, or evolves to be in compliance or more
in compliance with the current Unified Development Ordinance, the legal nonconforming use status is lost
or partially lost. The current use cannot revert back to the original legal nonconforming use or increments
thereof.
Nonconforming Uses
© 2018, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Article
Processes
09
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 09
9-2
Introduction to Processes
9.01 Introduction to Processes
The following permits and processes are detailed in Article 9: Processes.
A. Improvement Location Permit
B. Temporary Improvement Location Permit
C. Administrative Appeal
D. Development Plan
E. Planned Development
F. Special Exception
G. Subdivision of Land
H. Variance from Development Standards
I. Zoning Map Amendment (Rezoning)
Article
Article 09: Processes
09
9-3
Improvement Location Permit
9.02 Improvement Location Permit
A. Applicability: An Improvement Location Permit shall be required prior to permanent construction, installation,
addition, alteration, or relocation of a structure; prior to permanent alteration to the land; and prior to establishment
of a new land use or change an existing land use in all the following zoning districts.
M1
The following are examples of projects necessitating an Improvement Location Permit:
• Constructing or modifying off-street parking
• Constructing or altering a fence
• Installing a swimming pool
• Constructing a deck
• Installing or modifying a permanent sign
• Modifying a structure's height
• Constructing a recreation pond
• Installation of solar panels or exterior alternative energy devices
• Installation of a mini-barn, shed or pergola
B. Exemption from Improvement Location Permit: This exemption is only from having to obtain an Improvement
Location Permit. It is not an exemption from having to meet all applicable regulations in this Unified
Development Ordinance. Any project exempt from having to acquire an Improvement Location Permit that is
in violation of this Unified Development Ordinance is subject to Article 10: Enforcement and Penalties. The
following projects are exempt from having to obtain an Improvement Location Permit.
1. Driveways and Patios: Installing a new driveway, adding to an existing driveway, installing a patio, or any
other impervious surface is exempt from obtaining an Improvement Location Permit as long as there is no
adverse affect to drainage.
2. Softscaping and Hardscaping: Installing trees, shrubs, plants, and flowers; applying mulch or soil enhancers;
raising of planting beds around foundations; and installing accent hardscaping (e.g. stone steps, stone edging,
and small retaining walls) is exempt from obtaining an Improvement Location Permit as long as there is no
adverse affect to drainage.
3. Sign Content Change: Sign content may be changed without having to receive an Improvement Location
Permit.
4. Flag Pole: Flag poles may be installed without obtaining an Improvement Location Permit.
5. Play Set: Play sets that do not project more than ten (10) feet above the ground and with a footprint less than
120 square feet may be installed without obtaining an Improvement Location Permit.
6. Type 1 Home Based Business: Type 1 home businesses may commence without obtaining an Improvement
Location Permit.
7. Property Maintenance: Maintenance and repairs to the existing structure or site features may commence
without obtaining an Improvement Location Permit.
8. Adding or Changing Light Fixtures: Light fixtures may be added or changed without obtaining an
Improvement Location Permit.
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 09
9-4
C. Cross Reference:
1. Building Permit: Concurrent to having a project reviewed for compliance with this Unified Development
Ordinance, most projects with any type of building shall be reviewed for compliance with the Building Code.
The Zoning Administrator shall coordinate with the Building Official and confirm compliance with this
Unified Development Ordinance on the Building Permit. In these cases, the review for compliance with the
Building Code is conducted by the Building Official. See the Chapter 151: Building Code of City of Auburn
Code of Ordinances for information regarding Building Permits and Certificates of Occupancy.
2. MS4 Permit: Concurrent to having a project reviewed for compliance with this Unified Development
Ordinance some projects will also have to be reviewed for compliance with the Stormwater Management
Ordinance. The review for compliance with the Stormwater Management Ordinance is conducted by the
MS4 Coordinator during the Routing Process. See Chapter 160 and Chapter 161 Stormwater Management
of the City of Auburn Code of Ordinances for information regarding the MS4 Permit.
3. Other Permits: An Improvement Location Permit does not authorize compliance with any local, State or
federal Permits. It is the responsibility of the property owner to acquire any other required permits prior to
making any improvement. Other applicable permits may include:
a. Excavation Permit
b. Floodplain Development Permit
c. State Design Release
d. Utility Connection and Taps
e. Well Permit
D. Filing Requirements:
1. Application: Application for an Improvement Location Permit shall be made on a form provided by the
Zoning Administrator. The following information shall be provided on the application form.
a. Property owner's name, mailing address, phone number and/or email address.
b. Applicant's name, mailing address, phone number, and/or email address, if different than owner.
c. Written detailed description of the proposed project.
d. Date submitted and signed.
e. Signature of the applicant, testifying that they are authorized to represent the property.
f. Any other information requested on the application form.
2. For Permanent Construction, Installation, Addition, Alteration, or Relocation of a Structure: The following
supporting information, as applicable, shall be provided on a site plan, application form, or as an attachment.
a. Projects involving non-inhabitable structures not mounted on a permanent foundation.
i. A drawing of the parcel with dimensions.
ii. The location of existing structures (e.g. home, garage, sidewalk, driveway, etc.).
iii. The location of the proposed structure, with distance to adjacent property lines.
iv. A calculation of the existing lot coverage, expressed in a percentage.
v. A calculation of the lot coverage as it would be upon completing the project, expressed in a
percentage.
b. Projects involving non-inhabitable structures mounted on a permanent foundation.
i. A scale drawing of the parcel with dimensions.
ii. The location of existing structures (e.g. home, garage, sidewalk, driveway, etc.).
iii. The location of the proposed structure, with distance to adjacent property lines.
iv. A calculation of the existing lot coverage, expressed in a percentage.
v. A calculation of the lot coverage as it would be upon completing the project, expressed in a
percentage.
vi. Existing adjacent right-of-ways and the name of the street or alley if applicable.
vii. Easements on the parcel or adjacent to the parcel.
Improvement Location Permit
Article
Article 09: Processes
09
9-5
c. Projects involving inhabitable buildings.
i. All requirements of Section 9.02(D)(2)(b).
ii. Location of existing or proposed drainage tile (when applicable).
iii. Denotation of where utilities lines will be run to the building and whether they are above or below
grade.
iv. Location of a septic system, reserve area for a replacement septic system, well, geothermal loop, or
other on-site utility system.
d. Complex or Unique Projects: The Zoning Administrator may require any additional information if
reasonably necessary to determine if a complex or unique project complies with the provisions of this
Unified Development Ordinance. This may include the supporting information listed in Subsection
9.08(D)(9) for projects within the WH-O District and Subsection 9.08(D)(10) for projects within the
AC-O District.
3. For Permanent Alteration to the Land: The following supporting information, as applicable, shall be
provided on a site plan, application form, or as an attachment.
a. Projects that involve disturbing more than 5% of a parcel's area on a parcel less than 5 acres in area, or
disturbing any portion of a site greater than 5 acres, or results in more than 9,000 cubic feet of soil being
disturbed (cumulative of soil added from one area and soil removed from another, not the net of soil
added and removed).
i. A scale drawing of the parcel with dimensions.
ii. The location of existing structures (e.g. building, sidewalk, driveway, etc.).
iii. Denotation of existing mature trees, greater than 9 inches in DBH.
iv. Denotation of floodplains, wetlands, rock formations, karst, natural lakes, streams, regulated drains,
retention ponds, detention ponds, known drainage tile, inlets, outlets, monuments or markers, and
drainage swales on the parcel and within 75 feet of the parcel's property lines.
v. Two-foot contour lines of the existing parcel.
vi. Two-foot contours showing the parcel's contours as it would be upon completing the proposed project.
vii. Erosion control methodology, devices, locations, and maintenance strategy.
viii. Drainage evaluation of the existing parcel and as it would be upon completion of the proposed
project with a characterization of the change to drainage onto adjacent properties, into drainage tile,
or into surface water ways.
ix. Design cross-section of recreational ponds.
4. For Establishment of a New Land Use or Change to an Existing Land Use: The following supporting
information shall be provided on a site plan, application form, or as an attachment.
a. Description of the proposed new land use or change to an existing land use.
b. Detailed description of how the new or changed in land use will affect parking, average daily trips,
currier service, building alterations inside and outside, use of outdoor areas, use of accessory structures,
and number of employees.
5. Deadline: Applications for an Improvement Location Permit may be filed any time.
6. Fees: The applicable fee from the City's fee schedule shall be paid at the time the application for
Improvement Location Permit is filed. An application without the appropriate application fee shall not be
considered substantially complete. Technical expertise necessary to review an Improvement Location Permit
application that the City of Auburn does not have adequate proficiency may constitute hiring a professional to
conduct the review or portions thereof at the expense of the applicant and as per the City's fee schedule.
Improvement Location Permit
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 09
9-6
E. Permit Procedure:
1. Substantially Complete Application: An application for an Improvement Location Permit shall not be
reviewed for approval until it is determined to be substantially complete by the Zoning Administrator. The
Zoning Administrator must first verify that the application form and required supplemental information has
been submitted correctly, and the applicable application fee is paid.
2. Review the Project's Compliance: After the application is verified as being substantially complete, the Zoning
Administrator shall review the project to determine whether it complies with this Unified Development
Ordinance. The Zoning Administrator may consult with the Routing Committee, or any other person, department,
or group to determine if the project complies with all of the provisions of this Unified Development
Ordinance. During the review process, the Zoning Administrator may:
a. Request Additional Information: During the process of rendering a decision, the Zoning Administrator
may request additional information to be added to the site plan, application form, or attachments.
b. Exercise Discretion: Some provisions within this Unified Development Ordinance allow the Zoning
Administrator to apply discretion to a decision. If such discretion is exercised, the Zoning Administrator
shall describe the decision.
c. Interpret this Unified Development Ordinance: Because this Unified Development Ordinance cannot
address every possible unique situation, project features, or land use, the Zoning Administrator shall
interpret the intent of this Unified Development Ordinance when not specifically addressed.
3. Render a Decision: The Zoning Administrator shall render a "decision to deny" or "decision to approve"
based on the information submitted, project review, discretion exercised, and interpretations made.
4. Issuing an Improvement Location Permit: If the proposed project complies with this Unified Development
Ordinance, the Zoning Administrator shall render a decision to approve, document the terms of the approval
on the permit, and then issue an Improvement Location Permit.
5. Decision to Deny: If the proposed project does not comply with this Unified Development Ordinance, the
Zoning Administrator shall not issue an Improvement Location Permit. The Zoning Administrator shall
internally document the reasons for not issuing an Improvement Location Permit and send that information to
the applicant by email or U.S. Mail, or by telephone. If an email is used to communicate denial, documentation
that the email was received shall be included in the file. Similarly, if a phone call is used to communicate
denial, documentation of the phone call shall be included in the file. If a proposed project does not comply
with this Unified Development Ordinance, the applicant may promptly revise the application or pursue relief
from this Unified Development Ordinance.
F. Duration:
1. Procedural Expiration: An application shall expire and be void after the applicant is notified of a decision
to deny unless the applicant makes revisions to the application or pursues relief from the Board of Zoning
Appeals within thirty (30) days from notification.
2. Commencement: After an Improvement Location Permit is issued, the project shall commence within twelve
(12) months of the issuance date or shall become null and void.
3. Expiration: After an Improvement Location Permit is issued, the project shall be completed within thirty-six
(36) months of the issuance date or shall become null and void.
4. Extensions: Upon request by the applicant, an Improvement Location Permit may be extended one (1) time
for up to six (6) months. The Zoning Administrator may grant the requested extension. Both the request for
the extension and the Zoning Administrator's decision concerning the extension shall be made part of the
Improvement Location Permit file.
Improvement Location Permit
Article
Article 09: Processes
09
9-7
G. Modification After Issuance of an Improvement Location Permit: At the discretion of the Zoning Administrator,
an Improvement Location Permit may be modified if:
1. Warranted and Requested Prior to Initiation: Warranted due to discoveries during construction or other
significant finding, and requested prior to permanent construction, installation, addition, alteration, or
relocation of a structure; prior to permanent alteration to the land; and prior to establishment of a new land or
change an existing land use; or if:
2. Warranted and Component is Not Completed: Warranted due to discoveries during construction or other
significant finding, and requested prior to the applicable component of the project has been completed.
If a modification is allowed, the Zoning Administrator shall request any necessary information, shall review
the modification for its compliance to this Unified Development Ordinance, and then render a decision. If the
proposed modification meets the provisions of this Unified Development Ordinance the Improvement Location
Permit may be amended and filed. If denied to be considered or denied for non-compliance, the modification
shall not be permitted.
Improvement Location Permit
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 09
9-8
Temporary Improvement Location Permit
9.03 Temporary Improvement Location Permit
A. Applicability: A Temporary Improvement Location Permit shall be required prior to establishment of a temporary
use of land or a temporary structure in all districts.
M1
B. The following are examples of projects necessitating a Temporary Improvement Location Permit process:
• Temporary sign
• Tent sale
• Construction trailer
• Model home
• Fireworks Stand
• Carnival/Entertainment Stage (not associated with a Board of Public Works and Safety approved event)
C. Exemptions From A Temporary Improvement Location Permit: Temporary signs that meet one of the following
criteria shall be exempt from obtaining an Improvement Location Permit:
1. Residential: The sign is less than six (6) square feet in area, in a residential zoning district, and is located
on-premise;
2. Real Estate: The sign is a real estate sign located on-premise and advertising the property for sale or lease; or
3. Election: The sign is for an election and complies with Indiana Code 36-1-3-11.
D. Filing Requirements:
1. Application: Application for a Temporary Improvement Location Permit shall be made on a form provided
by the Zoning Administrator. Supporting information shall be submitted as per all applicable requirements
described below.
2. Establishment of a Temporary Use of Land or Structure: The following application and supporting information,
when applicable, shall be provided on a site plan, application form, or as an attachment.
a. Property owner's name, mailing address, phone number and/or email address.
b. Applicant's name, mailing address, phone number, and/or email address, if different than owner.
c. Written detailed description of the proposed project.
d. Date submitted and signed.
e. Signature of the applicant, and documentation of property owner's permission.
f. Any other information requested on the application form.
g. A drawing of the parcel with dimensions.
h. The location of existing structures (e.g. building, parking lot, sidewalk, driveway, etc.).
i. The location of the proposed temporary structure
j. The applicable setbacks shown on the parcel drawing.
k. Description of the proposed temporary land use.
l. Description of the desired duration of the temporary structure and/or land use.
3. Deadline: Applications for a Temporary Improvement Location Permit may be filed any time.
4. Fees: The applicable fee from the City's fee schedule shall be paid at the time the application for Temporary
Improvement Location Permit is filed. An application without the appropriate application fee shall not be
considered substantially complete. Technical expertise necessary to review a Temporary Improvement
Location Permit application that the City of Auburn does not have adequate proficiency may constitute hiring
a professional consultant to conduct the review or portions thereof at the expense of the applicant and as per
the City's fee schedule.
Article
Article 09: Processes
09
9-9
Temporary Improvement Location Permit
E. Permit Procedure:
1. Substantially Complete Application: An application for a Temporary Improvement Location Permit shall not
be reviewed for approval until it is determined to be substantially complete by the Zoning Administrator. The
Zoning Administrator shall first verify that the application form and required supplemental information has
been submitted correctly, and the applicable application fee is paid.
2. Review the Project's Compliance: After the application is verified as being substantially complete, the Zoning
Administrator shall review the project to determine whether it complies with this Unified Development
Ordinance. The Zoning Administrator may consult with the Routing Committee, or any other person, department,
or group to determine if the project complies with all of the provisions of this Unified Development
Ordinance. During the review process, the Zoning Administrator may:
a. Request Additional Information: During the process of rendering a decision, the Zoning Administrator
may request additional information to be added to the site plan, application form, or attachments.
b. Exercise Discretion: Some provisions within this Unified Development Ordinance allow the Zoning
Administrator to apply discretion to a decision. If such discretion is exercised, the Zoning Administrator
shall describe the decision.
c. Interpret this Unified Development Ordinance: Because this Unified Development Ordinance cannot
address every possible unique situation, project features, or land use, the Zoning Administrator shall
interpret the intent of this Unified Development Ordinance when not specifically addressed
3. Render a Decision: The Zoning Administrator shall render a "decision to deny" or "decision to approve"
based on the information submitted, project review, discretion exercised, and interpretations made.
4. Issuing a Temporary Improvement Location Permit: If the proposed project complies with this Unified
Development Ordinance, the Zoning Administrator shall render a decision to approve, document the terms of
the approval on the permit, and then issue a Temporary Improvement Location Permit.
5. Decision to Deny: If the proposed project does not comply with this Unified Development Ordinance, the
Zoning Administrator shall not issue a Temporary Improvement Location Permit. The Zoning Administrator
shall internally document the reasons for not issuing a Temporary Improvement Location Permit and send
that information to the applicant by email or U.S. Mail, or by telephone. If an email is used to communicate
denial, documentation that the email was received shall be included in the file. Similarly, if a phone call
is used to communicate denial, documentation of the phone call shall be included in the file. If a proposed
project does not comply with this Unified Development Ordinance, the applicant may revise the application
or may pursue relief from this Unified Development Ordinance.
F. Duration:
1. Procedural Expiration: An application shall expire and be void after the applicant is notified of a decision
to deny unless the applicant makes revisions to the application or pursues relief from the Board of Zoning
Appeals within thirty (30) days from notification.
2. Commencement: After a Temporary Improvement Location Permit is issued, the permit shall expire after the
last approved date for the temporary use and/or structure.
3. Permit Expiration: A Temporary Improvement Location Permit shall be issued for the dates requested by the
applicant and within the ordinance limits as described in Temporary Use and Structure Standards (TU). The
permitted dates shall be displayed on the Temporary Improvement Location Permit.
4. Extensions: As permitted by this Unified Development Ordinance.
G. Modification After Issuance of a Temporary Improvement Location Permit: As permitted by the Unified
Development Ordinance.
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 09
9-10
9.04 Administrative Appeal
A. Applicability: An Administrative Appeal applies to an applicant or interested party that wants a decision, interpretation,
order determination, or action of the Zoning Administrator and/or enforcement officer to be overturned
or corrected by the Board of Zoning Appeals. Any decision, interpretation, order determination, or action of the
Plan Commission shall not be the subject of an Administrative Appeal in all districts.
M1
B. Filing Requirements:
1. Petition: Petition for Administrative Appeal shall be made on a form provided by the Zoning Administrator.
Supporting information shall be submitted as per the requirements described below.
2. Information to be Submitted: The following information shall be provided on the petition form.
a. Petitioner's name, mailing address, phone number, and/or email address.
b. Petitioner's standing (i.e. legal right to initiate a petition).
c. The Zoning Administrator or Enforcement Official that rendered the decision, interpretation, order
determination, or action.
d. Written statement describing the administrative decision, interpretation, order determination, or action;
and the reason and facts supporting action by the Board of Zoning Appeals.
e. Date submitted and signed.
f. Signature of the applicant.
g. Any other information requested on the application form.
3. Deadline: A petition for an Administrative Appeal shall be filed with the Board of Zoning Appeals within
thirty (30) days of the decision, interpretation, order determination, or action that is the subject of the appeal.
4. Suspension of Work: Work related to the decision, interpretation, order determination, or action being
appealed shall be suspended until the Administrative Appeal is complete, or until the Board of Zoning
Appeals authorizes full or partial work to resume prior to a Board of Zoning Appeals decision.
5. Fees: The applicable fee, per the fee schedule, shall be paid at the time the petition for Administrative Appeal
is filed.
C. Appeal Procedure:
1. Substantially Complete Petition: A petition for an Administrative Appeal shall not be issued a docket number
or be scheduled for hearing by the Board of Zoning Appeals until it is determined to be substantially complete
by the Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator shall verify that the petition form and required
supplemental information has been submitted correctly, and the applicable petition fee is paid.
2. Assignment: Once a petition for an Administrative Appeal has been determined substantially complete, the
Zoning Administrator shall assign a case number and place the appeal on the agenda of the Board of Zoning
Appeals. The Zoning Administrator shall inform the petitioner, in writing, of the date and time of the Board
of Zoning Appeals meeting at which the appeal is to be heard.
3. Public and Interested Party Notice: The petitioner shall be responsible for providing public notice in
accordance with the Board of Zoning Appeals Rules and Procedures. The applicant shall also be responsible
for returning proof of public notice to the Zoning Administrator at least three (3) business days before the
meeting at which the appeal is to be heard. Failure to submit proof of notice may result in the Administrative
Appeal being continued to the following month's Board of Zoning Appeals meeting.
4. Transfer of Information:
a. The Zoning Administrator or Enforcement Official that is the subject of the appeal shall transmit the
documents, plans, and papers constituting the record regarding the case to the Board of Zoning Appeals.
b. The Zoning Administrator or the Enforcement Official that is the subject of the appeal may provide a
report explaining the final decision or action on the case.
5. Review: The Board of Zoning Appeals shall hear the Administrative Appeal at a regularly scheduled public
meeting according to their Rules and Procedures. The Board of Zoning Appeals may consider information
conveyed to them in writing and testimony during the hearing in making a decision.
Administrative Appeal
Article
Article 09: Processes
09
9-11
6. Decision: Following the hearing and review, the Board of Zoning Appeals may reverse, affirm, or modify the
decision, interpretation, order determination, or action from which the appeal stems. The Board of Zoning
Appeals may also add conditions to its decision when warranted.
a. Findings of Fact: The Board of Zoning Appeals shall make written findings of fact and take action or
continue the Administrative Appeal to a defined future meeting date. Approval of the Findings of Fact
may be in the form of a general statement. Disapproval of findings shall be specific. The findings of fact
shall be case-specific.
7. Appeal: Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals may appeal such decision to
the Circuit or Superior Court of DeKalb County.
Administrative Appeal
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 09
9-12
Development Plan
9.05 Development Plan
A. Applicability: This process applies to the following zoning districts:
M1
1. General: Development Plan approval shall be required prior to an Improvement Location Permit being
issued for projects involving any of the following improvements:
a. Any new primary structure.
b. Any addition to a primary structure that exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the footprint of the existing
primary structure,
c. Any addition to a primary structure that is 10,000 square feet or greater in size.
d. Any new or expanded accessory structure that exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the footprint of the primary
structure.
e. Any new or expanded accessory structure that exceeds 5,000 square feet or greater in size.
f. Addition of curb cuts and/or changes in site circulation.
g. Any new parking lot.
h. Any expansion of a parking lot that adds twenty-five percent (25%) more spaces.
i. Any project the Zoning Administrator determines its complexity warrants Development Plan approval.
2. Subdivisions: For residential subdivisions, Development Plan approval shall be reviewed concurrently with
the final subdivision plat.
B. Exemptions from Development Plan:
1. Single-family detached residential: Any lot being developed for a single-family detached residence or its
accessory structures shall be exempt from Development Plan approval.
2. Multiple-Family Development: Any M1 district development that includes one (1) primary structure with
three dwelling units or less on the lot shall be exempt from Development Plan approval.
3. Agriculture Sites and Buildings: Any lot being solely used for agricultural purposes shall be exempt from
Development Plan approval.
4. Temporary Use of Land or Structure: Any temporary use of land or structure shall be exempt from
Development Plan approval.
5. Establish a New Land Use or Change an Existing Land Use: Establishing a new land use or changing an
existing land use shall be exempt from Development Plan approval.
C. Filing Requirements: The following information shall be submitted for the Development Plan review process
1. Application: Application for Development Plan approval shall be made on a form provided by the Zoning
Administrator. The following information shall be provided on the application form.
a. Property owner's name, mailing address, phone number and/or email address.
b. Applicant's name, mailing address, phone number, and/or email address, if different than owner.
c. Written detailed description of the proposed project.
d. Date submitted and signed.
e. Signature of the applicant, testifying that they are authorized to represent the property.
f. Any other information requested on the application form.
2. Deed: The recorded deed(s) for the property:
3. Site Plan: A site plan, drawn to scale, that includes the following items:
a. North arrow.
b. Graphic scale.
c. Address of the site.
d. Proposed name of the development.
e. Engineer's name, contact information and stamp.
f. Owner's and developer's name and contact information.
g. Area map insert showing the general location of the site referenced to major streets.
h. Boundary lines of the site including all dimensions of the site.
i. Names, center lines, and right-of-way widths of all streets, alleys, and easements.
j. Layout, number, dimension, and area of all lots.
k. Location and dimensions of all existing and proposed structures, including paved areas, entryway
features, and signs.
Article
Article 09: Processes
09
9-13
Development Plan
l. Floodplain certification statement and location of all floodway, floodway fringe areas, and wetlands
within the boundaries of the site.
m. Use of each structure by labeling including approximate density or size of all proposed uses and structures
on the site (e.g. parking - number of parking spaces provided; office - floor area).
n. Distance of all structures from front, rear, and side lot lines.
o. Areas reserved for park, recreation, conservation, wetland, common area, lake, trails, or other similar uses.
p. Proposed landscaping buffers or landscaped areas.
q. Dumpster and trash receptacle details, if applicable.
r. Denotation of any existing structure on adjacent parcels if within twenty (20) feet of subject parcel's
property line.
s. Plan Commission certification signature block.
t. Any other information necessary to support a thorough review of the project and as requested in writing
by the Plan Commission or the Zoning Administrator.
4. Building Elevations: Representative building elevations for facades of primary structures with sufficient detail
to illustrate the character of the development.
5. Access and Circulation: A Site Access and Circulation Plan shall be required, but may be incorporated into
the required Site Plan or may be submitted as a separate plan. It shall be drawn to scale.
a. North arrow.
b. Graphic scale.
c. Address of site.
d. Proposed name of the development.
e. Names, center lines, and right-of-way widths of all existing and proposed streets, alleys, and easements
within 100 feet of the site.
f. Location of any proposed or existing driveways onto a street or alley and its width at the lot line.
g. All improvements to the street system on-site and off-site.
h. Measurement of curb radius and/or flares.
i. Location of proposed and existing sidewalk or sidepath.
j. Any other information necessary to support a thorough review of the project and as requested in writing
by the Plan Commission or the Zoning Administrator.
6. Utility Plan: A Utility Plan shall be drawn to scale and shall include the following items:
a. Location of all existing and proposed utility easements.
b. Location and size of all existing and proposed utility components including, but not limited to sanitary
sewer components, water components and storm water components. Electric, gas, telephone, and cable
as requested.
c. Details of light and light fixtures, and photometric plan illustrating illumination capacity.
d. Names of legal ditches and streams in or adjacent to the site.
e. Contours sufficient to illustrate storm water runoff.
f. Storm water drainage plan including estimated runoff.
g. Any other information necessary to support a thorough review of the project and as requested in writing
by the Plan Commission or the Zoning Administrator.
7. Traffic Impact Study:
a. A Traffic Impact Study may be required when a proposed development meets or exceeds the warrants of
the Indiana Department of Transportation Traffic Impact Study Guidelines (150 or more dwelling units;
15,000 square feet or more of retail space; 35,000 or more square feet of office space; 70,000 square feet
or more square feet of industrial space; 30,000 square feet or more of educational space; 120 or more
occupied rooms; 46,000 or more square feet of medical space; or any mixed use development which
generates 100 or more peak hour trips in the peak direction).
b. A registered professional engineer shall prepare and certify the Traffic Impact Study. The Traffic Impact
Study shall evaluate the impact of present and future traffic generated by the proposed development
on the adjacent roadway system. Prior to commencement, the applicant shall meet with the Zoning
Administrator and Director of Engineering to determine an appropriate scope for the Traffic Impact Study.
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 09
9-14
8. Statement of Development Build-out: The applicant shall indicate, either on the required Site Plan or in
writing, a statement of:
a. The order of development of the major infrastructure elements of the project.
b. Project phase boundaries, if any.
c. The order and content of each phase.
d. An estimate of the time frame for build-out of the project.
9. Landscape Plan: The applicant shall indicate, either on the required Site Plan or on a separate landscape
plan, existing and proposed green space and landscaping on the site showing how the proposed landscaping
meets or exceeds the standards detailed in Article 07: Perimeter Landscaping (PL) and Article 05: Landscape
Standards (LA).
10. WH-O District Requirements: If the proposed development is in the WH-O District, the applicant shall
submit the following:
a. A narrative description of the site including any existing uses, setbacks, available sewage disposal
facilities, and a brief history of the site (including any former uses, historical environmental concerns,
abandoned wells, underground storage tanks, septic systems, etc.).
b. Description of the proposed operations, including chemical or products used or generated, chemical
or product storage area descriptions, waste generation quantities, equipment cleaning or maintenance
procedures.
c. Methods and locations of receiving, handling, storing and shipping chemicals or products and wastes.
d. Spill or release response measures and reporting.
e. Description of slopes near containment vessels and waste storage areas.
f. The following information shall also be included on the required Site Plan or an additional plan: all
paved and non-paved areas; floor drain locations and outlets; chemical or product storage locations;
waste storage locations; liquid transfer areas; underground storage tanks and associated piping; above
ground storage tanks and associated piping; slope and contours of finished grade at two-foot intervals;
and proposed containment area detail drawings, including area, heights, materials, specifications, if
applicable.
11. AC-O District Requirements: If the development is within in the AC-O District, the Development Plan shall
include a Noise Sensitivity Statement stating owners of land within the subdivision agree to recognize the
existing airport use near the subdivision, and further agree to not object to noise associated with the airport
and its normal operations.
D. Deadline: One (1) hard copy of the application for Development Plan approval; seven (7) hard copies of all
supporting information; and one (1) digital copy of the application for Development Plan approval and supporting
information in .pdf (portable document format) by the deadline established in the Plan Commission Rules and
Procedures. Hard copies are preferred in 24-inch by 36-inch format.
E. Fees: The applicable fee from the City's fee schedule shall be paid at the time the application for Development
Plan approval is filed. An application without the appropriate application fee shall not be considered substantially
complete. Technical expertise necessary to review a Development Plan that the City of Auburn does not have
adequate proficiency may constitute hiring a professional consultant to conduct the review or portions thereof at
the expense of the applicant and as per the City's fee schedule.
Development Plan
Article
Article 09: Processes
09
9-15
F. Review Procedure:
1. Assignment: Development Plans which are determined to be substantially complete and in proper form by the
Zoning Administrator, shall be assigned a case number and placed on the Plan Commission agenda in accordance
with the Plan Commission Rules and Procedures. The Zoning Administrator shall notify the applicant
in writing of the date of the meeting and provide the applicant with a legal notice.
2. Internal Review: Upon assignment of a case number and hearing date, the Routing Committee and other
applicable agencies will be notified of the proposed Development Plan and asked to review and comment.
The Zoning Administrator may submit a written report to the Plan Commission stating any facts concerning
the physical characteristics of the area involved in the Development Plan, the surrounding land use, public
facilities available to service the area, or other pertinent facts. The written report may also contain opinions
of the Zoning Administrator concerning the Development Plan and information from the Routing Committee
and/or other agencies that have reviewed the Development Plan. A copy of such report shall be made available
to the applicant and to anyone who requests a copy.
3. Public Notice: Public notice shall be provided in accordance with the Plan Commission Rules and
Procedures. All costs associated with providing public notice shall be borne by the applicant.
4. Attendance: The applicant shall be present at the Plan Commission meeting to address and discuss comments
and concerns posed by the Plan Commission. Failure to appear may result in the dismissal of the application
for Development Plan approval.
5. Public Hearing: A public hearing shall be held in accordance with the Plan Commission Rules and
Procedures.
6. Review: At their regularly scheduled public meeting, the Plan Commission shall review:
a. The application for Development Plan approval.
b. All supporting information including the site plan, site access and circulation plan, elevations, etc.
c. The testimony of the applicant.
d. Information presented in writing or verbally by the Zoning Administrator, the Routing Committee, and/or
other applicable department or agency.
e. Input from the public during the public hearing.
f. Any applicable provisions of this Unified Development Ordinance.
g. Any applicable requirements of the City of Auburn's Construction Standards.
h. Any other information as may be required by the Plan Commission to evaluate the application.
7. Decision: The Plan Commission shall make findings of fact and take final action or continue the application
for Development Plan approval to a defined future meeting date.
a. Findings of Fact: The Plan Commission shall make the following findings of fact. Approval of findings
may be in the form of a general statement. Disapproval of findings shall specify the portion of this
Unified Development Ordinance or City of Auburn's Construction Standards with which there is not
compliance.
i. The Development Plan is consistent with the City of Auburn Comprehensive Plan.
ii. The Development Plan satisfies the development requirements of Article 02: Zoning Districts.
iii. The Development Plan satisfies the development requirements of Article 05: Development
Standards.
iv. The Development Plan satisfies any other applicable requirement of the Unified Development
Ordinance.
v. The Development Plan satisfies the construction requirements of the City of Auburn Construction
Standards.
b. Final Action: Based on the findings of fact, the Plan Commission shall approve, approve with conditions,
or deny the application for Development Plan approval.
c. The findings of fact and final action shall be signed by the Zoning Administrator.
d. The Zoning Administrator shall provide the applicant a final determination letter documenting the Plan
Commission's decision.
Development Plan
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 09
9-16
G. Duration: An approved Development Plan shall be valid for one (1) year from the date the Plan Commission
granted approval unless otherwise specified. The Zoning Administrator may grant two (2) one-year extension for
cause. The applicant shall submit the request for extension in writing, and the Zoning Administrator shall make
a written determination regarding the decision. Both the request and the determination shall be made part of the
Development Plan record. If development of the project has not begun by the end of the one-year period, or by
the end of the first one-year extension, the approval expires and a new application for Development Plan approval
shall be submitted.
H. Modification:
1. Minor Amendments: Minor amendments to approved Development Plans which do not involve an increase
in height, area, bulk or intensity of land uses; the designation of additional land uses; a reduction in yards;
the addition of driveways or access points; or a reduction in the amount of parking may be authorized by the
Zoning Administrator without a public hearing, if the requested minor amendments comply with the Unified
Development Ordinance do not adversely impact the purpose or intent of the overall development. Minor
amendments authorized by the Zoning Administrator shall be reported to the Plan Commission at the next
regular meeting of the Plan Commission.
2. Major Amendments: If the Zoning Administrator determines that the proposed modification may adversely
impact the purpose or intent of the overall development; or if the proposed modification includes an increase
in intensity of any land use; or if the proposed modification includes the designation of an additional land use,
the applicant shall be required to file a new application for Development Plan approval.
Development Plan
Article
Article 09: Processes
09
9-17
Planned Development: General
9.06 General Planned Development
A. Applicability: Planned Developments shall be permitted in the following districts:
M1
B. Purpose and Intent:
1. Generally: A Planned Development zoning district may be used to provide for:
a. Greater flexibility in applying the ordinances to mixed zoning classifications.
b. Innovative approaches to meet the demands of the housing, commercial, and business markets.
c. The recognition of the interdependency of the housing, commercial, and business markets.
d. The establishment of creative and unique developments that would not otherwise be able to be developed
under the provisions of the City’s standard zoning district regulations.
e. The planning and development of mixed zoning classifications to be consistent with the best interest of
the jurisdictional area of the Plan Commission, and the applicable ordinances.
2. Process Outline: The three (3) steps of the Planned Development process are listed below and explained in
detail in the following sections.
a. The Planned Development District Ordinance and an Establishment Plan.
b. The Planned Development Detailed Development Plan.
c. The Planned Development Final Development Plan.
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 09
9-18
Planned Development: District Ordinance
9.07 Planned Development: District Ordinance
A. Purpose and Intent:
1. Planned Development District Ordinance: The purpose of the Planned Development District Ordinance is to:
a. Designate, or rezone, a parcel of land as a Planned Development zoning district.
b. Specify uses or a range of uses permitted in the Planned Development zoning district.
c. Specify development requirements in the Planned Development zoning district.
d. Specify the plan documentation and supporting documentation that may be required.
e. Specify any limitation applicable to the Planned Development zoning district.
f. Meet the requirements of Indiana Code 36-7-4-1500 et seq.
2. Detailed Development Plan: The process for the Detailed Development Plan can occur concurrent to the
District Ordinance.
B. Project Applicability: Proposals for new Planned Developments shall meet the standards of this section.
C. Prerequisites:
1. Ownership: Planned Developments shall be initiated by the owners of the land involved in the development
or the owner's authorized agent. If an authorized agent files an application, a signed and notarized consent
form from all owners shall accompany the application.
2. Pre-application Meeting: Prior to submitting an application for a Planned Development, the applicant shall
meet with the Zoning Administrator to review the zoning classification of the site, review regulatory ordinances
and materials, review the procedures and examine the proposed use and development of the property.
D. Filing Requirements:
1. Application: Application for a Planned Development shall be made on a form provided by the Zoning
Administrator.
2. Supporting Information: The application for a Planned Development shall be accompanied by the following
information.
a. Recorded deed(s) for the property.
b. Survey and legal description of the proposed site of the Planned Development.
c. A draft of the Planned Development District Ordinance that includes proposed development standards for
all land uses within the Planned Development and an Establishment Plan.
d. Any other information requested by the Plan Commission or Zoning Administrator.
3. Deadline: One (1) hard copy of the application for a Planned Development; seven (7) hard copies of all
supporting information; one (1) digital copy of the application for a Planned Development and all supporting
information in .pdf (portable document format); shall be submitted by the deadline established in the Plan
Commission Rules and Procedures.
4. Fees: The applicable fee from the City's fee schedule shall be paid at the time the application for a Planned
Development District Ordinance is filed. An application without the appropriate application fee shall not be
considered substantially complete. Technical expertise necessary to review a Planned Development District
Ordinance that the City of Auburn does not have adequate proficiency may constitute hiring a professional
consultant to conduct the review or portions thereof at the expense of the applicant and as per the City's fee
schedule.
Article
Article 09: Processes
09
9-19
Planned Development: District Ordinance
E. Formal Procedure:
1. Assignment: An application for a Planned Development, which is determined to be complete and in proper
form by the Zoning Administrator, shall be assigned a case number and placed on the Plan Commission
agenda in accordance with the Plan Commission Rules and Procedures. The Zoning Administrator shall
notify the applicant in writing of the date of the meeting.
2. Internal Review: Upon assignment of a case number and hearing date, the Zoning Administrator shall review
the application for a Planned Development and all supporting information. While the District Ordinance is in
draft format, the Zoning Administrator may forward the District Ordinance and any other relevant information
to the Routing Committee, Plan Commission's legal counsel, or other applicable agencies. The Zoning
Administrator may submit a written report to the Plan Commission stating facts concerning the physical
characteristics of the area involved in the Planned Development, the surrounding land use, public facilities
available to service the area, or other pertinent facts. The written report may also contain opinions of the
Zoning Administrator concerning the Planned Development and information from any other agencies that
reviewed the District Ordinance. A copy of such report shall be made available to the applicant and anyone
who requests it.
3. Public Notice: Public notice shall be provided in accordance with the Plan Commission Rules and
Procedures. All costs associated with providing public notice shall be borne by the applicant.
4. Attendance: The applicant shall be present at the Plan Commission meeting to explain the proposed Planned
Development and address and discuss comments and concerns posed by the Plan Commission. Failure to
appear may result in the dismissal of the application for a Planned Development.
5. Public Hearing: A public hearing shall be held in accordance with the Plan Commission Rules and
Procedures.
6. Review: At their regularly scheduled public meeting, the Plan Commission shall review:
a. Application for a Planned Development.
b. Planned Development District Ordinance draft.
c. Establishment Plan.
d. The Auburn Comprehensive Plan.
e. Current conditions and the character of current structures and uses in the area.
f. The most desirable use for which the land in the area is adapted.
g. The conservation of property values throughout the jurisdiction.
h. Responsible development and growth.
i. The testimony of the applicant.
j. Relevant evidence presented by other persons.
k. The limitations, standards, and requirements of Article 04: Planned Developments.
l. Any applicable provisions of this Unified Development Ordinance.
m. The Zoning Administrator's report or any other documents provided by other departments or agencies.
n. Any other additional information as may be required by the Plan Commission to evaluate the application.
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 09
9-20
7. Decision: The Plan Commission shall take final action or continue the application for a Planned
Development to a defined future meeting date.
a. Final Action: The Plan Commission shall certify and forward the application for a Planned Development
to the Common Council with:
i. A favorable recommendation.
ii. A favorable recommendation and with recommendations for commitments and/or conditions.
iii. An unfavorable recommendation.
iv. No recommendation.
b. Revisions: If the certified version of the Planned Development District Ordinance was revised during the
process of Plan Commission review, the applicant shall make the revisions to the Planned Development
District Ordinance so the Common Council receives the certified version of the Planned Development
District Ordinance.
8. Commitments and Conditions: In conjunction with its recommendation to the Common Council, the Plan
Commission may recommend written commitments and/or conditions for approval. Commitments and/or
conditions shall be recorded in the Office of the DeKalb County Recorder before any portion of the Final
Development Plan is approved. The applicant shall deliver a copy of the recorded commitments and/or
conditions to the Zoning Administrator.
F. Duration: If a Planned Development Detailed Development Plan, has not been filed within one (1) year of the
date the Common Council approved the Planned Development District Ordinance, the approval expires and a new
application for a Planned Development shall be submitted.
G. Modification:
1. Planned Development District Ordinance: An amendment to the text of the Planned Development District
Ordinance shall follow the process in Unified Development Ordinance: Text Amendment.
2. Commitments and Conditions: Commitments and conditions associated with a Planned Development District
Ordinance and Establishment Plan shall only be modified or terminated by a decision of the Common Council
made after a public hearing.
Planned Development: District Ordinance
Article
Article 09: Processes
09
9-21
9.08 Planned Development: Detailed Development Plan
A. Purpose and Intent: The Planned Development Detailed Development Plan shall provide the Plan Commission
with the opportunity to review the details of the site plan and determine compliance with the Planned
Development District Ordinance. If the Planned Development involves the subdivision of land, this step also
serves as the Primary Plat.
B. Project Applicability: Proposals for new Planned Developments shall meet the standards of this section.
C. Prerequisites:
1. Planned Development District Ordinance: The Planned Development District Ordinance shall be filed with
the Plan Commission for consideration. Any approval of a Detailed Development Plan shall be contingent on
commitments and/or conditions being recorded in the Office of the DeKalb County Recorder.
D. Filing Requirements: The following information shall be submitted for the Planned Development Detailed
Development Plan review process.
1. Application: Application for a Planned Development should be on file with the Zoning Administrator from
the Planned Development District Ordinance.
2. Site Plan: A site plan, drawn to scale, that includes the following items:
a. North arrow.
b. Graphic scale.
c. Address of the site.
d. Proposed name of the development.
e. Engineer's name, contact information and stamp.
f. Owner's and developer's name and contact information.
g. Area map insert showing the general location of the site referenced to major streets.
h. Boundary lines of the site including all dimensions of the site.
i. Names, center lines, and right-of-way widths of all streets, alleys, and easements.
j. Layout, number, dimension, and area of all lots.
k. Location and dimensions of all existing and proposed structures, including paved areas, entryway
features, and signs.
l. Floodplain certification statement and location of all floodway, floodway fringe areas, and wetlands
within the boundaries of the site.
m. Use of each structure by labeling including approximate density or size of all proposed uses and structures
on the site (e.g. parking - number of parking spaces provided; office - floor area).
n. Distance of all structures from front, rear, and side lot lines.
o. Areas reserved for park, recreation, conservation, wetland, common area, lake, trails, or other similar
uses.
p. Proposed landscaping buffers or landscaped areas.
q. Dumpster and trash receptacle details, if applicable.
r. Denotation of any existing structure on adjacent parcels if within twenty (20) feet of subject parcel's
property line.
s. Plan Commission certification signature block.
t. Any other information necessary to support a thorough review of the project and as requested in writing
by the Plan Commission or the Zoning Administrator.
3. Building Elevations: Representative building elevations for facades of residential and non-residential primary
structures with sufficient detail to illustrate the character of the development.
Planned Development: Detailed Development Plan
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 09
9-22
4. Access and Circulation: A Site Access and Circulation Plan shall be required, but may be incorporated into
the required Site Plan or may be submitted as a separate plan. It shall be drawn to scale.
a. North arrow.
b. Graphic scale.
c. Address of site.
d. Proposed name of the development.
e. Names, center lines, and right-of-way widths of all existing and proposed streets, alleys, and easements
within 100 feet of the site.
f. Location of any proposed or existing driveways onto a street or alley and its width at the lot line.
g. All improvements to the street system on-site and off-site.
h. Measurement of curb radius and/or flares.
i. Location of proposed and existing sidewalk or sidepath.
j. Any other information necessary to support a thorough review of the project and as requested in writing
by the Plan Commission or the Zoning Administrator.
5. Utility Plan: A Utility Plan shall be drawn to scale and shall include the following items:
a. Location of all existing and proposed utility easements.
b. Location and size of all existing and proposed utility components including, but not limited to sanitary
sewer components, water components and storm water components. Electric, gas, telephone and cable as
requested.
c. Details of lights and light fixtures and photometric plan illustrating illumination capacity.
d. Names of legal ditches and streams in or adjacent to the site.
e. Contours sufficient to illustrate storm water runoff.
f. Storm water drainage plan including estimated runoff.
g. Any other information necessary to support a thorough review of the project and as requested in writing
by the Plan Commission or the Zoning Administrator.
6. Traffic Impact Study.
a. A Traffic Impact Study may be required when a proposed development meets or exceeds the warrants of
the Indiana Department of Transportation Traffic Impact Study Guidelines (150 or more dwelling units;
15,000 square feet or more of retail space; 35,000 or more square feet of office space; 70,000 square feet
or more square feet of industrial space; 30,000 square feet or more of educational space; 120 or more
occupied rooms; 46,000 or more square feet of medical space; or any mixed use development which
generates 100 or more peak hour trips in the peak direction).
b. A registered professional engineer shall prepare and certify the Traffic Impact Study. The Traffic Impact
Study shall evaluate the impact of present and future traffic generated by the proposed development
on the adjacent roadway system. Prior to commencement, the applicant shall meet with the Zoning
Administrator and Director of Engineering to determine an appropriate scope for the Traffic Impact
Study.
7. Statement of Development Build-out: The applicant shall indicate, either on the required Site Plan or in
writing, a statement of:
a. The order of development of the major infrastructure elements of the project.
b. Project phase boundaries, if any.
c. The order and content of each phase.
d. An estimate of the time frame for build-out of the project.
8. Landscape Plan: The applicant shall indicate, either on the required Site Plan or on a separate landscape
plan, existing and proposed green space and landscaping on the site showing how the proposed landscaping
meets or exceeds the standards detailed in Article 07: Perimeter Landscaping (PL) and Article 05: Landscape
Standards (LA).
Planned Development: Detailed Development Plan
Article
Article 09: Processes
09
9-23
9. WH-O District Requirements: If the proposed development is in the WH-O District, the applicant shall submit
the following:
a. A narrative description of the site including any existing uses, setbacks, available sewage disposal
facilities, and a brief history of the site (including any former uses, historical environmental concerns,
abandoned wells, underground storage tanks, septic systems, etc.).
b. Description of the proposed operations, including chemical or products used or generated, chemical
or product storage area descriptions, waste generation quantities, equipment cleaning or maintenance
procedures.
c. Methods and locations of receiving, handling, storing and shipping chemicals or products and wastes.
d. Spill or release response measures and reporting.
e. Description of slopes near containment vessels and waste storage areas.
f. The following information shall also be included on the required Site Plan or an additional plan: all
paved and non-paved areas; floor drain locations and outlets; chemical or product storage locations;
waste storage locations; liquid transfer areas; underground storage tanks and associated piping; above
ground storage tanks and associated piping; slope and contours of finished grade at two-foot intervals;
and proposed containment area detail drawings, including area, heights, materials, specifications, if
applicable.
10. AC-O District Requirements: If the development is within in the AC-O District, the Development Plan shall
include a Noise Sensitivity Statement stating owners of land within the subdivision agree to recognize the
existing airport use near the subdivision, and further agree to not object to noise associated with the airport
and its normal operations.
E. Deadline: One (1) hard copies of the application for a Planned Development; seven (7) hard copies of all supporting
information; one (1) digital copy of the application for a Planned Development and all supporting information
in .pdf (portable document format) shall be submitted by the deadline established in the Plan Commission Rules
and Procedures.
F. Fees: The applicable fee from the City's fee schedule shall be paid at the time the application for a Planned
Development Detailed Development Plan is filed. An application without the appropriate application fee shall not
be considered substantially complete. Technical expertise necessary to review a Planned Development Detailed
Development Plan that the City of Auburn does not have adequate proficiency may constitute hiring a professional
consultant to conduct the review or portions thereof at the expense of the applicant and as per the City's fee
schedule.
G. Formal Procedure:
1. Assignment: A Planned Development Detailed Development Plan, which is determined to be complete
and in proper form by the Zoning Administrator, shall be assigned a case number and placed on the
Plan Commission agenda in accordance with the Plan Commission Rules and Procedures. The Zoning
Administrator shall notify the applicant in writing of the meeting date.
2. Internal Review: The Routing Committee and other applicable agencies shall be notified of the proposed
Planned Development Detailed Development Plan and asked to review and comment. The Zoning
Administrator may request a formal meeting of the Routing Committee and request the applicant's presence
at that meeting. Following a thorough review, the Zoning Administrator may submit a written report to the
Plan Commission stating any facts concerning the physical characteristics of the area involved in the Planned
Development Detailed Development Plan, the surrounding land use, public facilities available to service
the area, or other pertinent facts. The written report may also contain opinions of the Zoning Administrator
concerning the Planned Development Detailed Development Plan and information from the Routing
Committee and/or other agencies that have reviewed the Planned Development Detailed Development Plan.
A copy of such report shall be made available to the applicant and anyone who requests a copy.
3. Public Notice: Public notice shall be provided in accordance with the Plan Commission Rules and
Procedures. All costs associated with providing public notice shall be borne by the applicant.
4. Attendance: The applicant shall be present at the Plan Commission meeting to address and discuss comments
and concerns posed by the Plan Commission. Failure to appear may result in the dismissal of the Planned
Development.
5. Public Hearing: A public hearing shall be held in accordance with the Plan Commission Rules and
Procedures.
Planned Development: Detailed Development Plan
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 09
9-24
6. Review: At its regularly scheduled public meeting, the Plan Commission shall review:
a. The original application for a Planned Development.
b. Approved Planned Development District Ordinance.
c. All supporting information including the site plan, site access and circulation plan, elevations, utility
plan, statement of development build-out, landscape plan, and, if applicable, traffic impact study and
WH-O district requirements.
d. The testimony of the applicant.
e. Information presented in writing or verbally by the Zoning Administrator, the Routing Committee, or
other applicable department or agency.
f. Input from the public during the public hearing.
g. Any applicable requirements of the City of Auburn's Construction Standards.
h. The limitations, standards, and requirements of Article 04: Planned Developments.
i. Any applicable provisions of this Unified Development Ordinance.
j. The Zoning Administrator's report or any other documents provided by other departments or agencies.
k. Any other additional information as may be required by the Plan Commission to evaluate the application.
7. Decision: The Plan Commission shall make findings of fact and take final action or continue the Planned
Development Detailed Development Plan to a defined future meeting date.
a. Findings of Fact: The Plan Commission shall make the following findings of fact. Approval of findings
may be in the form of a general statement. Disapproval of findings shall specify the portion of the
Planned Development District Ordinance, this Unified Development Ordinance, or City of Auburn's
Construction Standards with which there is not compliance.
i. The Planned Development Detailed Development Plan is consistent with the City of Auburn
Comprehensive Plan.
ii. The Planned Development Detailed Development Plan is consistent with Article 04: Planned
Developments.
iii. The Planned Development Detailed Development Plan satisfies the development standards of the
approved Planned Development District Ordinance.
iv. The Planned Development Detailed Development Plan satisfies the construction requirements of the
City of Auburn's Construction Standards.
b. Final Action: Based on the findings of fact, the Plan Commission shall approve, approve with conditions,
or deny the Planned Development Detailed Development Plan. If conditions are required, the
conditions shall be recorded in the Office of the DeKalb County Recorder within ninety (90) days of the
Plan Commission's approval of the Planned Development Detailed Development Plan. The applicant
shall deliver a copy of the recorded conditions to the Zoning Administrator before filing a Planned
Development Final Development Plan.
c. The findings and final decision shall be signed by the Zoning Administrator.
d. The Zoning Administrator shall provide the applicant a final determination letter documenting the Plan
Commission's decision.
H. Duration: An approved Planned Development Detailed Development Plan shall be valid for two (2) years
from the date the Plan Commission granted approval. The Zoning Administrator may grant one (1) six-month
extension. The applicant shall submit the request for extension in writing, and the Zoning Administrator shall
make a written determination regarding the decision. Both the request and the determination shall be made part
of the Planned Development record. If development of the project has not commenced by the end of the two
(2) year period (or by the end of the six-month extension), the approval expires and an application for a Planned
Development (District Ordinance and Detailed Development Plan) shall be required.
Planned Development: Detailed Development Plan
Article
Article 09: Processes
09
9-25
I. Modification:
1. Minor Amendments: A minor amendment to an approved Planned Development Detailed Development Plan
which does not involve an increase in height, area, bulk or intensity of land uses; the designation of additional
land uses; a reduction in yards; the addition of driveways or access points; or a reduction in the amount of
parking may be authorized by the Zoning Administrator without a public hearing, if the requested minor
amendment does not adversely impact the purpose or intent of the overall development. Minor amendments
authorized by the Zoning Administrator shall be reported, in writing, to the Plan Commission at the next
regular meeting of the Plan Commission.
2. Major Amendments: If the Zoning Administrator determines that the proposed modification may adversely
impact the purpose or intent of the overall development; or if the proposed modification includes an increase
in intensity of any land use; or if the proposed modification includes the designation of an additional land use,
the applicant shall be required to file an amended Planned Development Detailed Development Plan.
Planned Development: Detailed Development Plan
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 09
9-26
9.09 Planned Development: Final Development Plan
A. Purpose and Intent: The Planned Development Final Development Plan shall clearly define all construction
matters and special conditions such as construction techniques, materials and the like, as well as prepare the plans
and documents for recording. If the Planned Development involves the subdivision of land, this step also serves
as the Secondary Plat approval.
B. Project Applicability: Proposals for new Planned Developments shall meet the standards of this section.
C. Prerequisites:
1. Planned Development Detailed Development Plan: The Planned Development Detailed Development Plan
shall be approved by the Plan Commission prior to submitting a Planned Development Final Development
Plan. If Planned Development Detailed Development Plan approval included conditions, those conditions
shall be recorded in the Office of the DeKalb County Recorder.
2. Infrastructure: A Planned Development shall have all of the infrastructure improvements proposed in the
Planned Development Detailed Development Plan approved by the Board of Public Works and Safety that are
intended to be dedicated to the City or the applicant shall have financial security for the cost of the infrastructure
improvements in compliance with Article 07: Surety.
D. Filing Requirements:
1. Application: The applicant shall submit a letter stating the status of infrastructure improvements and
requesting Planned Development Final Development Plan approval. The original application for a Planned
Development should be on file with the Zoning Administrator from the Planned Development District
Ordinance and the Detailed Development Plan
2. Supporting Information: The following information shall accompany the applicant's letter requesting Planned
Development Final Development Plan approval
a. Accurate location of all survey monuments and markers, if applicable.
b. If infrastructure improvements are complete, the supporting information shall include as-built drawings
stamped by a certified engineer for each infrastructure system, and copies of any required inspections or
certifications.
c. If infrastructure improvements intended to be dedicated to the City are not complete, the supporting
information shall include detailed descriptions and locations of infrastructure to be installed, estimates
from contractors for all infrastructure improvements, and a performance surety in accordance with Article
07: Surety.
d. Any other information necessary to support a thorough review of the project that is requested, in writing,
by the Zoning Administrator or Plan Commission.
3. Deadline: Planned Development Final Development Plan approval for all or a portion of the development
shall be requested within two (2) years of the approval of Planned Development Detailed Development Plan
by the Plan Commission.
4. Fees: The applicable fee from the City's fee schedule shall be paid at the time the application for a Planned
Development Final Development approval is filed. An application without the appropriate application
fee shall not be considered substantially complete. Technical expertise necessary to review a Planned
Development Final Development approval that the City of Auburn does not have adequate proficiency may
constitute hiring a professional consultant to conduct the review or portions thereof at the expense of the
applicant and as per the City's fee schedule.
Planned Development: Final Development Plan
Article
Article 09: Processes
09
9-27
E. Formal Procedure:
1. Assignment: The Zoning Administrator shall review the letter requesting Planned Development Final
Development Plan approval and all supporting information. Based on the history and the complexity of
the project, the Zoning Administrator shall determine if the Planned Development Final Development Plan
should be presented to the Plan Commission. Should the Zoning Administrator determine Plan Commission
review is necessary, the Zoning Administrator shall assign the Planned Development Final Development Plan
a case number and place it on the Plan Commission agenda in accordance with the Plan Commission Rules
and Procedures. The Zoning Administrator shall notify the applicant in writing if Plan Commission review is
necessary and the date of the meeting, if applicable.
2. Review: The Zoning Administrator shall provide the letter requesting Planned Development Final
Development Plan approval, the supporting information, and a comment sheet to all applicable departments
and agencies. Each department shall determine if the infrastructure improvements installed or proposed to be
installed meet the City of Auburn's Construction Standards and establish adequate connection to the existing
and future systems. If applicable, each department shall also review applicable cost estimates for reasonableness.
Each department shall return the comment sheet with any comments or concerns for the Zoning
Administrator to convey to the Plan Commission.
3. Public Notice: Public Notice shall be provided in accordance with the Plan Commission Rules and Procedures.
All costs associated with providing public notice shall be borne by the applicant.
4. Decision: Based on comments from departments, the Zoning Administrator or the Plan Commission shall
approve, approve with conditions, or deny Planned Development Final Development Plan.
F. Duration: An approved Planned Development Final Development Plan and any conditions shall be recorded in
the Office of the DeKalb County Recorder within ninety (90) days of the date of approval or become null and void.
Planned Development: Final Development Plan
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 09
9-28
Special Exception
9.10 Special Exception
A. Purpose and Intent: A special exception use is a use for which certain conditions must be met before it can be
established at a specific location. The use shall be permitted by the Board of Zoning Appeals if certain conditions
are met.
B. Project Applicability: Only uses listed as "special exceptions" in the two-page layouts in Article 02: Zoning
Districts shall be considered for approval by the Board of Zoning Appeals. Special Exceptions are applicable to
the following zoning districts when listed Special Exceptions exist:
M1
C. Prerequisites: An application for a Special Exception shall be filed by the owner, the owner's agent, or any person
having a legal or equitable interest in the subject property. If an authorized agent files an application, a signed and
notarized consent form from the owner shall accompany the application.
D. Filing Requirements:
1. Application: An Application for a Special Exception shall be made on forms provided by the Zoning
Administrator.
2. Deed: Recorded deed(s) for the property.
3. Use Details: A description of existing conditions, existing use, and proposed use. Include hours of operation
and number of employees.
4. Site Plan: A site plan, drawn to scale, that includes the following information.
a. North arrow.
b. Graphic scale.
c. Address of the site.
d. Legal description of the site.
e. Boundary lines of the site including all dimensions.
f. Names, center lines, and right-of-way widths of all streets, alleys, and easements.
g. Location and dimensions of all existing and proposed structures, including paved areas and signs
h. Location of all floodway, floodway fringe areas, and wetlands within the boundaries of the site.
i. Distance of all structures from front, rear, and side lot lines.
j. Areas reserved for park, recreation, conservation, wetland, common area, lake, trails, or other similar
uses.
k. Proposed landscaping buffers or landscaped areas.
l. Any other information necessary to support a thorough review of the project and as requested in writing
by the Board of Zoning Appeals or the Zoning Administrator. This may include the supporting information
listed in Subsection 9.11(D)(2)(i) for projects within the WH-O District.
E. Deadline: An application for a Special Exception shall be filed by the deadline established in the Board of Zoning
Appeals Rules and Procedures.
F. Fees: The applicable fee from the City's fee schedule shall be paid at the time the application for a Special
Exception is filed. An application without the appropriate application fee shall not be considered substantially
complete. Technical expertise necessary to review a Special Exception that the City of Auburn does not have
adequate proficiency may constitute hiring a professional consultant to conduct the review or portions thereof at
the expense of the applicant and as per the City's fee schedule.
Article
Article 09: Processes
09
9-29
Special Exception
G. Formal Procedure:
1. Assignment: An application for a Special Exception, which is determined to be complete and in proper form
by the Zoning Administrator, shall be assigned a case number and placed on the first Board of Zoning Appeals
agenda that occurs twenty-eight (28) days after the application for a Special Exception was submitted in its
entirety. The Zoning Administrator shall notify the applicant in writing of the meeting date.
2. Internal Review: Upon assignment of a number and hearing date, the Zoning Administrator may ask
applicable departments to review and comment. The Zoning Administrator may submit a written report to the
Board of Zoning Appeals stating any facts concerning the physical characteristics of the area involved, the
surrounding land use, public facilities available to service the area, or other pertinent facts. The written report
may also contain opinions of the Zoning Administrator concerning the application for a Special Exception
and/or information from other departments that have reviewed the application for a Special Exception. A
copy of such report shall be made available to the applicant and others that request a copy.
3. Public Notice: Public notice shall be provided in accordance with the Board of Zoning Appeals Rules and
Procedures. All costs associated with providing public notice shall be borne by the applicant.
4. Attendance: The applicant shall be present at the Board of Zoning Appeals meeting to present the application
for a Special Exception and to address and discuss comments and concerns. Failure to appear may result in
the dismissal of the application for a Special Exception.
5. Public Hearing: A public hearing shall be held in accordance with the Board of Zoning Appeals Rules and
Procedures.
6. Review: At its regularly scheduled public meeting, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall review
a. The application for a Special Exception.
b. Supporting information.
c. Information presented in writing or verbally by the Zoning Administrator or other applicable department
or agency.
d. Presentation by the applicant.
e. Input from the public during the public hearing.
f. Applicable provisions of this Unified Development Ordinance.
g. The Board of Zoning Appeals may take into consideration the following items as they relate to the
proposed use:
i. Topography and other natural site features.
ii. Zoning of the site and surrounding properties.
iii. Driveway locations, street access and vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
iv. Parking amount, location, design.
v. Landscaping, screening, buffering.
vi. Open space and other site amenities.
vii. Noise production and hours of operation.
viii. Design, placement, architecture, and material of the structure.
ix. Placement, design, intensity, height, and shielding of lights.
x. Traffic generation.
xi. General site layout as it relates to its surroundings.
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 09
9-30
7. Decision: The Board of Zoning Appeals shall make findings of fact and take final action or continue the
application for a Special Exception to a defined future meeting date.
a. Findings of Fact: The Board of Zoning Appeals shall make the following findings of fact. Approval of
findings may be in the form of a general statement. Disapproval of findings shall specify the reason for
non-compliance.
i. The proposed special exception is consistent with the purpose of the zoning district and the Auburn
Comprehensive Plan.
ii. The proposed special exception will not be injurious to the public health, safety, morals and general
welfare of the community.
iii. The proposed special exception is in harmony with all adjacent land uses.
iv. The proposed special exception will not alter the character of the district.
v. The proposed special exception will not substantially impact property value in an adverse manner.
b. Final Action:
i. If the Board of Zoning Appeals finds all of the findings of fact in the affirmative, it shall approve or
approve with conditions and/or commitments the application for a Special Exception.
ii. If the Board of Zoning Appeals does not find all of the findings of fact in the affirmative, it shall deny
the application for a Special Exception.
c. Commitments and Conditions:
i. Commitments: The Board of Zoning Appeals may require the owner to make a written commitment.
Commitments shall be recorded in the Office of the DeKalb County Recorder. A recorded
commitment is binding on the owner of the land, any subsequent owner of the land, and any person
who acquires interested in the land.
ii. Conditions: The Board of Zoning Appeals may require certain conditions for approval.
iii. Final Determination Letter: The Zoning Administrator shall provide the applicant a final
determination letter document the Board of Zoning Appeal's decision.
H. Duration: The granting of a special exception authorizes the use to run with the land unless conditions to the
contrary are placed on the approval. If construction of structures or occupancy of existing structures has not
commenced within one (1) years of the date the Special Exception was granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals,
the approval shall be null and void.
I. Modification: If the Zoning Administrator determines a proposed modification or intensification represents an
alteration in the essential character of the original special exception use as approved by the Board of Zoning
Appeals, a new approval of the special exception use shall be required. The operator of the special exception use
shall provide the Zoning Administrator with all the necessary information to render this determination.
Special Exception
Article
Article 09: Processes
09
9-31
Subdivision of Land: Primary Plat
9.11 Subdivision of Land: Primary Plat
A. Purpose and Intent: A Primary Plat shall provide the Plan Commission with the opportunity to review the details
of a subdivision of land to determine compliance with the provisions of this Unified Development Ordinance. A
Primary Plat shall also ensure the statutory requirements established in Indiana Code for the subdivision of land
are met.
B. Project Applicability: A Primary Plat shall be prepared in conjunction with any proposal to subdivide or plat
property within the jurisdictional area of the Plan Commission.
1. Applicable Districts: The subdivision of land shall occur only in the following zoning districts:
M1
2. Amended Plats: Plats shall be amended using the Primary Plat process in this section and the Secondary Plat
process in Section 9.12.
3. Exemptions: Condominiums regulated by IC 32-35 are exempt from this subdivision process outlined in this
Unified Development Ordinance.
C. Prerequisites:
1. Eligible Applicants: An application for Primary Plat shall be initiated by the owner of the land involved in
the development or the owner's authorized agent. If an authorized agent files an application, a signed and
notarized consent form from the owner shall accompany the application.
2. Pre-application Meeting: Prior to submitting an application for Primary Plat, the applicant shall meet with
the Zoning Administrator to review the zoning classification of the site, review regulatory ordinances and
materials, review the procedures, and examine the proposed use and development of the site.
D. Filing Requirements:
1. Application: An application for Primary Plat shall be made on forms provided by the Zoning Administrator.
2. Deed: Recorded deed(s) for the property.
3. Site Plan: A Site Plan, drawn to a scale, that includes the following items:
a. North arrow.
b. Graphic scale.
c. Proposed name of the subdivision.
d. Engineer's name, contact information, and stamp.
e. Owner's and developer's name and contact information.
f. Area map insert showing the general location of the site referenced to major streets.
g. Legal description of the site.
h. Boundary lines of the site including all dimensions of the site.
i. Names, center lines, and right-of-way widths of all streets, alleys, and easements.
j. Layout, number, dimension, area, building setback lines on all lots.
k. Location and dimensions of any existing structures.
l. Location of all floodway, floodway fringe areas, and wetlands within the boundaries of the site.
m. Areas reserved for park, recreation, conservation, wetland, common area, lake, trails, or other similar
uses.
n. Proposed perimeter landscaping areas.
o. Proposed entryway feature signs.
p. Plan Commission signature block.
q. Adjacent property owners sufficient to determine title.
r. Any other information necessary to support a thorough review of the project and as requested in writing
by the Plan Commission or the Zoning Administrator. This may include the supporting information listed
in Subsection 9.08(D)(9) for projects within the WH-O District and Subsection 9.08(D)(10) for projects
within the AC-O District.
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 09
9-32
4. Access and Circulation: A Site Access and Circulation Plan shall be required, but may be incorporated into
the required Site Plan or may be submitted as a separate plan. It shall be drawn to scale and shall include the
following items:
a. North arrow.
b. Graphic scale.
c. Proposed name of the subdivision.
d. Names, center lines, and right-of-way widths of all existing and proposed streets, alleys, and easements
within 100 feet of the site.
e. All improvements to the street system on-site and off-site.
f. Measurement of curb radius and/or flares.
g. Location of proposed and existing sidewalk and sidepaths with widths.
h. Location and details of all proposed wayfinding signs.
i. Any other information necessary to support a thorough review of the project and as requested in writing
by the Plan Commission or the Zoning Administrator.
5. Utility Plan: A Utility Plan, drawn to scale, including the following items:
a. Location of all existing and proposed utility easements.
b. Location and size of all existing and proposed utility components including, but not limited to sanitary
sewer components including inverts, water components including hydrants, storm water components,
electric, gas, telephone, and cable.
c. Location, specifications and illumination capacity of all lights.
d. Names of legal ditches and streams in or adjacent to the site.
e. Contours sufficient to illustrate storm water runoff.
f. Storm sewer drainage plan including all infrastructure (manholes, catch basins, detention basins, etc.)
estimated runoff and surface drainage patterns.
g. Any other information necessary to support a thorough review of the project and as requested in writing
by the Plan Commission or the Zoning Administrator.
6. Traffic Impact Study.
a. A Traffic Impact Study may be required when a proposed development meets or exceeds the warrants of
the Indiana Department of Transportation Traffic Impact Study Guidelines (150 or more dwelling units;
15,000 square feet or more of retail space; 35,000 or more square feet of office space; 70,000 square feet
or more square feet of industrial space; 30,000 square feet or more of educational space; 120 or more
occupied rooms; 46,000 or more square feet of medical space; or any mixed use development which
generates 100 or more peak hour trips in the peak direction).
b. A registered professional engineer shall prepare and certify the Traffic Impact Study. The Traffic Impact
Study shall evaluate the impact of present and future traffic generated by the proposed development
on the adjacent roadway system. Prior to commencement, the applicant shall meet with the Zoning
Administrator and Director of Engineering to determine an appropriate scope for the Traffic Impact
Study.
7. Statement of Development Build-out: The applicant shall indicate, either on the required Site Plan or in
writing, a statement of:
a. The order of development of the major infrastructure elements of the project.
b. Future section boundaries, if any.
c. The order and content of each section.
d. An estimate of the time frame for build-out of each section.
8. Landscape Plan: The applicant shall indicate, either on the required Site Plan or on a separate landscape
plan, existing and proposed perimeter landscaping and other landscaping that meet or exceeds the standards
detailed in Article 05: Landscape Standards (LA) and Article 07: Perimeter Landscaping (PL).
9. Requested Waivers: An applicant may request upto two waivers for standards in Article 7: Design Standards.
Subdivision of Land: Primary Plat
Article
Article 09: Processes
09
9-33
E. Deadline: The following items shall be submitted. If the project requires Plan Commission approval, the items
shall be submitted by the deadline established in the Plan Commission Rules and Procedures:
1. One (1) hard copy of the application.
2. Seven (7) hard copies of the plans.
3. A .pdf (portable document format) copy of the application, plans, and all supporting information.
4. A .dwg (drawing format) copy of the primary plat in Indiana East State Plane Coordinate System.
F. Fees: The applicable fee from the City's fee schedule shall be paid at the time the application for a Primary Plat
is filed. An application without the appropriate application fee shall not be considered substantially complete.
Technical expertise necessary to review a Primary Plat that the City of Auburn does not have adequate proficiency
may constitute hiring a professional consultant to conduct the review or portions thereof at the expense of the
applicant and as per the City's fee schedule.
G. Formal Procedure:
1. Assignment: An application for Primary Plat, which is determined to be complete and in proper form by the
Zoning Administrator, shall be assigned a case number and placed on the Plan Commission agenda in accordance
with Plan Commission Rules and Procedures. The Zoning Administrator shall notify the applicant in
writing of the meeting date.
2. Internal Review: Upon assignment of a case number and hearing date, the Routing Committee and other
applicable agencies will be notified of the proposed subdivision of land and asked to review and comment.
The Zoning Administrator may submit a written report to the Plan Commission stating any facts concerning
the physical characteristics of the area involved in the subdivision of land, the surrounding land use, public
facilities available to service the area, or other pertinent facts. The written report may also contain opinions
of the Zoning Administrator concerning the subdivision of land and information from the Routing Committee
and/or other agencies that have reviewed the subdivision of land. A copy of such report shall be made
available to the applicant and others that request a copy.
3. Public Notice: Public Notice shall be provided in accordance with Plan Commission Rules and Procedures.
The costs associated with providing public notice shall be borne by the applicant.
4. Attendance: The applicant shall be present at the Plan Commission meeting to present and explain the
application for Primary Plat and address and discuss comments and concerns posed by the Plan Commission.
Failure to appear may result in the dismissal of the application for Primary Plat.
5. Public Hearing: A public hearing shall be held in accordance with the Plan Commission Rules and
Procedures.
6. Review: At their regularly scheduled public meeting, the Plan Commission shall review:
a. The application for Primary Plat.
b. All supporting information including the site plan, site access and circulation plan, elevations, etc.
c. Information presented in writing or verbally by the Zoning Administrator, the Routing Committee, or
other applicable department.
d. The testimony of the applicant.
e. Input from the public during the public hearing.
f. Any applicable provisions of this Unified Development Ordinance.
g. Any applicable requirements of the City of Auburn's Construction Standards.
h. Any other information as may be required by the Plan Commission to evaluate the application.
Subdivision of Land: Primary Plat
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 09
9-34
7. Decision:
a. The Plan Commission shall make findings of fact and take final action or continue the application for
Primary Plat to a defined future meeting date.
b. Findings of Fact: The Plan Commission shall make the following findings of fact. Approval of findings
may be in the form of a general statement. Disapproval of findings shall specify the provision of this
Unified Development Ordinance or City of Auburn's Construction Standards with which there is not
compliance or the manner in which the project is not consistent with the Auburn Comprehensive Plan.
i. The subdivision of land is consistent with the Auburn Comprehensive Plan.
ii. The subdivision of land satisfies the development requirements of Article 06: Subdivision Types.
iii. The subdivision of land satisfies the standards of Article 07: Design Standards.
iv. The subdivision of land satisfies any other applicable provisions of this Unified Development
Ordinance;
v. The subdivision of land satisfies the construction requirements of the City of Auburn's Construction
Standards.
c. Final Action
i. If the Plan Commission finds all of the findings of fact in the affirmative, it shall approve or approve
with commitments the application for Primary Plat.
ii. If the Plan Commission does not find all of the findings of fact in the affirmative, it shall deny the
application for Primary Plat.
d. Commitments: The Plan Commission may require the applicant to make a written commitment concerning
the Primary Plat. Any written commitments shall be recorded in the Office of the DeKalb County
Recorder within ninety (90) days of the Plan Commission's final action.
e. The Zoning Administrator shall provide the applicant a final determination letter documenting the Plan
Commission's decision.
H. Duration: An approved Primary Plat shall be valid for two (2) years from the date the Plan Commission granted
approval. If a Secondary Plat for all or a portion of the Primary Plat is not filed within two (2) years, the Primary
Plat approval becomes null and void. The Zoning Administrator may grant one (1) six-month extension.
I. Modification:
1. Minor Amendments: Minor amendment to an approved Primary Plat which does not involve an increase in
the number of lots or intensity of land uses; the designation of additional land uses; the reduction in perimeter
yards; changes to circulation; the addition of driveways or access points; or reduction in the amount of
parking may be authorized by the Zoning Administrator without a public hearing, if the requested minor
amendments do not adversely impact the purpose or intent of the overall development. An example of a
minor amendment could be the relocation of an easement. A minor amendment authorized by the Zoning
Administrator shall be reported to the Plan Commission at the next regular meeting of the Plan Commission.
2. Major Amendments: If the Zoning Administrator or Director of Engineering determines that the proposed
modification may adversely impact the purpose or intent of the overall development; or if the proposed
modification includes an increase in the number of lots, or intensity of any land use; or if the proposed
modification includes the designation of an additional land use, the applicant shall be required to file a new
application for Primary Plat.
Subdivision of Land: Primary Plat
Article
Article 09: Processes
09
9-35
9.12 Subdivision of Land: Secondary Plat
A. Purpose and Intent: The Secondary Plat shall clearly define all construction matters and special conditions such
as construction techniques, materials and the like, as well as prepare the plans and documents for recording.
B. Project Applicability: Proposals for new subdivisions of land shall meet the standards of this section.
C. Prerequisites:
1. Primary Plat: The application for Primary Plat shall be approved by the Plan Commission. If the Primary
Plat approval included commitments, those commitments shall be recorded in the Office of the DeKalb
County Recorder.
2. Infrastructure: A subdivision that is the subject of a Secondary Plat shall have all of the infrastructure
improvements proposed in the Primary Plat installed to meet the City of Auburn's Construction Standards and
accepted by the Board of Public Works and Safety, or the applicant shall have posted a performance surety for
the cost of the infrastructure improvements that complies with Surety Standards (SY).
D. Filing Requirements:
1. Application: The applicant shall submit a letter stating the status of infrastructure improvements and
requesting Secondary Plat. The original application for Primary Plat should be on file with the Zoning
Administrator.
2. Plat for Recording: The applicant shall provide a plat for recording purposes that includes the following:
a. North arrow.
b. Graphic scale.
c. Proposed name of the subdivision.
d. Engineer's name, contact information, and stamp.
e. Owner's and developer's name and contact information.
f. Address for each lot, as approved by the Plan Commission.
g. Area map insert showing the general location of the site referenced to major streets.
h. Legal description of the site.
i. Boundary lines of the site including all dimensions of the site.
j. Names, center lines, and right-of-way widths of all streets, alleys, and easements.
k. Location of all survey monuments and markers identifying lots.
l. Lot number, dimension, area, and building setback lines for each lot.
m. Identification and dimensions of any existing structures.
n. Floodplain Certification Statement referencing the appropriate FEMA Map Panel.
o. Location of all floodway, floodway fringe areas, and wetlands within the boundaries of the site.
p. Areas identified as Block Areas or Common Areas.
q. Any other applicable statements including Annexation Non-remonstrance, Agricultural Non-objection;
AC-O District Noise Sensitivity Statement; etc.
r. Adjacent property owners sufficient to determine title.
s. Reference to a recorded survey completed in compliance with Rule 12.
t. Plan Commission signature block.
E. Deadline: The following items shall be submitted. If the project requires Plan Commission approval, the items
shall be submitted by the deadline established in the Plan Commission Rules and Procedures:
1. One (1) hard copy of the application.
2. Seven (7) hard copies of the plans.
3. A .pdf (portable document format) copy of the application, plans, and all supporting information.
4. A .dwg (drawing format) copy of the secondary plat in Indiana East State Plane Coordinate System.
F. Fees: The applicable fee from the City's fee schedule shall be paid at the time the application for a Secondary Plat
is filed. An application without the appropriate application fee shall not be considered substantially complete.
Technical expertise necessary to review a Secondary Plat that the City of Auburn does not have adequate proficiency
may constitute hiring a professional consultant to conduct the review or portions thereof at the expense of
the applicant and as per the City's fee schedule.
Subdivision of Land: Secondary Plat
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 09
9-36
G. Formal Procedure:
1. Assignment: The Zoning Administrator shall review the letter requesting Secondary Plat and all supporting
information. Should the Zoning Administrator determine Plan Commission approval is necessary, the Zoning
Administrator shall assign the Secondary Plat a case number and place it on the Plan Commission agenda
in accordance with Plan Commission Rules and Procedures. The Zoning Administrator shall notify the
applicant, in writing, if Plan Commission approval is necessary and the date of the meeting. If the Secondary
Plat includes any of the following modifications from the Primary Plat, the Secondary Plat shall be presented
to the Plan Commission for approval.
a. The Secondary Plat includes additional buildable lots not contained in the Primary Plat.
b. The Secondary Plat includes changes in access or circulation from the Primary Plat.
c. The Secondary Plat includes reduction of any lot size by more than ten percent (10%) from the Primary
Plat.
d. The Secondary Plat includes other changes that necessitate Plan Commission approval as determined by
the Zoning Administrator.
2. Review: The Zoning Administrator shall provide the letter requesting Secondary Plat, the supporting information,
and a comment sheet to all applicable departments and agencies. Each department shall determine if
the infrastructure improvements installed or proposed to be installed meet the City of Auburn's Construction
Standards and if the improvements include adequate connection to existing and future systems. If applicable,
each department shall also review applicable cost estimates for reasonableness. Each department shall return
the comment sheet with any comments or concerns concerning the infrastructure or the project to the Zoning
Administrator. If it has been determined that Plan Commission review is required, the Zoning Administrator
shall forward the comments to the Plan Commission for review at the meeting.
3. Public Notice: Public Notice shall be provided in accordance with Plan Commission Rules and Procedures.
All costs associated with providing public notice shall be borne by the applicant.
4. Review and Decision: The Zoning Administrator shall, based on comments from departments, approve,
approve with conditions, or deny Secondary Plat. In cases where the Secondary Plat is being heard by the
Plan Commission, the Plan Commission shall review the comments from departments at a regularly scheduled
public meeting and approve, approve with conditions, or deny Secondary Plat.
H. Duration: An approved Secondary Plat and any conditions shall be recorded in the Office of the DeKalb County
Recorder within six (6) months of the date of approval or become null and void.
Subdivision of Land: Secondary Plat
Article
Article 09: Processes
09
9-37
Unified Development Ordinance: Text Amendment
9.13 Unified Development Ordinance: Text Amendment
A. Purpose and Intent: It may become necessary to amend the text of this Unified Development Ordinance from
time to time. The Plan Commission has the authority to hear a proposal to amend the text of this Unified
Development Ordinance. The Plan Commission shall make a recommendation to the Common Council concerning
a proposal to amend the text of this Unified Development Ordinance. The Common Council has the power to
approve or reject a proposal to amend the text of this Unified Development Ordinance.
B. Project Applicability: Any proposal to add, remove, or alter a provision of this Unified Development Ordinance
shall follow the process outlined in this section.
C. Prerequisites:
1. Eligible Applicants: Members of the Common Council or members of the Plan Commission shall initiate a
proposal to amend the text of this Unified Development Ordinance. Persons who wish to propose an amendment
to the text of this Unified Development Ordinance and who are not members of the Common Council or
Plan Commission shall find a sponsor among the Common Council or the Plan Commission to introduce the
proposal.
D. Filing Requirements:
1. Application: A proposal for an amendment to the text of this Unified Development Ordinance shall be
prepared by the Zoning Administrator upon the direction of either the Common Council or the Plan
Commission.
2. Deadline: A proposal for an amendment to the text of this Unified Development Ordinance may be filed any
time.
E. Formal Procedure:
1. Assignment: The Zoning Administrator shall assign a case number and place the proposed amendment to
the text of this Unified Development Ordinance on the Plan Commission agenda in accordance with Plan
Commission Rules and Procedures.
2. Internal Review: The Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for introducing the proposed amendment to
the text of this Unified Development Ordinance to the Routing Committee and other applicable departments
and agencies that may have an interested in the proposed amendment. The Zoning Administrator shall
also notify the Routing Committee and other applicable departments and agencies of the date of the Plan
Commission meeting where the proposed amendment to the text of this Unified Development Ordinance will
be heard.
3. Public Notice: Public notice shall be provided in accordance with Plan Commission Rules and Procedures.
4. Public Hearing: A public hearing shall be held in accordance with the Plan Commission Rules and
Procedures.
5. Review: In preparing and considering proposals to amend the text of this Unified Development Ordinance,
the Plan Commission and the Common Council shall pay reasonable regard to:
a. The Auburn Comprehensive Plan.
b. Current conditions and the character of current structures and uses in each district.
c. The most desirable use for which the land in each district is adapted.
d. The conservation of property values throughout the jurisdiction.
e. Responsible development and growth.
F. Decision:
1. Final Action: The Plan Commission shall certify the amendment to the text of this Unified Development
Ordinance and forward the proposal to the Common Council with a favorable recommendation, an unfavorable
recommendation, or no recommendation.
2. Effective Date:
a. Unless an amendment to the text of this Unified Development Ordinance provides for a later effective
date, the amendment shall be effective when it is adopted under IC 36-7-4-607.
b. When a provision prescribing a penalty or forfeiture for a violation is approved, it may not take effect
until fourteen (14) days after the final day on which notice of its adoption is published; or the day on
which it is filed in the Office of the Clerk Treasurer, whichever is later.
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 09
9-38
Variance
9.14 Variance
A. Purpose and Intent: The Board of Zoning Appeals may vary the regulations of this Unified Development
Ordinance for projects that meet the findings of fact set forth in this section. Variances may be a "development
standards variance" granting relief from a development standard such as height, bulk, or area; or a "use variance"
allowing a use that is not listed as a permitted or special exception use in a district.
B. Project Applicability:
1. Jurisdiction: Projects within the jurisdictional area of the Plan Commission that are unable to meet the
provisions of this Unified Development Ordinance may apply for a variance.
2. Previously Denied Applications: The Zoning Administrator shall refuse to accept an application for a
Variance that has been denied by the Board of Zoning Appeals within the last twelve (12) months. However,
the Zoning Administrator shall have the authority and discretion to determine that an application for a
Variance containing major changes may justify re-filing within the aforementioned twelve (12) month period.
C. Prerequisites
1. Eligible Applicants: An application for a Variance may be filed by the owner, his agent, or any person having
a legal or equitable interest in the subject property. If an authorized agent files an application, signed and
notarized consent form from the owner shall accompany the application.
2. Pre-application Meeting: Prior to submitting an application for a Variance, the applicant shall meet with the
Zoning Administrator to review the zoning classification of the site, ordinance provisions, the application
packet, and the procedure involved.
D. Filing Requirements.
1. Application: Application for a Variance shall be made on a form provided by the Zoning Administrator.
2. Deed: Recorded deed(s) for the property.
3. Project Details: A description of existing conditions, existing use, and proposed use.
4. Site Plan: A site plan, drawn to scale, that includes the following information.
a. North arrow.
b. Graphic scale.
c. Address of the site.
d. Boundary lines of the site including all dimensions.
e. Names, center lines, and right-of-way widths of all streets, alleys, and easements.
f. Location and dimensions of all existing and proposed structures, including paved areas and signs
g. Location of all floodway, floodway fringe areas, and wetlands within the boundaries of the site.
h. Distance of all structures from front, rear, and side lot lines.
i. Any other information necessary to support a thorough review of the project and as requested by the
Board of Zoning Appeals or the Zoning Administrator.
5. Survey: A survey of the property if required by the Zoning Administrator (typically required for setback
variances).
E. Deadline: An application for a Variance and seven (7) copies of plans and one electronic copy of the plans shall
be filed by the deadline in the Board of Zoning Appeals Rules and Procedures.
F. Fees: The applicable fee from the City's fee schedule shall be paid at the time the application for a Variance
is filed. An application without the appropriate application fee shall not be considered substantially complete.
Technical expertise necessary to review a Variance that the City of Auburn does not have adequate proficiency
may constitute hiring a professional consultant to conduct the review or portions thereof at the expense of the
applicant and as per the City's fee schedule.
Article
Article 09: Processes
09
9-39
Variance
G. Formal Procedure:
1. Assignment: An application for a Variance, which is determined to be complete and in proper form by the
Zoning Administrator, shall be assigned a case number and placed on the Board of Zoning Appeals agenda in
accordance with the Board of Zoning Appeals Rules and Procedures. The Zoning Administrator shall notify
the applicant, in writing, of the date of the meeting.
2. Internal Review: Upon assignment of a number and hearing date, the Zoning Administrator may ask applicable
departments to review and comment on the proposed project. The Zoning Administrator may submit a
written report to the Board of Zoning Appeals stating any facts concerning the physical characteristics of the
area involved, the surrounding land use, public facilities available to service the area, or other pertinent facts.
The written report may also contain opinions of the Zoning Administrator concerning the application for a
Variance and/or information from other departments that have reviewed the application for a Variance. A
copy of such report shall be made available to the applicant and anyone that requests a copy.
3. Public Notice: Public Notice shall be provided in accordance with the Board of Zoning Appeals Rules and
Procedures. All costs associated with providing notice shall be borne by the applicant.
4. Attendance: The applicant shall be present at the Board of Zoning Appeals meeting to present the application
for a Variance and address and discuss comments and concerns. Failure to appear may result in the dismissal
of the application for a Variance.
5. Public Hearing: A public hearing shall be held in accordance with the Board of Zoning Appeals Rules and
Procedures.
6. Review: At its regularly scheduled public meeting, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall review
a. The application for a Variance.
b. Supporting information.
c. Information presented in writing or verbally by the Zoning Administrator or other applicable department
or agency.
d. Presentation by the applicant.
e. Input from the public during the public hearing.
f. Applicable provisions of this Unified Development Ordinance.
g. Any other additional information as may be required by the Board of Zoning Appeals to evaluate the
application.
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 09
9-40
7. Decision: The Board of Zoning Appeals shall make findings of fact and take final action or continue the
application for a Variance to a defined future meeting date.
a. Development Standards Variance Findings of Fact: The Board of Zoning Appeals shall make the following
findings of fact for Development Standards Variances. Approval of findings may be in the form of a
general statement. Disapproval of findings shall specify the reason for non-compliance.
i. The approval of the variance will not be injurious to the public health, safety, morals and general
welfare of the community.
ii. The use and value of the area adjacent to the property included in the variance will not be affected in
a substantially adverse manner.
iii. The strict application of the terms of the ordinance will result in practical difficulties in the use of the
property.
b. Use Variance Findings of Fact: The Board of Zoning Appeals shall make the following findings of fact
for Use Variances. Approval of findings may be in the form of a general statement. Disapproval of
findings shall specify the reason for non-compliance.
i. The approval of the variance will not be injurious to the public health, safety, morals and general
welfare of the community.
ii. The use and value of the area adjacent to the property included in the variance will not be affected in
a substantially adverse manner.
iii. That the need for the use variance arises from some condition peculiar to the property involved.
iv. The strict application of the terms of the ordinance will constitute an unnecessary hardship if applied
to the property for which the variance is sought.
v. The approval does not interfere substantially with the Auburn Comprehensive Plan.
c. Final Action:
i. If the Board of Zoning Appeals finds all of the findings of fact in the affirmative, it shall approve or
approve with conditions and/or commitments the application for a Variance.
ii. If the Board of Zoning Appeals does not find all of the findings of fact in the affirmative, it shall deny
the application for a Variance.
iii. The Zoning Administrator shall provide the applicant a Final Determination Letter documenting the
decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals.
d. Commitments and Conditions:
i. Commitments: The Board of Zoning Appeals may require the owner to make a written commitment.
Commitments shall be recorded in the Office of the DeKalb County Recorder. A recorded
commitment is binding to the owner of the land, any subsequent owner of the land, and any person
who acquires interested in the land.
ii. Conditions: The Board of Zoning Appeals may require certain conditions for approval.
H. Duration:
1. Development Standards Variance: A Development Standards Variance granted by the Board of Zoning
Appeals shall run with the land until such time as the property conforms with this Unified Development
Ordinance.
2. Use Variance: The granting of a Use Variance authorizes the use to run with the land unless conditions to the
contrary are placed on the approval. If construction of structures or occupancy of existing structures has not
commenced within one (1) year of the date the Use Variance was approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals,
the approval shall become null and void.
I. Modification: Modifications authorized by the Zoning Administrator shall be reported to the Board of Zoning
Appeals at the next regular meeting of the Board of Zoning Appeals.
1. Development Standards Variance: Modification of a development standards variance that makes a project
more compliant with the provisions of this Unified Development Ordinance may be authorized by the Zoning
Administrator. Modification of a development standards variance that makes a project less compliant with
the provisions of this Unified Development Ordinance shall re-file an application for a Variance or other
appropriate application.
2. Use Variance: Modification of use variance shall not be permitted. Any modification of an approved use
variance shall meet all of the provisions of this Unified Development Ordinance or re-file an application for a
Variance or other appropriate application.
Variance
Article
Article 09: Processes
09
9-41
Zoning Map Amendment (Rezoning)
9.15 Zoning Map Amendment (Rezoning)
A. Purpose and Intent: It may become necessary to change the zoning of parcel, lot or area, thereby amending the
Official Zoning Map. The Plan Commission has the authority to hear a proposal to amend the Official Zoning
Map. This process is typically known as a "rezoning" of land. The Plan Commission shall make a recommendation
to the Common Council concerning a proposal to amend the Official Zoning Map. The Common Council has
the power to approve or deny a proposal to amend the Official Zoning Map.
B. Project Applicability:
1. Jurisdiction: Areas or lots shall be located within the jurisdictional area of the Plan Commission.
2. Previously Denied Applications: The Zoning Administrator shall refuse to accept an application for a
Rezoning that has been denied by the Common Council within the last twelve (12) months. However, the
Zoning Administrator shall have the authority and discretion to determine that an application for a Rezoning
containing major changes may justify re-filing within the aforementioned (12) month period.
C. Prerequisites
1. Eligible Applicants:
a. The Plan Commission may act as an applicant and initiate a zoning map amendment.
b. Unless the Plan Commission has initiated a zoning map amendment, an application for a Rezoning shall
be filed by the owner, his agent, or any person having a legal or equitable interest in the subject property.
If an authorized agent files an application, a signed and notarized consent form from the owner shall
accompany the application.
2. Pre-application Meeting: Prior to submitting an application for a Rezoning the applicant shall meet with
the Zoning Administrator to review the current zoning district, the proposed zoning district, adjacent zoning
districts and land uses, applicable ordinance provisions, the application packet, and the procedure involved.
D. Filing Requirements.
1. Application: An application for a Rezoning shall be made on a form provided by the Zoning Administrator.
2. Deed: Recorded deed(s) for the property.
3. Project Details: A description of existing conditions, existing use, and proposed use.
4. Site Plan: A site plan, drawn to scale, that includes the following information.
a. North arrow.
b. Graphic scale.
c. Address of the site.
d. Legal description of the site.
e. Boundary lines of the site including all dimensions.
f. Names, center lines, and right-of-way widths of all streets, alleys, and easements.
g. Location and dimensions of all existing and proposed structures, including paved areas and signs
h. Location of all floodway, floodway fringe areas, and wetlands within the boundaries of the site.
i. Distance of all structures from front, rear, and side lot lines.
j. Areas reserved for park, recreation, conservation, wetland, common area, lake, trails, or other similar
uses.
k. Proposed landscaping buffers or landscaped areas.
l. Any other information necessary to support a thorough review of the project and as requested by the Plan
Commission or the Zoning Administrator.
5. Survey: A survey of the property if required by the Zoning Administrator.
E. Deadline: An application for a Rezoning, seven (7) copies of the plans and one (1) electronic copy of the plans
shall be filed by the deadline established in the Plan Commission Rules and Procedures.
F. Fees: The applicable fee from the City's fee schedule shall be paid at the time the application for a Rezoning
is filed. An application without the appropriate application fee shall not be considered substantially complete.
Technical expertise necessary to review a Rezoning that the City of Auburn does not have adequate proficiency
may constitute hiring a professional consultant to conduct the review or portions thereof at the expense of the
applicant and as per the City's fee schedule.
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 09
9-42
G. Formal Procedure:
1. Assignment: An application for a Rezoning, which is determined to be complete and in proper form by the
Zoning Administrator, shall be assigned a case number and placed on the Plan Commission agenda in accordance
with the Plan Commission Rules and Procedures. The Zoning Administrator shall notify the applicant,
in writing, of the date of the meeting and provide the applicant with a legal notice.
2. Internal Review: Upon assignment of a case number and hearing date, the Zoning Administrator shall review
the application for a Rezoning and all supporting information. The Zoning Administrator may forward
the application for a Rezoning and any other relevant information to the Routing Committee and/or other
applicable agencies. The Zoning Administrator may submit a written report to the Plan Commission stating
facts concerning the physical characteristics of the area involved in the application for a Rezoning, adjacent
zoning, the surrounding land use, facilities available to service the area, or other pertinent facts. The written
report may also contain opinions of the Zoning Administrator concerning the application for a Rezoning and
information from any other agency that reviewed the application for a Rezoning. A copy of such report shall
be made available to the applicant and anyone that requests a copy.
3. Public Notice: Public Notice shall be provided in accordance with Plan Commission Rules and Procedures.
4. Attendance: The applicant shall be present at the Plan Commission meeting to explain the application for a
Rezoning and address and discuss comments and concerns posed by the Plan Commission. Failure to appear
may result in the dismissal of the application for a Rezoning.
5. Public Hearing: A public hearing shall be held in accordance with the Plan Commission Rules and
Procedures. All costs associated with providing notice shall be borne by the applicant.
6. Review: At their regularly scheduled public meeting, the Plan Commission shall review:
a. The application for Rezoning.
b. All supporting information.
c. Information presented in writing or verbally by the Zoning Administrator or other applicable department.
d. Presentation by applicant.
e. Input from the public during the public hearing.
f. Any applicable provisions of this Unified Development Ordinance;
g. Any other information as may be required by the Plan Commission to evaluate the application.
7. Decision:
a. The Plan Commission shall take final action or continue the application for a Rezoning to a defined future
meeting date. The Plan Commission shall pay reasonable regard to the following factors before taking
final action.
i. The Auburn Comprehensive Plan.
ii. Current conditions and the character of current structures and uses in each district.
iii. The most desirable use for which the land in each district is adapted.
iv. The conservation of property values throughout the jurisdiction.
v. Responsible development and growth.
b. Final Action: The Plan Commission shall certify the amendment to the Official Zoning Map and forward
the application to the Common Council with a favorable recommendation, an unfavorable recommendation,
or no recommendation. The Plan Commission may also recommend commitments concerning
the use and/or development of the land in connection with the application for Rezoning. The Common
Council makes the final determination regarding an application for Rezoning and any recommended
commitments by ordinance.
H. Duration: A rezoning shall be effective from the date of its final approval by the Common Council.
I. Modification: A modification to an approved Zoning Map Amendment shall not be permitted.
Zoning Map Amendment (Rezoning)
© 2018, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Article
Enforcement and Penalties
10
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 10
10-2
Enforcement and Penalties
10.01 Authority
The Plan Commission, Board of Zoning Appeals, Common Council, City Attorney, Building Commissioner, or the
Zoning Administrator shall be designated to enforce the provisions of this Unified Development Ordinance.
10.02 Violations
A. Identification: Reports made to the Department of Building, Planning and Development about potential violations
of this Unified Development Ordinance may be investigated by the Plan Commission, Board of Zoning Appeals,
Common Council, City Attorney, Building Commissioner, or Zoning Administrator. Action may or may not be
taken depending on the findings. If a violation is identified, the degree of action will be at the discretion of the
investigating person and should reflect what is warranted by the violation.
B. Responsibility: The owner, tenant, and/or occupant of any property or structure, or a part of any property or
structure, shall be responsible for the violation. Architects, engineers, builders, developers, or agents may also be
found responsible for the violation if evidence of their involvement or negligence is found. Ultimately, if fault is
not clearly found in whole or in part in persons other than the owner, the owner shall be held fully responsible.
C. Liability: A structure that is erected or converted, or land used in violation of this Unified Development
Ordinance may be deemed a common nuisance and the owner of the structure or land shall be held liable for the
nuisance.
D. Types: The following items shall be deemed zoning violations, enforceable by the Plan Commission, Board of
Zoning Appeals, Common Council, City Attorney, Building Commissioner, or Zoning Administrator. Penalties
may be imposed based on the provisions set forth in this Article.
1. Permits: Failure to obtain an Improvement Location Permit or any other required permit under this Unified
Development Ordinance when required prior to the initiation of improvements, change of land use, or other
modifications regulated under this Unified Development Ordinance.
2. Improper Placement: The placement or erection of a primary structure, accessory structure, sign, landscaping,
fences, structures or any other element that does not conform with the provisions or explicit intent of this
Unified Development Ordinance as determined by the Zoning Administrator.
3. Maintenance: Failure to maintain a property, primary structure, accessory structure, sign, or any other
element as determined by the Zoning Administrator.
4. Occupancy: Failure to obtain a Certificate of Occupancy prior to the utilization of a structure.
5. Use: Conducting a use or uses that do not comply with the provisions or explicit intent of this Unified
Development Ordinance.
6. Other: Failure to comply with any regulations of this Unified Development Ordinance, including, but not
limited to development standards, design standards, development plan, planned development, or conditions of
approval imposed.
7. Stop Work: Proceeding with work under a Stop Work Order.
8. Commitments: Any failure to comply with commitments made in connection with a rezoning, approval of
a development plan, special exception, variance, or other similar or documentable commitment, including
verbal agreements during official Plan Commission, Common Council, or Board of Zoning Appeals meetings.
9. Address Numerals: Failure to place and maintain city-assigned address numbers on applicable structures.
E. Duration: Each day a zoning violation remains uncorrected constitutes a separate violation.
Article
Article 10: Enforcement and Penalties
10
10-3
Enforcement and Penalties
F. Inspection:
1. Standard: Inspections of property may be conducted by the Zoning Administrator or the Building
Commissioner from the property suspected of the violation with permission from that property owner, tenant,
or occupant at the time of the inspection; from a right-of-way; or from an adjacent property with permission
from that property owner.
2. Warrant: In the event the inspector is denied access and unable to adequately inspect from adjacent property
or right-of-way, and providing there is evidence of violation of this Unified Development Ordinance, the Plan
Commission, Board of Zoning Appeals, Common Council, Building Commissioner, or Zoning Administrator
may apply to the court of jurisdiction to invoke legal, equitable, or special remedy for the enforcement of
this Unified Development Ordinance or any applicable ordinances adopted under Indiana Code. If the court
determines the evidence is sufficient, the warrant issued shall order the owner, tenant, and/or occupant to
permit entry by the Zoning Administrator or the Building Commissioner for the purposes documented in the
application for the warrant.
3. Emergency Remedy:
a. When, in the opinion of the Zoning Administrator or Building Commissioner, the condition of the site
causes serious danger to the health, safety, or welfare of the public, the City may enter the site to remedy
the dangerous condition without notice to the property owner.
b. Signs located within the right-of-way shall be deemed a violation requiring an emergency remedy. Signs
located within the right-of-way may be removed at the discretion of the Zoning Administrator or Building
Commissioner without notice.
10.03 Procedure for Violations
A. Stop Work Order: The Zoning Administrator or Building Commissioner may place a stop work order on any
violation discovered during the construction process, including construction occurring without all of the necessary
permits. Stop work orders shall be issued by written notice which describe the violation and orders the immediate
cessation of work or illegal activity until the matter is resolved. The stop work order shall be posted in a
conspicuous place on the property where the violation exists. A copy of the stop work order and a first Notice of
Violation letter shall be mailed to the property owner and/or the person who is responsible, in part or in whole, for
the violation if that person is not the property owner.
B. Notice of Violation: The Zoning Administrator or Building Commissioner may issue a Notice of Violation letter
to the property owner and/or the person who is responsible, in part or in whole, for the violation if that person is
not the property owner. The Notice of Violation letter shall state that a violation exists and must be corrected.
1. Corrected: If the violation is corrected no further action shall be taken.
2. Arrangements: If arrangements are made to have the violation corrected within a reasonable time period that
is agreed to and signed by the person responsible for the violation and the Zoning Administrator or Building
Commissioner, no further action shall be taken. If the property owner has not been party to the violation, the
property owner shall be notified of the arrangement to correct the violation.
C. Signs in Right-of-Way: The Zoning Administrator may remove signs located in rights-of-way without notice to
the sign owner and/or adjacent property owner. Signs removed from rights-of-way may be retrieved from the
Department of Building, Planning & Development within two weeks of the date of the sign's removal.
10.04 Appeals or Trials
A. Initiating an Appeal: Any aggrieved person may appeal to the Board of Zoning Appeals or to the court of jurisdiction.
A written statement from the property owner and/or person responsible for the violation shall be submitted
to the Zoning Administrator within thirty (30) days of the date of the notice of violation letter to initiate the appeal
of the violation.
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 10
10-4
10.05 Enforcement, Remedies, and Injunctive Relief
A. Enforcement: All remedies and enforcement shall comply with the powers set forth in IC 36-7-4-1000 et seq. and
all other applicable State Laws.
1. Legal Action: The Plan Commission, Board of Zoning Appeals, Common Council, City Attorney, Building
Commissioner, or Zoning Administrator may bring an action in the Circuit or Superior Court of DeKalb
County for the following reasons:
a. To invoke any legal, equitable, or special remedy, for the enforcement of any ordinance or regulation
created under Indiana Code 36-7-4 et seq. This includes but is not limited to this Unified Development
Ordinance.
b. To enforce agreements between the Plan Commission which have been recorded as covenants in connection
with a subdivision plat, a development plan, or a planned development.
c. To enforce commitments made in accordance with Indiana Code 36-7-4 et seq.
d. To enforce conditions imposed in accordance with Indiana Code 36-7-4 et seq.
e. To restrain a person violating Indiana Code 36-7-4 et seq. or any ordinance adopted under Indiana Code
36-7-4 et seq. which includes but is not limited to this Unified Development Ordinance.
f. For an injunction from violating State law or local ordinance.
g. For a fine as per Section 10.99 in Chapter 10 of the Auburn Code of Ordinances for a fine. This section
establishes a fine of not more than $2,500 for each offense. For zoning violations each day of the
existence of the violation shall be a separate offense.
2. Enforcing a Commitment: An action to enforce a commitment made in accordance with Indiana Code 36-7-4
et seq. may be brought in the Circuit or Superior Court of DeKalb County by:
a. Any person who is entitled to enforce a commitment made in accordance with Indiana Code 36-7-4
et seq. under the rules of the Plan Commission or the Board of Zoning Appeals in force at the time the
commitment was made; or
b. Any other specially affected person who was designated in the commitment.
Enforcement and Penalties
© 2018, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Article
Definitions
11
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 11
11-2
Definitions
11.01 General
The definitions contained in Article 11 shall be observed and applied in the interpretation of all Articles in this Unified
Development Ordinance, except where the context clearly indicates otherwise. Words used in the present tense shall
include the future; words used in the singular number shall include the plural and the plural the singular; words used
in the masculine gender shall include the feminine.
11.02 Defined Words
The following terms shall have the following meanings:
Article
Article 11: Definitions
11
11-3
Abandoned
Abandoned: The relinquishment of property or a cessation of the use of the property for a continuous period of one
(1) year by the owner with the intention neither of transferring rights to the property to another owner nor of resuming
the use of the property.
Above Ground Utility Facility: Permanently located and installed electrical generators, pipeline pumping stations,
public wells, telephone exchanges, utility substations, and the like.
Access Street: See "Street, Access"
Accessory Dwelling (or Dwelling Unit): A dwelling subordinate to a primary dwelling on the same lot. This use is
typically referred to as a "Granny Flat" or "In-law Apartment."
Accessory Structure: Any structure which:
1. Is subordinate to a primary structure in area, intent, and/or purpose;
2. Contributes to the comfort, convenience, or necessity of occupants of the primary structure or primary use;
3. Does not alter or change the character of the premises;
4. Is located on the same lot as the primary structure or use; and
5. Is not designed for human occupancy as a dwelling or commercial use.
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Accessory
Structures
Primary
Structure
Lot
Area
Property
Line
R.O.W.
Accessory Structure, Recreation-based: An accessory structure placed on a lot and used for recreation, entertainment
and lounging. Examples of recreation-based accessory structures include decks, docks, gazebos, hot tubs,
ground-mounted satellite dishes, piers, sport courts, swimming pools
Accessory Structure, Storage-based: An accessory structure placed on a lot and used to store, keep, shelter or
contain material items. Examples of storage-based accessory structures include barns, boat houses, carports, detached
garages, greenhouses, mini-barns, pole structures, pool houses, and sheds.
Accessory Structure, Support-based: An accessory structure placed on a lot and used to provide essential services
to a primary structure, primary land use, or another accessory structure. Examples of support-based accessory
structures include maintenance facility, mechanical structure, freestanding canopy, stand-alone restroom facilities,
storage building, enclosed vending, kiosk, or structures used in support of the primary structure.
ADA: The Americans with Disabilities Act.
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 11
11-4
Adjacent Property
Adjacent Property: Any property adjacent to or directly diagonal to the subject property. Properties across a public
right-of-way (ROW) are also considered adjacent. The illustration below notes the properties that would be considered
adjacent to two (2) different subject properties.
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Subject
Property
Subject
Property
R.O.W.
R.O.W.
R.O.W.
Administrator: The officer appointed by and/or delegated the responsibility for the administration of the Auburn
Unified Development Ordinance's regulations by the Plan Commission. The term "Administrator" includes his/her
authorized representative.
Advisory Plan Commission: See "Plan Commission."
Agricultural District: Refers to the AG and AC districts.
Agriculture: The use of land for agriculture purposes, including farming, dairying, pasturage, apiculture, agriculture,
horticulture, floriculture, viticulture, and animal and poultry husbandry, and the necessary accessory uses for packing,
treating, or storing the produce; provided, however, that the operation of any accessory uses shall be secondary to that
of the normal agricultural activities. "Agriculture” does not include feed lots, stock yards, or the commercial feeding
of garbage or offal to swine or other animals.
Agricultural Tourism: Permanent or temporary uses integrated with an agricultural operation offering agriculture
education, agricultural experiences, agricultural products primarily grown or produced on-site, and the like.
Examples, include "you-pick" blueberries, pumpkin festival, cider mill, observing a dairy operation, retail sales of
cheese produced on site, and feeding farm animals. Agricultural tourism shall not include private or public stables.
Airport: Any area which is used or intended to be used for the taking off and landing of aircraft, including helicopters,
and any appurtenant areas which are used or intended to be used for airport structures or facilities, including open
spaces, taxiways, and tie-down areas.
Alley: A public right-of-way, other than a street, crosswalk, or easement, that provides secondary access for the special
accommodation of abutting property.
Amusement Park: A commercial enterprise with three (3) or more of the following: rides (e.g. roller coasters),
entertainment, experiences, attractions, performances, and/or themed experiences. Ancillary to the core components
listed in the previous sentence, lodging, restaurants, vending, shopping and personal services. Generally, amusement
parks are family oriented enterprises and accommodate very large assembly of persons.
Antenna: A device for directional or non-directional sending or receiving of electromagnetic waves (e.g. radio
waves).
Applicant: The owner, owners, subdivider, developer, or legal representative of real estate who makes application to
the Zoning Administrator, Plan Commission, and/or Board of Zoning Appeals for action by the Zoning Administrator,
Plan Commission, Board of Zoning Appeals or Common Council affecting the real estate owned or represented by the
applicant.
Arterial Street: See "Street, Arterial."
Assisted Living Facility: A residential facility where assistance with daily activities, such as taking medicine,
dressing, grooming, and bathing are provided for the aged or infirm, or any other reasonably independent person in
need of nursing care; and which does not contain equipment for surgical care or for treatment of disease or injury, and
is not primarily designed for patients being treated for mental illness or alcohol or drug addiction. Assisted living
facilities have private rooms that are not shared by non-related persons.
ATM: See "Automated Teller Machine."
Attached Structure: A structure that is structurally connected to another structure by a foundation, wall, bridge, or
roof line, or appears to be connected.
Article
Article 11: Definitions
11
11-5
Automobile Oriented Business
Automobile Oriented Business: A business that includes services rendered directly on, to, or for vehicles.
Automobile Oriented Businesses include automobile accessory installation, automobile body shop, automobile gas
station, automobile oil change facility, automobile parts sales, automobile rental, automobile repair or service station,
and automobile wash; not including automobile sales.
Automated Teller Machine (ATM): An electronically operated device used to conduct financial transactions on site,
by means of direct computerized access.
Automobile Repair or Service Station: Any building or premises used for the dispensing, sale or offering for sale to
the public, automobile fuels stored only in underground tanks and located wholly within the lot lines; lubricating oil
or grease for the operation of automobiles; and the sale and installation of tires, batteries, other minor accessories, and
minor auto repair, but not including a bulk plant, conducting of major auto repairs, automobile wrecking, automobile
sales, or car washes; provided, however, that the washing of individual automobiles where no chain conveyor is
employed may be included.
Average Setback: See "Setback, Average."
Base Flood Elevation: The calculated elevation of floodwater that represents a one-percent (1%) annual chance flood.
A base flood elevation is commonly referred to as a 100-year flood elevation.
Base Zoning District: See "Underlying Zoning District."
Basement: That portion of a structure below the first or ground floor level and having less than four (4) feet of
clearance from its ceiling to the average finished grade of the structure perimeter. A basement shall not be considered
a story for the purposes of determining structure height, except when it is used or suitable for habitation.
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Crawl Space
A
B
If B is greater than A,
the story is a basement.
Second
Floor
First
Floor
Basement
A
B
Mezzanine Attic
If B is less than A,
the story is NOT a basement.
Bed and Breakfast Facility: An owner occupied or employee of the owner occupied residence containing no more
than six (6) guest rooms for hire, for lodging by prearrangement for periods not to exceed three (3) consecutive weeks
and providing for occasional meals daily (usually breakfast) and not a hotel or motel or boarding house.
Berm: A man-made, formed, earth mound of definite height and width used for landscaping and screening purposes,
the intent of which is to provide a transition between uses of differing intensity or to screen uses from sight.
Block: Property abutting on one (1) side of a street and lying between the two (2) nearest intersecting or intercepting
streets, intersecting railroad, intersecting waterway, or the end of a dead end street.
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Corner
Lot
Corner
Lot
Interior
Lot
Through
Lot
Through
Lot
R.O.W.
R.O.W.
R.O.W.
Block
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 11
11-6
Board
Board: See "Board of Zoning Appeals."
Board of Zoning Appeals: The City of Auburn Board of Zoning Appeals or any division thereof.
Boarding House: A structure, not available to transients, in which lodging and meals are regularly provided for
compensation for at least three (3) but not more than ten (10) persons.
Buffer Landscaping: Any trees, shrubs, walls, fences, berms, space, or related landscaping features required under
this Unified Development Ordinance for buffering lots from adjacent properties or public rights-of-way for the
purpose of increasing visual shielding or other aspects of privacy and/or aesthetics.
Buffer Yard: An area adjacent to front, side, and rear property lines, measured perpendicularly from adjacent
property lines and/or right-of-way lines, intended to provide attractive spaces to reduce the impacts of proposed uses
on adjacent property or natural features and to screen incompatible uses from each other and from the right-of-way.
Buffer yards also help to maintain existing trees or natural vegetation, to block or reduce noise, glare or other emissions
and to maintain privacy. Buffer yards are in addition to (separate from) front, rear, or side yard setbacks.
Buildable Lot: See "Lot, Improved."
Building: A structure having a roof, supported by columns or walls, for the shelter, support, or enclosure of persons,
property, or animals; and when separated by division walls from the ground up and without openings, each portion of
such building shall be deemed as a separate building.
Building Area: The horizontal area of the buildings on a lot, measured from the outside exterior walls, excluding open
areas or terraces, unenclosed porches or decks, and architectural features that project no more than two (2) feet.
Building Code: The Indiana Building Code which establishes and controls the standards for constructing all forms of
permanent structures and related matters.
Building, Detached: See "Detached Structure."
Building Height: See "Structure Height."
Building Envelope: The setback lines that establishes an area on a lot in which building can occur.
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Building
Envelope
Front Yard
Setback
Side
Yard
Setback
Rear Yard
Setback
R.O.W.
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Side
Yard
Setback
Building
Envelope
R.O.W.
Front Yard
Setback
Rear Yard
Setback
Side
Yard
Setback
Buffer
Yard
Building, Multiple-tenant: A building that contains more than one (1) business, organization and/or institution.
Building, Single-tenant: A building that contains only one (1) business, organization and/or institution.
Bumpout: An extension of a street curb toward the centerline of a street creating a narrowed street, either for the
purpose of defining parking spaces, shortening a crosswalk, adding landscaping area along a street, or the like.
Business: The engaging in the purchase, sale, barter, or exchange of goods, wares, merchandise, or services, or the
maintenance or operation of office, recreational, or amusement enterprises.
BZA: See "Board of Zoning Appeals."
Cabaret: A nightclub, theater, or other establishment which is licensed to serve food and/or alcoholic beverages
which feature live performances by topless and/or bottomless dancers, go-go dancers, exotic dancers, strippers, or
similar entertainers, where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on sexual conduct or
specified anatomical areas.
Campground: Any site, lot, field, or tract of land designed with facilities for short term occupancy by recreational
vehicles and other camping equipment but not including mobile homes.
Article
Article 11: Definitions
11
11-7
Canopy Tree
Canopy Tree: Deciduous trees that grow to at least thirty (30) feet in height and have a canopy that is round or oval in
shape. Conical or tubular shaped trees are not canopy trees.
Car Wash: A structure, or portion of a structure, containing facilities for washing one (1) or more automobiles at
any one (1) time, using production line methods such as a chain conveyor, blower, steam cleaning device, or other
mechanical devices; or providing space, water, equipment, or soap for the complete or partial cleaning of such
automobiles, whether by operator or by customer.
Cellular Communication Equipment: Antennas and other transmitting and/or receiving devices or other associated
devices used in the provision of telecommunications service.
Cemetery: Property used for interring of the dead, inclusive of any crematory, mausoleum or mortuary operated in
conjunction with and on the same property.
Central Water System: A community water supply system including existing and new wells and/or surface water
sources and intakes, treatment facilities, and distribution lines and includes such of the above facilities established by
the developer to serve a new subdivision, or commercial or industrial development.
Central Sewer System: A community sewer system including collection and treatment facilities owned and maintained
by the City of Auburn.
Certificate of Occupancy: A certificate stating that the occupancy and use of a structure complies with all applicable
Unified Development Ordinance provisions.
Child Care Home: An establishment providing non-overnight care, supervision, and protection of children in private
residences which is ancillary to the primary use as residential. A residential structure in which at least six (6) children
(not including the children for whom the provider is parent, stepparent, guardian, custodian, or other relative) at any
time receive child care from a provider: (a) while unattended by a parent, legal guardian, or custodian; (b) for regular
compensation; and (c) for more than four (4) hours but less than twenty-four (24) hours in each of ten (10) consecutive
days per year, excluding intervening Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays. The term includes class I child care home
and class II child care home as defined in IC 12-7-2-33.7 and IC 12-7-2-33.8.
Child Care Center: Any institution operated for the care of children, licensed pursuant to IC 12-3-2-3.1, et seq., and
as defined by IC 12-3-2-3.
Child Care Institution:
1. A residential facility that provides child care on a twenty-four (24) hour basis for more than ten (10) children; or
2. A residential facility with a capacity of not more than ten (10) children that does not meet the residential structure
requirements of a group home; or
3. Operates under a license issued under IC 12-17.4; provides for delivery of mental health services that are
appropriate to the needs of the individual; and complies with the rules adopted under IC 4-22-2 by the Division of
Family and Children. A child care institution does not include a juvenile detention facility.
Children's Home: See "Child Care Institution."
Church: See “Places of Worship.”
City: City of Auburn, Indiana.
City Official: A member of the Common Council, Board of Public Works and Safety, Plan Commission, Plan
Commission staff, Board of Zoning Appeals, or an employee of the City.
Classroom: A space used by a teacher, professor or instructor to educate or train students.
Clinic: An establishment in which human patients are admitted for medical or dental study or treatment and in which
the services of at least two (2) physicians or dentists are provided.
Club House: A structure used in association with a golf course, in which may be locker rooms, golf course administration
offices, golf cart storage and maintenance, rest rooms, lounges, meeting space, snack bar, banquet facilities,
and retail sales of golf related products. Retail sales shall constitute no more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the
space accessible to the public of the club house.
Collocation: A space on an existing or proposed telecommunication tower that can be used for the installation and/or
mounting of antennas or radio or cellular communication equipment that operates on a different frequency from the
initial user.
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 11
11-8
Commercial Districts
Commercial Districts: Refers to the C1, DC, and C2 Districts.
Commercial Wireless Communications Service: A licensed commercial wireless telecommunications service,
including cellular, personal communication services (PCS), specialized mobile radio (SMR), enhanced specialized
mobile radio (ESMR), paging, and similar devices that are marketed to the general public.
Commission: See "Plan Commission."
Community Center: A structure available to the public for community activities, meetings, banquets, projects,
gatherings, and the like. A community center may be able to be reserved by the public for private parties and events.
Comprehensive Plan: Refers to the Auburn Comprehensive Plan. The plan includes goals, objectives, and implementation
measures for land use, growth management, transportation, public services, the environment, image and
identity, economic development, parks and recreation, and inter-jurisdictional cooperation. The Comprehensive Plan
was developed and adopted by the Plan Commission pursuant to the IC 36-7-4-500 Series and includes any part and/
or policies separately adopted and any amendment to the plan and/or the policies.
Condition of Approval: Stipulations or provisions set forth by the Board of Zoning Appeals or Plan Commission
required as a prerequisite for approval of a petition.
Condominium: Real estate lawfully subject to IC 32-25, et seq. (the Condominium Law), by the recording of condominium
instruments, in which undivided interests in the common areas and facilities are vested in the condominium
unit owners.
Confined Feeding: The raising of animals for food, fur, or recreation in lots, pens, ponds, sheds, or buildings, where
they are confined, fed, and maintained for at least forty-five (45) days during any year, and where there is no ground
cover or vegetation present over at least half of the animals’ confinement area.
Confined Feeding Operation (large): Any livestock operation engaged in the confined feeding of at least 1,000
cattle, or 1,000 swine, or 10,000 sheep, or 30,000 hens or ducks. All thresholds are defined by the Indiana Department
of Environmental Management (IDEM).
Confined Feeding Operation (medium): Any livestock operation engaged in the confined feeding of between
300-999 cattle, or 750-999 swine, or 3,000-9,999 sheep, or 9,000-29,999 hens, or 10,000-29,999 ducks. All thresholds
are defined by the Indiana Department of Environmental Management (IDEM).
Confined Feeding Operation (small): Any livestock operation engaged in the confined feeding of less than 300
cattle, or 750 swine, or 3,000 sheep, or 9,000 hens or 10,000 ducks. All thresholds are defined by the Indiana
Department of Environmental Management (IDEM).
Construction Plan(s): The maps or drawings showing the specific location and design of improvements to be
installed in accordance with the requirements of this Unified Development Ordinance and the Indiana Building Code
as a condition of approval.
Continuous Mound: A landscape feature used for screening in which a continuous raised section of earth is used to
block or partially block visibility from one side to the other. In particular, continuous mounds are linear with a top
elevation (crest) relatively consistent from one end to the other.
Corner Lot: See "Lot, Corner."
County: DeKalb County, Indiana.
Covenants: Private and legal restrictions of various kinds on the usage of lots, typically within a subdivision and
applied by the subdivider. In the case of public health, safety, and welfare, covenants may be applied by the Plan
Commission, that are recorded with the plat and deed. Covenants can also be placed on commercial and industrial
developments. Unless specifically agreed to, covenants are not enforceable by the Plan Commission. However, they
are enforceable in civil court by interested or affected parties.
Article
Article 11: Definitions
11
11-9
Cul-de-sac
Cul-de-sac: A street having one (1) end open to traffic and being permanently terminated by a vehicular turnaround at
the other end.
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Cul-de-sac
Length
Block
Length
Stub
Street
R.O.W.
Stub Street
Dance or Night Club: An establishment for entertainment with table seating, stage (or area) for musical performances
and floor area designated for dancing.
Day Care Center: See "Child Care Center."
DBH: Diameter-at-breast-height is a tree trunk diameter measured in inches at a height of four and one-half feet (4'
6") above the ground. If a tree spits into multiple trunks below four and one-half feet (4' 6"), the trunk is measured at
its most narrow point beneath the split.
Deck: An accessory structure which is on the ground or is elevated from ground level and is open to the sky.
Dedication: The setting apart of land or interests in land for use by the municipality or public by ordinance, resolution,
or entry in the official minutes as by the recording of a plat.
Demolition: The complete removal or destruction of any structure excluding its foundation.
Design Services Office: See "Office, Design Services."
Designed Fail Area: The area surrounding a tower in which the tower could fall should it fail as structurally designed.
The designed fail area is quantified in terms of linear distance from the tower to the perimeter of the designed fail
area. The designed fail area shall be certified by a structural engineer.
Detached Building: See "Detached Structure."
Detached Structure: A structure that has no structural connection with the primary structure or any other building or
structure.
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Detached
Buildings
Property
Line
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 11
11-10
Developed Lot
Developed Lot: See "Lot, Developed."
Developer: The owner or legal representative of land proposed to be subdivided or used for agricultural, residential,
commercial, institutional, mixed-used, industrial or the like purposes.
Development: The act of modifying a lot, parcel or property developing as a plan or method, or an image upon
a photographic plate; gradual advancement or growth through a series of progressive changes; also, the result of
developing, or a developed state.
Development Standards: Height, bulk, density, environmental performance standards, and other standards for
development as set forth in this Unified Development Ordinance, including landscaping, parking, and other required
improvements, excluding those provisions which specifically regulate the use, per se, of property.
Development Standards Variance: See "Variance, Development Standards."
Diameter-at-breast-height: See "DBH."
District: See "Zoning District."
District Intent: A zoning district’s purpose to ensure that all development is consistent with the goals, objectives, and
policies identified in the Comprehensive Plan.
DNR: Indiana Department of Natural Resources.
Domestic Pets: Animals commonly used as household pets, protection, companions, and for assistance to disabled
persons. Domestic pets shall include animals that are cared for and treated in a manner acceptable for pet dogs,
cats, and birds. Domestic pets shall include, but not be limited to, dogs, cats, parakeets, parrots, finches, lizards,
spiders, guinea pigs, hamsters, gerbils, rats, mice, rabbits, aquarium fish, ferrets, and snakes if cared for in the manner
described above.
Drive, Private: See "Street, Private."
Drive-Through Establishment: A place of business, being operated for the sale and purchase at retail of food and
other goods, services, or entertainment, which is laid out and equipped so as to allow its patrons to be served or
accommodated while remaining in their automobiles.
Driveway: A surface improvement installed on a lot and used to convey vehicles to public streets.
Duplex: See "Dwelling, Single-family Attached."
Dwelling: A structure or portion thereof, conforming to all requirements applicable to the district in which it is
located, all Building Codes, and that is used exclusively for residential occupancy, including single-family dwelling
units, two-family dwelling units, and multiple-family dwelling units, but excluding hotels, motels, and boarding
houses.
Dwelling, HUD: See "Dwelling, Mobile Home."
Dwelling, Manufactured Home: A single-family dwelling unit designed and built in a factory, installed as a permanent
residence, which bears a seal certifying that it was built in compliance with the federal Manufactured Housing
Construction and Safety Standards Law (1974 U.S.C. 5401 et seq.), and which also complies with the following
specifications:
1. Was constructed after January 1, 1981, and exceeds 950 square feet of occupiable space per IC 36-7-4(d);
2. Is attached to a permanent foundation of masonry construction and has a permanent concrete or concrete block
perimeter enclosure constructed in accordance with the One and Two Family Dwelling Code;
3. Has wheels, axles, and towing chassis removed;
4. Has a pitched roof with a minimum rise of 2:12; and
5. Consists of two (2) or more sections which, when joined, have a minimum dimension of twenty-three (23) feet in
width for at least sixty percent (60%) of its length.
Dwelling, Mobile Home: A transportable dwelling unit which is a minimum of eight (8) feet in width and which is
built on a permanent foundation or tied down with perimeter skirting when connected to the required utilities, and
includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical system contained therein, and which was manufactured
either:
1. Prior to June 15, 1976 and bears a seal attached under Indiana Public Law 135, 1971, certifying that it was built in
compliance with the standards established by the Indiana Administrative Building Council; or
2. Subsequent to or on June 15, 1976 and bears a seal, certifying that it was built in compliance with the Federal
Mobile Home Construction & Safety Standards.
Article
Article 11: Definitions
11
11-11
Dwelling, Modular Home
Dwelling, Modular Home: A dwelling unit designed and built in a factory that meets state and local building codes. A
modular home is installed and assembled as a permanent residence on a permanent foundation.
Dwelling, Multiple-family: A residential structure designed to be occupied by four (4) or more families, with the
number of families in residence not exceeding the number of dwelling units provided.
Dwelling, Single-family: See "Dwelling, Single-family Detached."
Dwelling, Single-family Attached: An attached residential dwelling unit designed to be occupied by two (2) or three
(3) families, with the number of families in residence not exceeding the number of dwelling units provided.
Dwelling, Single-family Detached: A detached residential dwelling unit designed to be occupied by one (1) family.
A single family dwelling shall be at least twenty-three (23) feet wide for sixty percent (60%) of its length.
Dwelling Site: A site within a manufactured home park and/or mobile home park with required improvements and
utilities that is leased for the long-term placement of a manufactured home and/or mobile home.
Dwelling Size: The overall square footage of a dwelling unit. The dwelling size does not include a garage, carport,
deck, unfinished storage, patio or open porch.
Dwelling, Two-Family: See "Dwelling, Single-family Attached."
Dwelling Unit: A single unit for owner occupancy or for rent or lease, physically separated from any other dwelling
units which may be in the same structure, and providing complete and independent living facilities for one (1) or more
persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, cooking, and sanitation. Examples of a dwelling unit
include a single-family dwelling, multiple-family dwelling, mobile home dwelling, manufactured home dwelling, and
farmstead.
Easement: A grant by a property owner ("grantor") to specific persons, the general public, corporations, utilities, or
others ("grantee" or "easement holder") for the purpose of providing services or access to the property.
Entryway Feature: A means to identify the entrance to a subdivision, typically installed in common area and
inclusive of hardscape, landscape, and other built features that portray the character for the subdivision.
EPA: United States Environmental Protection Agency.
Erosion: The wearing away of the land surface by water, wind, ice, gravity, or other geological agents.
Established Building Setback Line: See "Setback, Established."
Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision: A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the
construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete
pads) is completed before the effective date of the City of Auburn's first floodplain management regulations.
Exotic Animals: Animals not normally considered to be household pets or farm animals and which may or may not
be potentially dangerous.
Expansion to an Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision: The preparation of additional sites by the
construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
Eyebrow: A semi-circular extension of a curb on one (1) side of a street designed to provide more street frontage for a
small number of lots.
FAA: Federal Aviation Administration.
Fair Housing Facility (large): To prevent the discrimination of mentally or physically disabled persons, these facilities
have been identified as types of housing that are permitted in certain districts, but still must meet "nondiscriminatory"
health, fire, safety, and building regulations. These facilities include:
1. Group homes for children in need of service under IC 31-34-1 or children who have committed a delinquent act
under IC 31-37-2-2, IC 31-37-2-3, or IC 31-37-2-5; and specifically a facility that houses more than ten (10)
children.
2. Residential Facility for the Developmentally Disabled which provides residential services for more than eight (8)
developmentally disabled individuals as described in IC 12-28-4.
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 11
11-12
Fair Housing Facility (small)
Fair Housing Facility (small): To prevent the discrimination of mentally or physically disabled persons, these
facilities have been identified as types of housing that are permitted in any single-family or multiple-family residential
zoning district, but still must meet "nondiscriminatory" health, fire, safety, and building regulations. These facilities
include:
1. Group homes for children in need of service under IC 31-34-1 or children who have committed a delinquent act
under IC 31-37-2-2, IC 31-37-2-3, or IC 31-37-2-5; and specifically a facility that houses not more than ten (10)
children.
2. Residential Facility for the Developmentally Disabled which provides residential services for eight (8) developmentally
disabled individuals or less as described in IC 12-28-4.
3. Residential Facility for the Mentally Ill which provides residential services for mentally ill individuals as
described in IC 12-28-4. No two (2) Residential Facilities for the Mentally Ill shall be within 3,000 feet of one
another in the planning jurisdiction as stated in Indiana Code.
Family: An individual; or two (2) or more persons related by blood, marriage, or adoption; or a group of not more
than three (3) persons, not related by blood, marriage or adoption, living together as a single housekeeping unit in a
dwelling unit.
Farmer's Market: The assembly of local producers and providers of fruit, vegetables, meat, bread, dairy, herbs,
spices, eggs, wine, and other products of local and regional farms; at an interior or exterior location for the public
to purchase such products. Ancillary to farm products, non-farm products and products manufactured from farm
products may be sold.
FCC: United States Federal Communications Commission.
FEMA: United States Federal Emergency Management Agency.
Fence: A vertical structure, solid or otherwise, used for containment, security, aesthetics, a landscape feature, and
the like. Fences are inclusive of permanently affixed structures, temporarily affixed structures, and living material (a
dense hedge row).
Financial Services Office: See "Office, Financial Services."
Fixture, Cutoff: A luminaire that:
1. Projects at least ninety percent (90%) of the total lamp lumens below eighty degrees (80°) from vertical;
2. Does not allow more than ten percent (10%) of the total lamp lumens above eighty degrees (80°) from vertical; and
3. Does not allow more than two and one-half percent (2.5%) of the total lamp lumens above ninety (90°) from vertical.
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
80° - Minimum 90% of total
lamp lumens in this zone
10° - Maximum 10% of total
lamp lumens above 80°
Maximum 2.5% of total
lamp lumens above 90°
Cutoff Fixture
Article
Article 11: Definitions
11
11-13
Fixture, Full-cutoff
Fixture, Full-cutoff: A luminaire that:
1. Projects at least ninety percent (90%) of the total lamp lumens below eighty degrees (80°) from vertical;
2. Does not allow more than ten percent (10%) of the total lamp lumens above eighty degrees (80°) from vertical;
and
3. Does not allow any lamp lumens above ninety degrees (90°) from vertical.
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
80° - Minimum 90% of total
lamp lumens in this zone
10° - Maximum 10% of total
lamp lumens above 80°
No light above 90°
Full-cutoff Fixture
Fixture, Non-cutoff: A luminaire with no control of the horizontal distribution of luminance.
Fixture, Semi-cutoff: A luminaire that:
1. Projects at least eighty percent (80%) of the total lamp lumens below eighty degrees (80°) from vertical;
2. Does not allow more than twenty percent (20%) of the total lamp lumens above eighty degrees (80°) from
vertical; and
3. Does not allow more than five percent (5%)of the total lamp lumens above ninety degrees (90°) from vertical.
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
80° - Minimum 80% of total
lamp lumens in this zone
10° - Maximum 20% of total
lamp lumens above 80°
Maximum 5% of total
lamp lumens above 90°
Semi-cutoff Fixture
Flex Space: A commercial or industrial building that has been designed to accommodate multiple tenants each able to
utilize one (1) or more of the pre-designed tenant spaces.
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 11
11-14
Floor Area
Floor Area: The sum of all horizontal surface areas of all floors of all roofed portions of a structure enclosed by and
within the surrounding exterior walls or roofs, or to the center line(s) of party walls separating such structures or
portions thereof. Floor area of a structure shall exclude exterior open balconies and open porches.
Floor Area, Main: That portion of floor area constructed, completed, and usable for living purposes with normal
living facilities which includes sleeping, dining, cooking, working, entertainment, common space linking rooms, areas
for personal hygiene, or combination of those areas located on the first (or nearest ground level) floor of the structure.
The Main Floor Area of a primary structure does not include a garage, carport, deck, unfinished storage, patio, or open
porch.
Foundation: The supporting member of a wall or structure.
Front Facade: The facade of a building that faces the street from which the address to the building is assigned.
Front Line: With respect to a structure, the foundation line that is nearest the front lot line.
Front Lot Line: See "Lot Line, Front."
Front Yard: See "Yard, Front."
Frontage: See "Lot Frontage."
Frontage Street: See "Street, Frontage."
Garage: An attached or detached structure whose primary use is to house motor vehicles or personal property for the
accommodation of related dwelling units or related business establishments.
General Services Office: See "Office, General Services."
Geographic Information System (GIS): A computer system that stores and links non-graphic attributes or
geographically referenced data with graphic map features to allow a wide range of information processing and display
operations, as well as map production, analysis, and modeling.
Gift Shop: A retail store offering a variety of small gift items, as opposed to stores offering primarily specific lines of
merchandise such as toys, clothing, or sporting goods.
GIS: See "Geographic Information System (GIS)."
Golf Course: An area of terrain on which the game of golf is played during daylight hours. A golf course includes
greens, fairways, and natural areas. A golf course may also include a driving range when integrated with the golf
course operations and hours.
Grade, Finished: The average elevation of the finished surface of the ground within ten (10) feet of the structure after
final grading.
Grantee: A person to whom an interest in property is granted.
Gross Floor Area: The sum of all horizontal floor area of all floors within a structure.
Ground Floor Area: See "Floor Area, Main."
Group Home: A facility that houses not more than ten (10) children that are either:
1. In need of service under IC 31-34-1; or
2. Children who have committed a delinquent act under IC 31-37-2-2, IC 31-37-2-3, or IC 31-37-2-5.
Group homes are not subject to covenants, deeds, or other instruments pertaining to the transfer, sale, lease, or use of
property that would permit the residential use of property but prohibit the use of that property as a group home as a
matter of State public policy reasons. Group homes cannot be prohibited on the grounds that they are a business, the
persons living in a group home are not related, or any other reason. All group homes must abide by IC 12-17.4-5 and
shall be a licensed facility with the State, meeting fire codes, building codes, and specific group home regulations.
Habitable Space: Any space in a structure suitable for living, sleeping, eating or cooking purposes, excluding such
enclosed places as closets, pantries, bath or toilet rooms, hallways, laundries, storage spaces, utility rooms and similar
spaces.
Hardship: A difficulty with regard to one’s ability to improve land stemming from the application of the development
standards of this Unified Development Ordinance, which may or may not be subject to relief by means of variance. In
and of themselves, self-imposed situations and claims based on a perceived reduction of or restriction on economic
gain shall not be considered hardships.
Self-imposed situations include: the purchase of land with actual or constructive knowledge that, for reasons other
than physical characteristics of the property, the development standards herein will inhibit the desired improvement;
any improvement initiated in violation of the standards of this Unified Development Ordinance; any result of land
division requiring variance from the development standards of this Unified Development Ordinance in order to render
that site buildable.
Article
Article 11: Definitions
11
11-15
Height
Height: See "Structure Height."
High Impact District: Refers to the HI district.
Historic Structure: A building that is recognized for its age or significance, or as a cultural resource. Generally
buildings or structures greater than 50 years in age.
Hobby Farming: The use of land for purposes, including: dairying, pasturage, apiculture, agriculture, horticulture,
floriculture, viticulture, and animal and poultry husbandry. Processing and storage of harvested produce or other
end products shall not be allowed on site. The hobby farming use(s) shall not exceed forty percent (40%) of the land
area of the lot and shall abide by all setback regulations. Hobby farming cannot be the primary income source for
the owner, operator or household on site. Hobby farming shall not include feed lots, stock yards, or the commercial
feeding of garbage or offal to swine or other animals.
Home Based Business, Type 1: A very low impact business being operated out of a residence.
Home Based Business, Type 2: A low impact business being operated out of a residence.
Home Based Business, Type 3: A moderately intense business being operated from an accessory building on a lot
with a residence.
Hospital: An institution providing primary health services and medical or surgical care to persons, primarily inpatients,
suffering from illness, disease, injury, and other abnormal physical or mental conditions and including, as an
integral part of the institution, related facilities, such as laboratories, outpatient facilities, training facilities, medical
offices, and staff residences.
Hotel: A structure in which temporary lodging or board and lodging are provided and offered to the public for
compensation and in which ingress and egress to and from all rooms is made through an inside lobby or office
supervised by a person in charge at all hours. As such, it is open to the public. Compensation is usually assessed on a
day-to-day basis.
IAC: Indiana Administrative Code.
IC: Indiana Code.
IDEM: Indiana Department of Environmental Management.
Illuminance: The total amount of visible light illuminating (incident upon) a point on a surface from all directions
above the surface (i.e. how brightly a surface is illuminated). Illuminance is measured in lux or footcandles.
Impervious Surface: Any material that prevents absorption of stormwater into the ground such as concrete or asphalt.
This does not include gravel, rock, or stone.
Impervious Surface Coverage: The area of a lot occupied by the primary structure, any accessory structures, and
impervious surface.
Improved Lot: See "Lot, Improved."
Improvement: Any permanent structure that becomes part of, placed upon, or is affixed to real estate, or any alteration
to the land.
Improvement Location Permit: A permit issued under this Unified Development Ordinance prior to receiving or
as part of a Building Permit, permitting a person, firm, or corporation to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move,
occupy, use, improve, remove, convert, or demolish any structure within its jurisdiction, or permitting a person to
change the condition of the land.
Improvement, Off-site: Any premises not located within the area of the property to be subdivided, used, or built upon
whether or not in the same ownership of the applicant for subdivision approval.
Incidental: A minor occurrence or condition which is customarily associated with a permitted use and is likely to
ensue from normal operations.
INDOT: Indiana Department of Transportation.
Industry, Light: See "Manufacturing, Light."
Industry, Heavy: See "Manufacturing, Heavy."
Industrial District: Refers to the I1 and I2 districts.
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 11
11-16
Initial User
Initial User: The applicant, person, organization, or corporation that originally applies to the City for approval for the
installation of an antenna or other radio or cellular communication equipment or for approval for the construction of a
telecommunication tower or facility.
Institutional District: Refers to the IS district.
Interested Party: See definition listed in Plan Commission and/or Board of Zoning Appeals Rules and Procedures.
Interested Parties: See definition listed in Plan Commission and/or Board of Zoning Appeals Rules and Procedures.
Interior Lot: See "Lot, Interior."
Interstate: Any street that operates at a high service level, consists of limited access, is divided and carries regionwide
traffic.
Junk: An automobile, truck, other motor vehicle, watercraft, large appliances, furniture or like materials which have
been damaged to such an extent that they cannot be operated under their own power or used and/or will require major
repairs before being made usable. This also includes such a vehicle which does not comply with State, County, or
City vehicle licensing or other laws or ordinances.
Junk Yard: A place, usually outdoors, where waste or discarded used property, including but not limited to automobiles,
farm implements and trucks, is accumulated and is or may be salvaged for reuse or resale. This does not
include industrial scrap metal or accumulation of organic matter.
Jurisdiction: See "Planning Jurisdiction."
Juvenile Detention Facility: A facility that holds children or minors (typically under eighteen (18) years of age) for
punishment and/or counseling as a result of sentencing by a court of jurisdiction for criminal or antisocial behavior.
Kennel (Commercial): A place primarily for keeping more than five (5) adult dogs or other small animals that are
ordinarily bred for sale as pets, including temporary care facilities for animals for compensation.
Kennel (Private): A place for keeping up to five (5) adult dogs or other small animals for personal use and enjoyment
which is subordinate to the primary use.
Landscape Areas: Areas on a lot or abutting right-of-way that are identified for application of landscaping regulations.
Landscape areas include: street tree planting areas, parking lot planting areas, foundation planting areas,
bufferyard areas, and perimeter planting areas. The image below conceptually demonstrates the general location of
each landscape area.
Street Tree Planting © 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Foundation
Planting
Landscape
Buffer Yard Bumpout
Local Street R.O.W.
Property Line
Lot Planting
Arterial R.O.W.
Business
Residence
Perimeter Landscaping
Retention
Pond
Detention and
Retention Facility
Landscaping
Parking Lot
Perimeter
Landscaping
Landscape Island
Common Area Common Area
Landscape Buffer: A continuous landscaped area designed, maintained and used for screening and separation of uses,
lots, or structures.
Landscape Material: Trees, shrubs, plants, decorative fences, retaining walls, walls, earthen mounds, irrigation
systems, flower beds, decorative rocks, edging, mulch, stakes ,and the like. Artificial trees, shrubs, ground cover, and
flowers are not considered landscape material.
Article
Article 11: Definitions
11
11-17
Landscape Structure
Landscape Structure: Decorative fences, walls, retaining walls, edging, and the like.
Landscaping: The improvements of a lot with grass, shrubs, trees, and other vegetation and/or ornamental objects.
Landscaping may include pedestrian walks, flower beds, berms, fountains, and other similar natural and man-made
objects designed and arranged to produce an aesthetically pleasing effect.
Legal Nonconforming Lot of Record: Any legally established and recorded lot prior to the effective date of this
Unified Development Ordinance, or its subsequent amendments, that no longer meet the lot-specific development
standards.
Legal Nonconforming Sign: Any sign lawfully existing on the effective date of this Unified Development Ordinance,
or amendment thereto, that does not conform to all the standards and regulations of this Unified Development
Ordinance.
Legal Nonconforming Structure: Any continuously occupied, lawfully established structure prior to the effective
date of this Unified Development Ordinance, or its subsequent amendments, that no longer meets the development
standards.
Legal Nonconforming Use: Any continuous, lawful use of structures, land, or structures and land in combination
established prior to the effective date of this Unified Development Ordinance or its subsequent amendments that is no
longer a permitted use in the district where it is located.
Loading Space: An off-street space for temporary parking of delivery and pickup vehicles.
Local Street: See "Street, Local."
Lot: A piece, parcel, or tract of land designated by its owner or developer to be used, developed, or built upon as a
unit under single or multiple ownership or control. There are generally three (3) types of lots identified in this Unified
Development Ordinance: interior lots, corner lots, and through lots.
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Corner
Lot
Corner
Lot
Interior
Lot
Through
Lot
Through
Lot
R.O.W.
R.O.W.
R.O.W.
Block
Lot Area: The area of a horizontal plane bounded by the front, side, and rear lot lines, excepting any easement or
right-of-way for public streets.
Lot Depth
Lot Area
Lot Width
Property
Line
R.O.W.
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Side
Lot
Line
Front
Yard
Setback
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Lot
Area
Lot Width
Lot Depth
Property
Line
Side
Lot
Line
Front
Yard
Setback
R.O.W.
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 11
11-18
Lot, Buildable
Lot, Buildable: See "Lot, Improved."
Lot, Corner: A lot situated at the intersection of two (2) streets or which fronts a street on two (2) or more sides
forming an interior angle of less than one hundred thirty-five degrees (135°).
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
R.O.W.
R.O.W.
Rear Yard
Front Yard
Front Yard
Corner
Lot
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
R.O.W.
R.O.W.
Front Yard
Front Yard
C oLronter
Rear Yard
Rear Yard
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
R.O.W.
R.O.W.
Front Yard
Front Yard
Corner
L ot
Front Yard
Rear Yard
R.O.W.
Lot Coverage: The area of a lot occupied by the primary structure, any accessory structures, and impervious surface.
Lot Depth: The horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines. (See Graphics for "Lot Area")
Lot, Developed: A lot with structures situated thereon.
Lot Frontage: The length of the front lot line bordering upon a public right-of-way. The lot frontage is determined by
measuring the total distance in which the front lot line touches a public right-of-way. Lot frontage requirement for a
cul-de-sac lot is one-half (0.5) the distance required for standard lots.
Lot, Improved: A lot upon which a structure may be constructed and occupied as a result of the fact that it has
frontage on and access to an improved street, meets minimum setback requirements, and has all necessary utilities
available to the lot such as sewer, water, electricity, etc.
Lot, Interior: A lot other than a corner lot or a through lot.
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Rear Yard
Interior Lot
Side Yard
Side Yard
Front Yard
Front Yard
R.O.W
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Rear Yard
Interior
Lot
Side Yard
Side Yard
Front Yard
R.O.W
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Rear Yard
Interior
Lot
Side Yard
Side Yard
Front Yard
R.O.W.
Lot, Lake Front: A lot fronting on a lake and a street. May also be referred to as a "lake front through lot" when the
street and watercourse abut property lines that are relatively parallel.
Article
Article 11: Definitions
11
11-19
Lot Line, Front (corner lot)
Lot Line, Front (corner lot): The line marking the boundary between the lot and each of the abutting streets.
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Rear Lot Line
R.O.W.
Front Yard
Front Lot Line
Rear Lot Line
Rear Yard
Rear
Yard
Front Lot Line
Front
Yard
R.O.W.
Lot Line, Front (interior or through lot): The line marking the boundary between the lot and the abutting street,
right-of-way or a lake or watercourse
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Front Yard
Side
Yard
Rear Yard
R.O.W.
Side
Yard
Rear Lot Line
Front Lot Line
Side Lot Line
Side Lot Line
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Rear Lot Line
Front Yard
Side Lot Line
Side Lot Line
Rear Yard
Side
Yard
Front Lot Line
Side
Yard
Lot Line, Rear: The lot line that is opposite the front lot line and farthest from it, except that for a triangular or other
irregularly-shaped lot, the line ten feet (10') long, parallel to the front lot line, and wholly within the lot, that is farthest
from the lot line. (See Graphic for "Lot Line, Front")
Lot Line, Side: A lot boundary line other than a front or rear lot line. (See Graphic for "Lot Line, Front")
Lot of Record: A lot which is part of a subdivision recorded in the office of the County Recorder, or a parcel or lot
described by metes and bounds, a description of which has been so recorded.
Lot, Through: A lot fronting on two (2) parallel or approximately parallel streets, or abutting two (2) streets which do
not intersect at the boundaries of the lot. Also includes lots fronting on both a street and a watercourse or lake.
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
R.O.W.
R.O.W.
Front Yard
Front Yard
Through
Lot
Side Yard
Side Yard
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
R.O.W.
Rear Yard
Front Yard
Through
Lot
Side Yard
Side Yard
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
R.O.W.
Rear Yard
Front Yard
Through
Lot
Side Yard
Side Yard
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 11
11-20
Lot Width
Lot Width: The distance between the side lot lines as measured on the front setback line. Cul-de-sac and irregular
shaped lots shall measure their front lot widths along the front setback line from one (1) side lot line to the other. (See
Graphic for "Lot Area")
Luces: The plural of Lux.
Lumens: Unit of luminous flux in the International System of Units (SI) equal to one (1) candela per steradian. Used
to measure the amount of light emitted by lamps.
Lux: Unit of illuminance in the International System of Units (SI) equal to one (1) lumen per square meter.
Main Floor Area: see "Floor Area, Main."
Maintenance Surety: A bond, letter of credit, or other security provided by the applicant that assures that the City
of Auburn would be provided the money necessary to repair or rebuild any public improvements associated with a
project in the event the installed public improvements fail over the duration of the maintenance surety. Once established,
a maintenance surety is irrevocable by the applicant until the established maintenance period has expired or the
City of Auburn releases the surety.
Maneuvering Space: An open space in a parking area which:
1. Is immediately adjacent to a parking space;
2. Is used for and/or is necessary for turning, backing, or driving forward a motor vehicle into such parking space; but
3. Is not used for the parking of or storage of motor vehicles.
Manufactured Home: See "Dwelling, Manufactured Home."
Manufactured Home Park: A parcel of land containing two (2) or more dwelling sites, with required improvements
and utilities, that are leased for the long term placement of Mobile Home Dwellings and/or Manufactured Home
Dwellings, and shall include any street used or intended for use as part of the facilities of such Manufactured Home
Park. A Manufactured Home Park does not involve the sales of Mobile Home Dwellings or Manufactured Home
Dwellings in which unoccupied units are parked for inspection or sale.
Manufacturing, Heavy: The assembly, fabrication, or processing of goods and materials using processes that ordinarily
have greater than minimal impacts on the environment, or that otherwise do not constitute light manufacturing.
Heavy manufacturing generally includes processing and fabrication of products made from extracted or raw materials.
Heavy manufacturing shall not include any use that is otherwise listed specifically in any zoning district as a permitted
use or special exception.
Manufacturing, Light: The assembly, fabrication or processing of goods and materials using processes that ordinarily
do not create noise, smoke, fume, odors, glare, or health or safety hazards outside of the structure or lot where such
assembly, fabrication, or processing of goods are housed entirely within an enclosed building. Light manufacturing
generally includes processing and fabrication of finished products predominantly from previously prepared materials.
Light manufacturing shall not include any use that is otherwise listed specifically in any zoning district as a permitted
use or special exception.
Marker (survey): A stake, pipe, rod, nail, or any other object which is not intended to be a permanent point for record
purposes.
Market Value: The price at which a structure, building, parcel or combination thereof would be sold for at present
day.
Massage Parlor: Any place where for any form of consideration or gratuity, massage, alcohol rub, administration of
fomentations, electric or magnetic treatments, or any other treatment or manipulation of the human body occurs as
part of or in connection with sexual conduct; or where any person providing such treatment, manipulation or service
related thereto exposes specified anatomical areas.
Master Plan: See "Comprehensive Plan."
Maximum Lot Coverage: The highest amount of impervious surface coverage permitted by this Unified
Development Ordinance.
Medical Office: See "Office, Medical."
Metes and Bounds: Boundaries of a property described from known points, angles (i.e. compass direction) and
lengths of boundary lines.
Article
Article 11: Definitions
11
11-21
Mini Warehouse
Mini Warehouse: See "Warehouse Storage Facility."
Mobile Home: See "Dwelling, Mobile Home."
Mobile Home Park: See "Manufactured Home Park."
Modular Home: See "Dwelling, Modular Home."
Monument (survey): A permanent physical structure which marks the location of a corner or other survey point.
Motel: An establishment consisting of a group of attached or detached living or sleeping accommodations with
bathroom and closet space, located on a single zoning lot, and designed for use by transient automobile travelers.
A motel furnishes customary services such as maid service and laundering of linen, telephone, secretarial or desk
service, and the use and upkeep of furniture.
Motor Home: See "Recreational Vehicle."
Motor Vehicle: Any passenger vehicle, truck, tractor, tractor-trailer, truck-trailer, trailer, boat, recreational vehicle,
semitrailer, or any other vehicle propelled or drawn by mechanical power.
Mound: A landscape feature used for screening in which earth is piled up in irregular, round or oblong shapes.
Particularly, mounds do not have consistent crest elevations, but are irregular in form and overlapping such to emulate
a more natural landscape feature. Mounds in combination with other landscape material are used to block or partially
block visibility from one (1) side to the other.
MS4 Coordinator: The person assigned the role of administering and managing stormwater systems and activities
pursuant to the provisions of IC 35-9-25 et seq.
Multiple-family District: Refers to the M1 and M2 districts.
Mural: See "Sign, Mural."
Noise Sensitive Use: The use of a structure for a purpose that would be adversely impacted by noise associated
with nearby aircraft operations including aircraft overflights. Noise Sensitive Uses include but are not limited to
residences, schools, churches, child care facilities, medical facilities, retirement homes, and nursing homes.
Nonconforming Building: See "Nonconforming Structure."
Nonconforming Lot of Record: A lot which was created such that it does not conform to the regulations of the
district in which it is located.
Nonconforming Sign: A sign or portion thereof, which was designed, erected, or structurally altered such that it does
not conform to the regulations of the district in which it is located.
Nonconforming Structure: A structure or portion thereof which was designed, erected, or structurally altered such
that it does not conform to the regulations of the district in which it is located.
Nonconforming Use: A use which does not conform with the use regulations of the district in which it is located.
Nursing Home: A private home for the care of the aged or infirm, or any other person in need of nursing care; and
which does not contain equipment for surgical care or for treatment of disease or injury, and is not primarily designed
for patients being treated for mental illness or alcohol or drug addiction.
Observatory: A structure, building, or lot containing telescopes and other instruments for observing astronomical
objects, meteorological events, and other atmospheric and space phenomena.
Office: A place in which business, professional and/or clerical activities are conducted. Offices shall include medical
offices, government offices, and office functions which serve other off-site land uses.
Office, Construction Trade: Electrical contractor, general contractor, heating and cooling contractor, landscaping
contractor, plumbing contractor office, and the like.
Office, Design Services: Architecture firm, engineering firm, graphic design firm, planning firm, and the like.
Office, Financial Services: Accounting office, bank or credit union, investment firm, and the like.
Office, General Services: Employment service, insurance office, law office, membership association, publishing
corporate office, reading clinic, real estate office, secretarial service, service organization, temporary service agency,
title company, trade office, travel agency, and the like.
Office, Medical: Emergency medical clinic, dental clinic, medical clinic, optical clinic, rehabilitation clinic, veterinarian
clinic or hospital, and the like.
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 11
11-22
Office, Professional
Office, Professional: An office used by members of a recognized profession such as architects, artists, dentists,
engineers, lawyers, physicians, surgeons, pharmacists, realtors, insurance agents, or brokers.
Official Zoning Map: A map of the City of Auburn, Indiana, that legally denotes the boundaries of zoning districts as
they apply to the properties within the planning jurisdiction. There is only one Official Zoning Map, and it is kept up
to date by the Plan Commission and the Zoning Administrator.
Official Zoning Map Copies: A map of the City of Auburn, Indiana, that legally denotes the boundaries of zoning
districts as they apply to the properties within the planning jurisdiction. These maps may be out of date.
Off-Site Improvement: See "Improvement, Off-Site."
Open Space: An area of land not covered by structures, parking structures, or accessory structures except for recreational
structures. Open space may include nature areas, streams, flood plains, meadows or open fields containing
baseball fields, football fields, soccer fields, golf courses, swimming pools, bicycle paths, etc. Open space does not
include street rights-of-way, platted lot area, private yard, patio areas, or land where future development is proposed.
Ornamental Tree: A deciduous tree that does not grow to over thirty (30) feet in height at maturity. Ornamental trees
typically are flowering trees.
OSHA: Occupational Safety and Health Administration.
Outdoor Display: An outdoor area used to display merchandise that can be picked and purchased or viewed and
rented by customers. Outdoor display include areas partially or fully enclosed by walls and/or fences, and open sided
areas with a canopy or roof structure, and the like. Outdoor display does not include merchandise stored outdoors
when located in an area that is not accessible to customers, or that is packaged or stacked in a manner that makes it
difficult or dangerous for customers to pick the product, or that is packaged or stacked in a manner consistent with
warehousing.
Outdoor Storage: See "Storage, Outdoor."
Owner: Any person, group of persons, firm or firms, corporation or corporations, or any other legal entity having
legal title to or sufficient proprietary interest in the land sought to be subdivided under these regulations, or their legal
representative.
Parcel: See "Lot."
Parent Tract: In regards to a subdivision of land, a parcel of land intended to be split into smaller lots.
Park and Recreation District: Refers to the PR district.
Park, Public: A parcel of land available to the public for passive and active recreation and is maintained and governed
by the City of Auburn.
Parking, Required: The minimum number of off-street parking spaces specified for a particular use or uses by this
Unified Development Ordinance.
Parking Space, Automobile: Space within a public or private parking area for the storage of one (1) passenger
automobile or commercial vehicle under a one and one-half (1.5) ton capacity
Parking Structure: A parking garage.
Passing Blister: An extension of a road's width allowing vehicles to pass to the right of a car that is stopped and
waiting to turn left.
Paved Surface: A durable surface for parking, driving, riding, or similar activities that utilizes asphalt, concrete,
brick, paving blocks, or similar material. Crushed gravel, stone, rock, dirt, sand, or grass are not permitted as a paved
surface.
Performance Surety: A bond, letter of credit, or other security provided by the applicant that assures that the City of
Auburn would be provided the money necessary to finish or fix any public improvements associated with a project in
the event the applicant cannot, does not, or otherwise defaults on making the required or committed public improvements.
Once established, a performance surety is irrevocable by the applicant until the project is finished, inspected,
and released by the City of Auburn.
Performing Arts Center: A building which is used for dance, musical, and acting performances to audiences.
Ancillary uses may include rehearsal and training studios, ticket sales, vending, and administrative offices.
Permanent Foundation: A structural system for transposing loads from a structure to the earth at a depth below the
established frost line without exceeding the safe bearing capacity of the supporting soil.
Permitted Use: See "Use, Permitted."
Person: A corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization, unit of government, or any other group that acts as
a unit, as well as a natural person.
Article
Article 11: Definitions
11
11-23
Personal Service
Personal Service: An establishment, other than an office, in which services other than health care are rendered to
consumers on an individual basis, such as barber shops and beauty parlors.
Places of Worship: Structures and outdoor or indoor facilities used for public worship and accessory educational,
cultural, and social activities.
Plan Commission: A plan commission serving a single local government jurisdiction established as defined under the
Indiana Code, 36-7-1-2 (1983) as amended. The Auburn Plan Commission is an Advisory Plan Commission.
Planned Development (PD): Referred to as a Planned Unit Development in Indiana Code. A large-scale unified
development meeting the requirements for zoning approval under the provisions of Article 4 of this Unified
Development Ordinance. Generally a planned development consists of a parcel or parcels of land, controlled by
a single landowner, to be developed as a single entity which does not correspond in size of lots, bulk or type of
structures, density, lot coverage, and required open space to the regulations established in any district of this Unified
Development Ordinance. This may result in more attractive and affordable development than conventional developments
would allow. Clustered housing (dwellings built in innovative lot arrangements around common open space)
and zero lot line housing (dwellings built immediately adjacent to lot lines) are possible as part of planned developments.
A planned development requires approval through a zoning map amendment.
Planning Director: See "Administrator."
Planning Jurisdiction: The City of Auburn, Indiana city limits and the contiguous unincorporated extra-territorial
jurisdictional area over which the City exercises planning and zoning authority.
Planning Staff: The Administrator and all employees of the Plan Commission of the City under the supervision of the
Administrator and subject to the authority of the Administrator.
Plat: A drawing, map or plan that shows a division of land and/or the layout for subdivisions that is intended to be
filed for record.
Plat, Amended: A change in a recorded subdivision, if such change affects any street layout or area reserved for
public use, or any lot line or easement; or if it affects any map or plan legally recorded.
Plat, Primary: The primary plat, pursuant to the IC 36-7-4-700 Series, is the plat and plans upon which the approval
of a proposed subdivision are based. (Under former state statutes, the primary plat was referred to as a “preliminary”
plat.)
Plat, Secondary: The secondary plat, pursuant to IC 36-7-4-700 Series, is the final plat document in recordable form.
A secondary plat shall substantially conform with the preceding primary plat, or section thereof.
Pool, Swimming: See "Swimming Pool."
Porch: A roofed-over structure projecting out from the wall or walls of a main structure and commonly open to the
weather in part.
Power Generation Facility: A facility used to generate electrical power such as a wind power facility or solar power
facility.
Practical Difficulty: A difficulty with regard to one’s ability to improve land stemming from regulations of this
Unified Development Ordinance. A practical difficulty is not a “hardship,” rather it is a situation where the owner
could comply with the regulations within this Unified Development Ordinance, but would like a variance from the
Development Standards to improve his site in a practical manner. For instance, a person may request a variance from
a side yard setback due to a large tree which is blocking the only location that would meet the Development Standards
for a new garage location.
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 11
11-24
Primary Arterial
Primary Arterial: See "Street, Primary Arterial."
Primary Plat: See "Plat, Primary."
Primary Structure: The structure in which the use of the lot or premises is located or conducted, with respect to
residential uses, the primary structure shall be the main dwelling.
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Accessory
Structures
Primary
Structure
Lot
Area
Property
Line
R.O.W.
Primary Use: See "Use, Primary."
Principal Use: See "Use, Primary."
Private Street: See "Street, Private."
Professional Office: See "Office, Professional."
Prohibited Use: A use that is not permitted under any circumstances.
Public Improvements: Any storm drainage facility, street, highway, parkway, sidewalk, pedestrian-way, tree, lawn,
off-street parking area, lot improvement, utility, or other facility for which the local government may ultimately
assume the responsibility for maintenance and operation, or which may affect an improvement for which local
government responsibility is established.
Public or Private Parking Area: A group of parking spaces in an open area not including any part of a street or alley,
designed or used for temporary parking of motor vehicles.
Public Safety and Nuisance: Anything that is injurious to the safety or health of an entire community, neighborhood
or any considerable number of persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of
any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal, or basin.
Public Street: See "Street, Public."
Public Utility: See "Utility, Public."
Public Way: Highways, streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, lanes, alleys, trails or sidewalks.
Radio or TV Station: The broadcast structure for the production of radio and television programing, not to include
any telecommunication towers.
Raising of Farm Animals: Any livestock operation that falls below the thresholds of a Confined Feeding Operation
as defined by the Indiana Department of Environmental Management.
Rear Lot Line: See "Lot Line, Rear."
Rear Yard: See "Yard, Rear."
Recreation Center or Play Center: An enclosed structure containing recreational facilities, such as a tennis court,
swimming pool, and/or gymnasium. This shall not include outdoor amphitheaters, tennis courts, or swimming pools.
Recreational Vehicle (RV): A vehicular-type portable structure without permanent foundation that can be towed,
hauled, or driven and primarily designed as a temporary living accommodation for recreational, camping, and travel
use and including but not limited to, travel trailers, truck campers, camping trailers, boats, and self-propelled motor
homes. A recreational vehicle shall not be used as living quarters.
Recreational Vehicle Park: A facility designed for short term occupancy for recreational vehicles only.
Recreational Vehicle, Parked: A recreational vehicle that is in the process of being loaded or unloaded; or a recreational
vehicle that is set up for sleeping purposes, camping, or use.
Recreational Vehicle, Stored: A recreational vehicle that is not set up for sleeping purposes, camping, or use.
Article
Article 11: Definitions
11
11-25
Registered Land Surveyor
Registered Land Surveyor: A land surveyor properly licensed and registered or through reciprocity permitted to
practice in the State of Indiana.
Registered Professional Engineer: An engineer properly licensed and registered or through reciprocity permitted to
practice in the State of Indiana.
Residential District: Refers to the ER, R1, R2, R3, TR, M1, M2 and MH districts.
Residential Facility for the Developmentally Disabled (large): A residential facility which provides residential
services for more than eight (8) developmentally disabled individuals as described in IC 12-28-4.
Residential Facility for the Developmentally Disabled (small): A residential facility which provides residential
services for eight (8) developmentally disabled individuals or less as described in IC 12-28-4.
Residential Facility for the Mentally Ill: A residential facility which provides residential services for mentally ill
individuals as described in IC 12-28-4. No two (2) Residential Facilities for the Mentally Ill shall be within 3,000 feet
of one another in the planning jurisdiction as stated in Indiana Code.
Responsible Party: For purposes of issuing notice of violation, the following persons shall be considered responsible
parties, with liability for fines and responsibility for remedy of the violation: the property owner(s); persons with any
possessory interest in the property, and/or any persons and/or their agents who have caused the violation. Any owner,
tenant, builder, developer, possessor of interest, architect, designer, property manager, equipment operator known or
suspected to be responsible in part or in whole for a violation of this Unified Development Ordinance.
Restaurant: An establishment whose use is the selling of food in a ready-to-consume state, in individual servings, in
which the customer consumes these foods while seated at tables or counters located in or immediately adjacent to the
building in which the use is located, and which may include carry-out service. “Restaurant” shall include that portion
of any establishment which sells prepared food, such as a bakery or a delicatessen, and which is used for seating for
the consumption of food on the premises. (See also “Drive-Through Establishment.”)
Re-Plat: See "Plat, Amended."
Retail, High Intensity: See "Type 4 Retail, High Intensity."
Retail, Low Intensity: See "Type 2 Retail, Low Intensity."
Retail, Medium Intensity: See "Type 3 Retail, Medium Intensity."
Retail, Special Handling: See "Type 6 Retail, Special Handling."
Retail, Very High Intensity: See "Type 5 Retail, Very High Intensity."
Retail, Very Low Intensity: See "Type 1 Retail, Very Low Intensity."
Retirement Community: An age-restricted development, which may include detached and attached dwelling units
and apartments.
Right-of-way: A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by transportation facilities, public utilities, or other
special public uses. Rights-of-way intended for any use involving maintenance by a public agency shall be dedicated
to the public use by the maker of the plat on which such right-of-way is established.
Road: See "Street."
Roadside Sales: Sale of produce grown on the lot where the sales takes place or locally on neighboring farms.
Root Protection Zone: Generally, eighteen (18) to twenty-four (24) inches deep and a distance from the trunk of a
tree equal to one-half (0.5) its height or its drip line, whichever is greater.
ROW: See "Right-of-way."
Satellite Dish or Antenna: An apparatus capable of receiving communications from a transmitter relay located in a
planetary orbit or broadcasted signals from transmitting towers.
School: A public or private institution which offers instruction in any of the branches of learning and study comparable
to that taught in the public schools under the Indiana School Laws, including pre-kindergarten, kindergarten,
elementary school, and junior and senior high schools, but excluding trade, business, or commercial schools.
School, Trade, Business or Commercial: An educational facility which offers instruction specific to a trade, business,
or commercial practice.
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 11
11-26
Scrap Metal Yard
Scrap Metal Yard: A general industrial use established independent or ancillary to and connected with another
general industrial use, which is concerned exclusively in new and salvaged metal pipes, wire, beams, angles, rods,
machinery, parts, filings, clippings, and/or all other metal items of every type, and which acquires such items
incidental to its connection with the other general industrial use or by purchase, consignment or bailment which
stores, grades, processes, melts, cuts, dismantles, compresses, cleans, or in any way prepares said items for reuse by
the connected other general industrial use or for storage, sale or shipment and/or use in other industries or businesses
including open hearth, electric furnaces and foundry operations. Such an establishment shall not include junk yards,
dumps, or automobile or other vehicle graveyards.
Secondary Plat: See "Plat, Secondary."
Setback: The minimum horizontal distance between the building line and a lot line or right-of-way, or edge of
pavement if no right-of-way is established.
Setback, Established Building: The average setback distance of all structures on the side of a street between two (2)
intersecting streets. Such line shall be redetermined as each successive vacant lot is proposed to be improved with a
structure.
Sexually Oriented Business: A sexually oriented business includes sexually oriented entertainment businesses,
sexually oriented retail businesses, and accessory sexually oriented retail businesses as defined below.
Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business: An establishment which regularly offers live entertainment, lingerie or
nude modeling, or presentation of motion pictures or publications by any photographic, electronic, digital, magnetic,
or other media which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating
"Specified Sexual Activities" or "Specific Anatomical Areas;" or and establishment which offers massage therapy or
body work except when performed by a massage therapist licensed by the State of Indiana, certified by the National
Certification Board for Therapeutic Massage and Bodywork or the American Massage Therapy Association, or under
the direct supervision of a licensed physician; or, advertises or holds itself in any forum as "XXX," "adult," or "sex."
Sexually Oriented Materials: Materials including still or motion pictures, books, magazines, other periodicals, or
other depiction recorded on paper, electronic, digital, video, magnetic or other media, which are distinguished or
characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating "Specified Sexual Activities" or "Specific
Anatomical Areas;" or, instruments, devices, or paraphernalia either designed as a representation of human genital
organs or female breasts, or designed or marketed primarily for use to stimulate human genital organs.
Sexually Oriented Retail Business: An establishment which advertises or holds itself in any forum as "XXX",
"adult" or "sex", or which has stock in trade or floor area devoted to the sale, rental, or display of sexually oriented
materials.
Sexually Oriented Retail Business, Accessory: An establishment with at least ten percent (10%) but less than
forty percent (40%) of its stock in trade or gross floor area devoted to the sale, rental, or display of sexually oriented
materials.
Side Lot Line: See "Lot Line, Side."
Side Yard: See "Yard, Side."
Sidepath: An pedestrian facility similar to a sidewalk, but wider to accommodate walkers, joggers, cyclists and strollers;
usually constructed of asphalt or concrete.
Article
Article 11: Definitions
11
11-27
Sign
Sign: Any name, identification, description, display, or illustration which is affixed to, painted on, or is represented
directly or indirectly upon a building, structure, or piece of land, and which directs attention to an object, product,
place, activity, person, institution, organization, or business. Address numbers are not considered a sign.
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Sign Area: The entire area within a single continuous perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of a sign, including all
background area figures and letters. However, such perimeter shall not include any structural elements lying outside
the limits of the sign which are not part of the information, visual attraction or symbolism of the sign.
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Sign Height
Sign Width
Sign Area
Sign, Construction: A sign directing attention to construction upon the property where the sign is displayed, and
bearing the name, address, sublot number, or other identifier of the contractor, subcontractor, and/or architect.
Sign, Directional Device: A sign intending to direct the safe flow of vehicular and pedestrian traffic and includes
“enter,” “exit,” and “arrow” signs.
Sign, Display Board: A permanent device used to post temporary signs (e.g. a permanently installed bulletin board).
Sign, Election: A temporary sign used to advertise for an election as described in Indiana Code 3-5-1-2 or a candidate
for said election.
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 11
11-28
Sign, Electronic
Sign, Electronic: A sign capable of displaying words, symbols, figures, or images in a format such as LED (Light
Emitting Diode) that can be electronically or mechanically changed by remote or automatic means.
Sign, Entryway Feature: A ground sign that identifies the entrance to a subdivision installed in common area and
typically inclusive of hardscape, landscape, and other built features that portray the character of the subdivision.
Sign, Envelope: An area on a sign in which the message is placed.
Sign Face: See "Sign Area."
Sign, Flashing: A sign that flashes or appears to flash by a powered light source more than two (2) times per second.
Sign, Gateway: A ground sign that identifies a non-subdivided, commercial development, multifamily development
or mobile home community.
Sign, Ground: A sign in which the bottom edge of the sign is permanently affixed to the ground. A monument sign is
another name for a Ground Sign. (See Graphic for "Sign")
Sign, Height above Ground: The vertical distance measured from the ground elevation to the highest point of the
sign structure.
Sign, Illuminated: A sign which has characters, letters, figures, designs, or outline illuminated by electric lights or
luminous tubes as a part of the sign, or which is illuminated by reflectors.
Sign, Monument: See "Sign, Ground."
Sign, Mural: A sign painted onto the side of a wall or structure that displays a non-commercial message.
Sign, Nonconforming: See "Nonconforming Sign."
Sign, Permanent: A sign that is designed or intended to be used indefinitely, or used indefinitely without change in
the same state or place, including, but not limited to business signs, directional signs, residential complex or subdivision
signs, and illuminated signs.
Sign, Pole: A sign that is supported by one or more poles, posts, or braces upon the ground, not attached to or
supported by any structure, with a clear space in excess of six (6) feet from the finished grade to the bottom of the sign
face. (See Graphic for "Sign")
Sign, Portable: A sign not permanently affixed to the ground or a building, but which is designed to be used on a daily
basis. A portable sign is designed to be relocated and reused with the majority of the sign meant to be changeable copy.
Sandwich board signs and a-frame signs are considered permanent portable signs.
Sign, Projecting: Any sign other than a wall sign affixed to any structure or wall whose leading edge extends beyond
such structure or wall. (See Graphic for "Sign")
Sign, Real Estate: A sign announcing the sale, rental, or lease of the lot where the sign is displayed, or announcing
the sale, rental, or lease of one or more structures, or a portion thereof, located on such lot, and identifying the owner,
realty agent, telephone numbers, or “open house” information.
Sign, Roof: A sign which is erected, constructed, and maintained above any portion of the roof. (See Graphic for "Sign")
Sign, Temporary: An advertising device not fixed to a permanent foundation.
Sign, Tenant Listing: A sign identifying businesses within that development.
Sign, Wall: A sign attached to and/or integral with exterior wall or window surface of a structure, the face of which is
parallel to the surface, no part of which extends above the eves on the structure. (See Graphic for "Sign")
Sign, Wayfinding System: A series of signs to identify a destination within a large development.
Sign, Window: A device attached to and/or integral with the window surface of a building that is visible outside, the
face of which is parallel to the window surface.
Sign, Yard: An advertising device comprised of a metal frame and one or more legs that are pressed into the ground.
Site Plan: A map of a site, drawn accurately to scale, showing existing and proposed features of the site including but
not limited to structures, circulation, grading, trees, and landscaping, sufficient for review. A site plan shall serve as
the development plan regulated by IC 36-7-4-1400.
Article
Article 11: Definitions
11
11-29
Solar Farm
Solar Farm: A collection of photovoltaic panels on a utility scale with intent to sell power to a utility company for
commercial gain. (This does not include selling “excess” through net metering.)
Solar Field: A collection of photovoltaic panels on a site scale with intent to power facilities located on the same
property.
Special Exception: The authorization of a use that is designated as such by this ordinance as being permitted in
the district concerned if it meets special conditions, is found to be appropriate and upon application, is specifically
authorized by the Board of Zoning Appeals.
Sports Complex: An indoor or outdoor facility that is designed for sport activities, training, competition, games and
spectating that is open to the public or open to members. Sport facilities may include ice skating rink, roller skating
rink, football field, baseball diamond, soccer fields, volleyball courts, swimming pool, skate park, bicycle park,
velodrome, tennis court or combinations thereof.
State: When capitalized, The State of Indiana.
Storage Facility, Warehouse: A structure or group of structures containing individual storage units of 400 square
feet or less with access to each unit only for the storage and warehousing of personal property. Warehouse storage
facilities do not include activities of any kind including wholesaling, retailing, servicing, or repair of household or
commercial goods in conjunction with storage.
Storage, Outdoor: The outdoor accumulation of goods, junk, motor vehicles, equipment, products, or materials for
permanent or temporary holding.
Storage, Personal: A structure used primarily for individual, indoor storage of personal property. Personal storage
facilities do not include activities of any kind including wholesaling, retailing, servicing, repair of household or
commercial goods, or warehousing.
Story: That portion of a structure included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it,
or if there is no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it. Any portion of a story
exceeding fourteen (14) feet in height shall be considered as an additional story for each fourteen (14) feet or fraction
thereof.
Street: Any vehicular right-of-way that:
1. Is an existing state, county, or municipal roadway;
2. Is shown upon a plat approved pursuant to law;
3. Is approved by other official action; or
4. Is shown on a plat duly filed and recorded in the office of the county recording officer prior to the appointment of
a Plan Commission and the grant to such Plan Commission to review plats; includes the land between the street
lines, whether improved or unimproved.
Street, Major: A street that is designed to carry high volumes of traffic, as depicted by the Thoroughfare Plan.
Street, Minor: A street within a development that provides access to lots that do not have access to a perimeter street.
The hierarchical classification is not relevant.
Street, Local: A street designed primarily to provide access to abutting properties and discourage through traffic, as
depicted by the Pavement Management System maintained by the Auburn Street Department.
Street, Major Arterial: A street with access control and restricted parking, that collects and distributes traffic to and
from minor arterials. State and federal streets and highways are considered major arterials.
Street, Perimeter: A pre-existing street that a new subdivision or development abuts.
Street, Private: Vehicular streets and driveways, paved or unpaved, that are maintained by the owner(s) and that are
wholly within private property except where they intersect with other streets within public rights-of-way.
Street, Public: All property dedicated or intended for public highway, freeway, or roadway purposes or subject to
public easements therefore.
Street, Stub: A street that stops at the edge of a development and that is intended to be extended onto an adjacent
future development.
Structural Alteration: Any change in the supporting members of a structure such as bearing walls, partitions,
columns, beams or girders, or any change in the footprint or increase in the size of living space. Also, substantial
roofing and siding work when repairs are made to the structure beneath.
Structure: Anything constructed or erected with requires location on the ground or attachment to something that has
location on the ground.
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 11
11-30
Structure Height
Structure Height: The vertical distance measured from the top of the structure's main floor surface (e.g. concrete
slab, floor decking, dirt) to the highest point of the roof.
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Structure
Height
Gable, Hip and Gambrel Roof
(from midpoint on pitched roof)
Flat Roof
(from highest section
of flat roof)
chimneys are
exempt
parapet
Mansard Roof
(from midpoint on
mansard roof)
deck line
Structure
Height
Structure, Primary: Any building used for occupancy, employment, or dwelling; or any structure in which the
primary use of the lot on which it is situated is conducted.
Structure, Tall: A structure that is greater than or equal to 200 feet in vertical height measured from the ground
elevation to the highest point of the structure.
Structure, Temporary: A structure established for a limited and fixed period of time, with the intent to discontinue
such structure upon the expiration
of the time period.
Student Center: A structure used for student recreation, entertainment, lounges, wellness, socialization and programming.
A student center is commonly referred to as a student commons or student union.
Studio Arts: Karate studio, dance studio, art studio, and the like.
Subdivision: The division of a parent tract or other piece of land into at least two (2) smaller lots or the combination
of two (2) or more smaller lots into one (1) lot.
Surety: Any form of security including a cash deposit, bond, collateral, property, or instrument of credit in an amount
and form satisfactory to the Board of Public Works and Safety.
Swimming Pool: A self-contained body of water at least eighteen (18) inches deep and eight (8) feet in diameter or
width and used for recreational purposes. It may be above or below ground level, and shall be considered an accessory
structure.
Technology Park: A development that includes uses such as knowledge-based, science-based, research-based,
software-based, electronic device design-based, and higher-education-based businesses. Technology parks may
include support services and businesses in subordinate roles to the main tenants. Technology parks are reliant on high
quality telecommunications and utility services.
Telecommunication Antenna: See "Antenna."
Telecommunications Facility: A land based facility, consisting of towers, antennae, accessory structures or other
structures intended for use in connection with the commercial transmission or receipt of radio or television signals, or
any other spectrum-based transmissions or receptions.
Telecommunications Tower: Any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting
one (1) or more antennas. The term includes radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, cellular
telephone and wireless communication towers, alternative tower structures, and the like.
Telecommunications Tower, Accessory Structure: Any structure located at the tower's base for housing receiving or
transmitting equipment.
Telecommunications, Micro Tower: A structure or device, as part of a communication network, used to enhance or
extend the signal of a provided service.
Telecommunications Tower, Setback: The horizontal distance from the base of the tower to an abutting property line
and/or right-of-way.
Temporary Use: See "Use, Temporary."
Article
Article 11: Definitions
11
11-31
Theater
Theater: A facility for audio and visual productions and performing arts, excluding adult motion picture theaters and
adult entertainment businesses.
Thoroughfare: A public way that is included in the Thoroughfare Plan.
Thoroughfare Plan: The official plan, now and hereafter adopted, which includes a street plan, sets forth the location,
alignment, dimensions, identification, and classification of existing and proposed streets, and other thoroughfares, as
found in the Auburn Comprehensive Plan.
Through Lot: See "Lot, Through."
Tower: See "Telecommunications Tower."
Townhouse: A single-family dwelling unit constructed in a group of three (3) or more attached units in which each
unit extends from foundation to roof with open space on at least two (2) sides.
Trail: A pedestrian facility similar to a sidewalk, but wider to accommodate walkers, joggers, cyclists, and strollers.
Surfaces can be hard surfaces or dirt, mulch and the like.
Tree Plot: That portion of a public right-of-way lying between the back face of the curb and the leading edge of the
sidewalk, not covered by paving, often used to plant street trees.
Two-Page Layout: Two-Page Layout refers to the two-page layout accompanying each zoning district in Article 2:
Zoning Districts and Article 6: Subdivision Types of this Unified Development Ordinance.
Type 1 Retail, Very Low Intensity: Retail businesses that have very little impact on neighboring properties, traffic
generation, and public safety.
Type 2 Retail, Low Intensity: Retail businesses that have a low impact on neighboring properties, traffic generation,
and public safety.
Type 3 Retail, Medium Intensity: Retail businesses that have a moderate impact on neighboring properties, traffic
generation, and public safety.
Type 4 Retail, High Intensity: Retail businesses that have a high impact on neighboring properties, traffic generation,
and public safety.
Type 5 Retail, Very High Intensity: Retail businesses that have a very high impact on neighboring properties, traffic
generation, and public safety.
Type 6 Retail, Special Handling: Retail businesses that sell products that require special handling due to risks to
public safety.
Underlying Zoning District: The zoning district of a lot:
1. Prior to the approval of a planned development; or
2. Prior to the effects of an overlay district.
Use: The purposes for which land or structure thereon is designed, arranged, or intended, or for which it is occupied,
maintained, let, or leased.
Use, Permitted: A use which may be lawfully established in a particular district or districts provided it conforms with
all applicable requirements, regulations, and standards.
Use, Primary: The main use of land or buildings as distinguished from an accessory use.
Use, Temporary: A land use or structure established for a limited and fixed period with the intent to discontinue such
use or structure upon the expiration
of the time period.
Use Variance: See "Variance, Use."
Utility: Any organization that provides utility services and is not considered a public utility.
Utility, Public: An organization duly authorized to furnish under government regulation to the public: electricity, gas,
steam, telephone, fiber optics, transportation, water or sewage systems.
Utility Facility, Public: A structure (or structures) in which a public utility uses to conduct business in order to
provide services to the public. Examples include but are not limited to pumping station, substation, transmission line,
etc.
Variance, Development Standards: A specific approval granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals in the manner
prescribed by this Unified Development Ordinance, to deviate from the development standards (such as height, bulk,
area) that this Unified Development Ordinance otherwise prescribes.
Variance, Use: The approval of a use other than that prescribed by this Unified Development Ordinance.
Variety Store: A retail establishment that sells a multitude of consumer goods.
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Article 11
11-32
Vehicle
Vehicle: See "Motor Vehicle."
Watercourse: A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel or other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at
least periodically. Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may occur.
Yard: A space on the same lot with a primary structure that is open and unobstructed except as otherwise authorized
by this Unified Development Ordinance. All required yards shall be kept free of all material including but not limited
to structures, material for sale, storage, advertising or display to attract attention and parking lots.
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Front Yard
Side
Yard
Rear Yard
R.O.W.
Side
Yard
Rear Lot Line
Front Lot Line
Side Lot Line
Side Lot Line
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Rear Lot Line
Front Yard
Side Lot Line
Side Lot Line
Rear Yard
Side
Yard
Front Lot Line
Side
Yard
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Side Lot Line
R.O.W.
Front Yard
Front Lot Line
Side Lot Line
Side Yard
Side
Yard
Front Lot Line
Front
Yard
R.O.W.
Yard, Front: The horizontal space between the nearest foundation or structural appurtenance, to the Front Lot Line,
extending to the side lines of the lot, and measured as the shortest distance from that foundation to the Front Lot Line.
(See Graphic for "Yard"). Corner lots have two front yards, each abutting a street right-of-way, or edge of pavement if
no right-of-way exists.
Yard, Rear: The horizontal space between the nearest foundation or structural appurtenance of a building to a rear lot
line and that rear lot line, extending to the side lines of the lot, and measured as the shortest distance from the foundation
to the rear lot line. Corner lots do not have rear yards, rather they have two side yards. (See Graphic for "Yard").
Yard, Side: The horizontal space between the nearest foundation or structural appurtenance of a building to the side
lot line or alley right-of-way. (See Graphic for "Yard").
Zoning Administrator: See "Administrator."
Zoning District: Areas within the City of Auburn for which uniform zoning regulations governing use, height,
area, size, intensity of use of structures and land, and open spaces about structures, are established by this Unified
Development Ordinance. Districts are drawn on the Official Zoning Map.
Zoning Map Amendment: The process used to change the current zoning district to another zoning district.
Zoning Map: See "Official Zoning Map."
© 2018, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Appendix
A
Land Use Matrix
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Appendix
PR AG AC ER R1 R2 R3 TR M1 M2 MH IS DC C1 C2 I1 I2 HI
Accessory Uses
accessory detached dwelling unit P
agricultural tourism P
child care home P P P P P P P
farmers’ market P P P P P P P P
home business, type 1 P P P P P P P P P P P
home business, type 2 P P P P P P P
home business, type 3 P
outdoor storage P P P P
permanent outdoor display areas P P S P P
roadside sales P P P
solar field P P P S S P P P
Land Use Matrix A
A-2
Appendix
PR AG AC ER R1 R2 R3 TR M1 M2 MH IS DC C1 C2 I1 I2 HI
Agricultural Uses
agricultural crop production P P P
confined feeding operation (small) S
fairground S
grain elevator P
hobby farming P P
orchard P P
plant nursery, wholesale P P
processing of agricultural products P P
raising of exotic animals S P
raising of farm animals P P
sale of agricultural products P
stable, private P P P
storage of agricultural products P P P
tree farm P P
vineyard P P
Appendix A: Land Use Matrix
Land Use Matrix A
A-3
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Appendix
PR AG AC ER R1 R2 R3 TR M1 M2 MH IS DC C1 C2 I1 I2 HI
Commercial Uses
amusement park P
automobile oriented business P P
accessory installation P P
body shop P P
car wash P P
oil change facility P P
parts sales P P
repair or service station P P
vehicle rental P P
bank machine or atm drive-up S S P
bank machine or atm walk-up P P P
bank with drive-up window S P P
bank without drive-up window P P P
banquet hall P P
bar or tavern P P
barber or beauty shop P P P
billiard or arcade room P
boarding house S
bowling alley P P
broadcast studio P P
camp ground S S S
child care center P S P
club or lodge P P P
coffee shop P P P
coin laundry S P
country club P P P
dance or night club P P
day care, adult P S P
delicatessen P P P
driving range S P
dry-cleaning service (on-site) P
fitness center or health club P P
funeral home or mortuary P P P
gas station S P
golf course P P
health spa or day spa P P
hotel or motel S P
ice cream shop P P P
kennel S S P P P
marina S
miniature golf P
movie theater P P
office, construction trade P P
electrical contractor P P
general contractor P P
heating or cooling contractor P P
landscape contractor P P P
plumbing contractor P P
Land Use Matrix A
A-4
Appendix
PR AG AC ER R1 R2 R3 TR M1 M2 MH IS DC C1 C2 I1 I2 HI
Commercial Uses (continued)
office, design services P P P
office, general services P P P P
accounting firm P P P P P
bank or credit union S P P P P
bank with drive-up window S S P P
employment service S P P P P
insurance office P P P P P
investment firm P P P P P
law office P P P P P
membership associations P P P P P
publishing corporate office S P P P P
reading clinic P P P P P
real estate office P P P P P
secretarial service S P P P P
service organization P P P P P
temporary service agency S P P P P
title company P P P P P
trade office S P P P P
travel agency S P P P P
office, medical P P P P S
emergency medical clinic P P P S
dental clinic P P P P S
medical clinic P P P P S
optical clinic P P P P S
rehabilitation clinic P P P S
veterinarian clinic or hospital S P P S
paintball facility S S S
photographic studio P P P
race track P
recreation center or play center P P P P
restaurant P P P
restaurant with drive-up window P P
restaurant with outdoor dining P P P
sexually oriented business P
shooting range S S S S P
skating rink S P P
sports complex (indoor) S P P
sports complex (outdoors) P S P
stable, commercial S P
stadium S P
studio arts P P P
swimming pool P P
tailor or pressing shop P P
tanning salon P P
tattoo or piercing parlor P
technology park P P
truck stop P
Appendix A: Land Use Matrix
Land Use Matrix A
A-5
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Appendix
PR AG AC ER R1 R2 R3 TR M1 M2 MH IS DC C1 C2 I1 I2 HI
Commercial Uses (continued)
type 1 retail, very low intensity P P P
type 2 retail, low intensity P P P
art and craft gallery P P P P
bakery P P P
dry-cleaning service (drop-off only) P P P
flower shop P P P
gift shop P P P
jewelry store P P P
meat market P P P
mobile phone center P P P
news dealer P P P
type 3 retail, medium intensity P P
antique shop P P
apparel shop P P
art and craft supply P P
book store P P
boutique P P
computer sales P P
convenience store P P
drug store P P
fabric shop P P
garden shop P P
liquor sales P P
music or media shop P P
party or event store P P
pawn shop P P
pet grooming or store P P
plant nursery, retail or greenhouse P S S P P
print shop or copy center P P
quick cash or check cashing P P
shoe store or repair P P
sign shop P P
video or DVD rental P P
type 4 retail, high intensity S P
automobile sales S P
building supply store S P
department store S P
furniture shop S P
grocery or supermarket S P
home electronics or appliance store S P
office supply store S P
sporting goods store S P
type 5 retail, very high intensity P P
Land Use Matrix A
A-6
Appendix
PR AG AC ER R1 R2 R3 TR M1 M2 MH IS DC C1 C2 I1 I2 HI
Commercial Uses (continued)
type 6 retail, special handling P
farm implement sales P S P P
fireworks sales P P P
gun sales P P P
heavy equipment sales or rental P P P P
hunting store P S P
manufactured home sales S S P
recreational vehicle or watercraft sales P S P
semi tractor - trailer sales S S P
watercraft rental S
winery S P
Appendix A: Land Use Matrix
Land Use Matrix A
A-7
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Appendix
PR AG AC ER R1 R2 R3 TR M1 M2 MH IS DC C1 C2 I1 I2 HI
Industrial Uses
assembly P P
construction demolition landfill P
construction trade office w/ outdoor yard S P P
distribution facility P P
electrical generation plant P
flex-space P P
food production or processing P P
gravel or sand mining P
heavy equipment repair P
heavy manufacturing P
incinerator P
junk yard P
light manufacturing P P
liquid fertilizer storage or distribution P P
metal shredding P
public utility facility P P P S S S S S S P S P S P P P P P
recycling processing P
rendering plant P
research center P P P
sanitary landfill or refuse dump P
scrap metal yard P
sewage treatment plant P P
sign painting or fabrication P P
solar farm S P
storage tanks (hazardous) P
storage tanks (nonhazardous) P P P
telecommunication facility S S S S S P
testing lab P P
tool and die shop P P
transfer station P
warehouse P P
warehouse “self storage” facility S S P P
water treatment plant P P
welding P P P
Land Use Matrix A
A-8
Appendix
PR AG AC ER R1 R2 R3 TR M1 M2 MH IS DC C1 C2 I1 I2 HI
Institutional Uses
assisted living facility S P P P
bus station P
cemetery or mausoleum S P
child care institution P
church, temple or mosque S S P S S S
community center S P P P P
crematory S
government office P P P P
government operation (non-office) P P P
hospital P
jail S P
juvenile detention facility S P
library P P
mental health facility S P P
municipal airport S P
municipal heliport S P
museum P P
nature center P
nursing home S P P
park P P P P P P P
parking lot, independent S S P P S P
parking structure P P
police, fire or rescue station S S P P P P
post office P P P
prison P
recycling collection point S P P
school (P-12) P
skate park P
swimming pool, public P P
trade or business school P P P
university or college P
Appendix A: Land Use Matrix
Land Use Matrix A
A-9
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Appendix
PR AG AC ER R1 R2 R3 TR M1 M2 MH IS DC C1 C2 I1 I2 HI
Residential Uses
bed and breakfast S P S S S P
caretaker’s residence S
dwelling, four-family (quadplex) P P
dwelling, five-family P P
dwelling, manufactured home P P P P
dwelling, mobile home P
dwelling, multiple-family (6 to 10 units) S P
dwelling, multiple-family (11+ units) S P
dwelling, single-family detached P P P P P P S S
dwelling, three-family (triplex) P P
dwelling, two-family (duplex) S S P P
dwelling unit (upper floors) P P
fair housing facility (large) S P S
fair housing facility (small) P P P P P P
fraternity or sorority house S
manufactured home park P
mobile home park P
personal storage (primary use) P S S P P
retirement community P P
Land Use Matrix A
A-10
© 2018, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Appendix
B
Flood Hazard Areas
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Appendix Flood Hazard Areas B
B-2
Article 1: Statutory Authorization, Findings of Fact, Purpose, and Objectives
A. Statutory Authorization: The Indiana Legislature has in Indiana Code 36-7-4 granted the power to local government
units to control land use within their jurisdictions. Therefore, the Common Council of the City of Auburn
does hereby adopt the following floodplain management regulations.
B. Findings of Fact:
1. The flood hazard areas of the City of Auburn are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life
and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary
public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely
affect the public health, safety, and general welfare.
2. These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in
flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy in flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods or
hazardous to other lands which are inadequately elevated, inadequately flood-proofed, or otherwise unprotected
from flood damages.
C. Statement of Purpose: It is the purpose of this ordinance to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare
and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
1. Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards,
which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities.
2. Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood
damage at the time of initial construction.
3. Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers which are
involved in the accommodation of flood waters.
4. Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase erosion or flood damage.
5. Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may
increase flood hazards to other lands.
6. Make Federal flood insurance available for structures and their contents in the City by fulfilling the requirements
of the National Flood Insurance Program.
D. Objectives: The objectives of this ordinance are:
1. To protect human life and health.
2. To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects.
3. To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the
expense of the general public.
4. To minimize prolonged business interruptions.
5. To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains; electric, telephone, and
sewer lines; streets; and bridges located in floodplains.
6. To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood prone areas in
such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas.
Appendix
Appendix B: Flood Hazard Areas
Flood Hazard Areas B
B-3
Article 2: Definitions
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this ordinance shall be interpreted so as to give them the
meaning they have in common usage and to give this ordinance its most reasonable application.
A Zone: Portions of the Special Flood Hazard Area in which the principal source of flooding is runoff from rainfall,
snowmelt, or a combination of both. In “A Zones,” floodwaters may move slowly or rapidly, but waves are usually
not a significant threat to buildings. These areas are labeled as Zone A, Zone AE, Zones A1-A30, Zone AO, Zone
AH, Zone AR, and Zone A99 on a Flood Insurance Rate Map or Flood Hazard Boundary Map. The definitions are
presented below:
Zone A: Areas subject to inundation by the one-percent (1%) annual chance flood event. Because detailed hydraulic
analyses have not been performed, no base flood elevation or depths are shown.
Zone AE and A1-A30: Areas subject to inundation by the one-percent (1%) annual chance flood event determined by
detailed methods. Base flood elevations are shown within these zones. (Zone AE is on new and revised maps in place
of Zones A1-A30.)
Zone AO: Areas subject to inundation by one-percent (1%) annual chance shallow flooding (usually sheet flow on
sloping terrain) where average depths are between one (1) and three (3) feet. Average flood depths derived from
detailed hydraulic analyses are shown within this zone.
Zone AH: Areas subject to inundation by one-percent (1%) annual chance shallow flooding (usually areas of ponding)
where average depths are between one (1) and three (3) feet. Average flood depths derived from detailed hydraulic
analyses are shown within this zone.
Zone AR: Areas that result from the decertification of a previously accredited flood protection system that is determined
to be in the process of being restored to provide base flood protection.
Zone A99: Areas subject to inundation by the one-percent (1%) annual chance flood event, but which will ultimately
be protected upon completion of an under-construction Federal flood protection system. These are areas of special
flood hazard where enough progress has been made on the construction of a protection system, such as dikes, dams,
and levees, to consider it complete for insurance rating purposes. Zone A99 may only be used when the flood
protection system has reached specified statutory progress toward completion. No base flood elevations or depths are
shown.
Accessory Structure: A structure with a floor area of 400 square feet or less that is located on the same parcel of
property as the principal structure and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure. Accessory
structures should constitute a minimal initial investment, may not be used for human habitation, and be designed to
have minimal flood damage potential. Examples of accessory structures are detached garages, carports, storage sheds,
pole barns, and hay sheds.
Addition: Any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a structure in which the addition is connected by a
common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition, which is connected by a firewall or
is separated by independent perimeter load-bearing walls, is new construction.
Appeal: A request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator’s interpretation of any provision of this ordinance.
Appurtenant Structure: See “Accessory Structure.”
Area of Shallow Flooding: A designated AO or AH Zone on the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)
with base flood depths from one (1) to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of
flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized
by ponding or sheet flow.
Base Flood: The flood having a one-percent (1%) annual chance flood.
Base Flood Elevation (BFE): The elevation of the one-percent (1%) annual chance flood.
Basement: That portion of a structure having its floor sub-grade (below ground level) on all sides.
Building: See “Structure.”
Community: A political entity that has the authority to adopt and enforce floodplain ordinances for the area under its
jurisdiction.
Community Rating System (CRS): A program developed by the Federal Insurance Administration to provide
incentives for those communities in the Regular Program that have gone beyond the minimum floodplain management
requirements to develop extra measures to provide protection from flooding.
Critical facility: A facility for which even a slight chance of flooding might be too great. Critical facilities include,
but are not limited to, schools, nursing homes, hospitals, police, fire, and emergency response installations, installations
which produce, use or store hazardous materials or hazardous waste.
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Appendix Flood Hazard Areas B
B-4
D-Zone: Unstudied areas where flood hazards are undetermined, but flooding is possible. Flood insurance is available
in participating communities but is not required by regulation in this zone.
Development: Any man made change to improved or unimproved real estate including but not limited to:
Construction, reconstruction, or placement of a structure or any addition to a structure;
Installing a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for a manufactured home or installing a recreational vehicle
on a site for more than 180 days;
Installing utilities, erection of walls and fences, construction of roads, or similar projects;
Construction of flood control structures such as levees, dikes, dams, channel improvements, etc.;
Mining, dredging, filling, grading, excavation, or drilling operations;
Construction and/or reconstruction of bridges or culverts;
Storage of materials; or
Any other activity that might change the direction, height, or velocity of flood or surface waters.
“Development” does not include activities such as the maintenance of existing structures and facilities such as
painting, re roofing; resurfacing roads; or gardening, plowing, and similar agricultural practices that do not involve
filling, grading, excavation, or the construction of permanent structures.
Elevated Structure: A non-basement structure built to have the lowest floor elevated above the ground level by
means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, filled stem wall foundations (also called chain walls), pilings, or
columns (posts and piers).
Elevation Certificate: A certified statement that verifies a structure’s elevation information. This certificate shall be
signed and sealed by a land surveyor, engineer, or architect authorized by law to certify elevation information.
Emergency Program: The first phase under which a community participates in the National Flood Insurance
Program. It is intended to provide a first layer amount of insurance at subsidized rates on all insurable structures in
that community before the effective date of the initial Flood Insurance Rate Map.
Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision: A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the
construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete
pads) is completed before the effective date of the community’s first floodplain ordinance.
Expansion to an Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision: The preparation of additional sites by the
construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FEMA: The Federal Emergency Management Agency.
Flood: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the
overflow, the unusual and rapid accumulation, or the runoff of surface waters from any source.
Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM): An official map on which the Federal Emergency Management
Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated the areas of flood hazards and regulatory floodway.
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM): An official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management
Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
Flood Insurance Study (FIS): The official hydraulic and hydrologic report provided by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles, as well as the Flood Insurance Rate Map, Flood Boundary
and Floodway Map (where applicable), and the water surface elevation of the base flood.
Flood Prone Area: Any land area acknowledged by a community as being susceptible to inundation by water from
any source. (See “Flood.”)
Flood Protection Grade (FPG): The elevation of the regulatory flood plus two (2) feet at any given location in the
Special Flood Hazard Area. (See “Freeboard.”)
Floodplain: The channel proper and the areas adjoining any wetland, lake, or watercourse which have been or
hereafter may be covered by the regulatory flood. The floodplain includes both the floodway and the fringe districts.
Floodplain Management: The operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing
flood damage and preserving and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including but not
limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management regulations, and open space
plans.
Appendix
Appendix B: Flood Hazard Areas
Flood Hazard Areas B
B-5
Floodplain Management Regulations: This ordinance and other zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations,
building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances, and other applications of police power which control
development in flood-prone areas. This term describes Federal, State, or local regulations in any combination thereof,
which provide standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and damage. Floodplain management regulations are
also referred to as floodplain regulations, floodplain ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, and floodplain
management requirements.
Floodproofing (dry floodproofing): A method of protecting a structure that ensures that the structure, together
with attendant utilities and sanitary facilities, is watertight to the floodproofed design elevation with walls that are
substantially impermeable to the passage of water. All structural components of these walls are capable of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic flood forces, including the effects of buoyancy, and anticipated debris impact forces.
Floodproofing Certificate: A form used to certify compliance for non-residential structures as an alternative to elevating
structures to or above the flood protection grade. This certification must be by a Registered Professional Engineer
or Architect.
Floodway: The channel of a river or stream and those portions of the floodplains adjoining the channel which are
reasonably required to efficiently carry and discharge the peak flood flow of the regulatory flood of any river or
stream.
Freeboard: A factor of safety, usually expressed in feet above the base flood elevation, which is applied for the
purposes of floodplain management. It is used to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to
flood heights greater than those calculated for the base flood.
Fringe: Those portions of the floodplain lying outside the floodway.
Hardship: As related to variances of this ordinance, the exceptional hardship that would result from a failure to
grant the requested variance. The City of Auburn Board of Zoning Appeals requires that the variance is exceptional,
unusual, and peculiar to the property involved. Mere economic or financial hardship alone is NOT exceptional.
Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps, personal preferences, or the disapproval of one’s neighbors
likewise cannot, as a rule, qualify as an exceptional hardship. All of these problems can be resolved through
other means without granting a variance, even if the alternative is more expensive, or requires the property owner to
build elsewhere or put the parcel to a different use than originally intended.
Highest Adjacent Grade: The highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to the start of construction, next
to the proposed walls of a structure.
Historic Structure: Any structure individually listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the Indiana State
Register of Historic Sites and Structures.
Increased Cost of Compliance (ICC): The cost to repair a substantially damaged structure that exceeds the minimal
repair cost and that is required to bring a substantially damaged structure into compliance with the local flood damage
prevention ordinance. Acceptable mitigation measures are elevation, relocation, demolition, or any combination
thereof. All renewal and new business flood insurance policies with effective dates on or after June 1, 1997, will
include Increased Cost of Compliance coverage.
Letter of Final Determination (LFD): A letter issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency during the
mapping update process which establishes final elevations and provides the new flood map and flood study to the
community. The Letter of Final Determination initiates the six-month adoption period. The community shall adopt
or amend its floodplain management regulations during this six-month period unless the community has previously
incorporated an automatic adoption clause.
Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA): An amendment to the currently effective Federal Emergency Management
Agency map that establishes that a property is not located in a Special Flood Hazard Area. A Letter of Map
Amendment is only issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
Letter of Map Change (LOMC): A general term used to refer to the several types of revisions and amendments
to Federal Emergency Agency Maps that can be accomplished by letter. They include Letter of Map Amendment
(LOMA), Letter of Map Revision (LOMR), and Letter of Map Revision based on Fill (LOMR-F).
Letter of Map Revision (LOMR): An official revision to the currently effective Federal Emergency Management
Agency map. It is issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and changes flood zones, delineations, and
elevations.
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Appendix Flood Hazard Areas B
B-6
Letter of Map Revision Based on Fill (LOMR-F): An official revision by letter to an effective National Flood
Insurance Program map. A LOMR-F provides the Federal Emergency Management Agency’s determination concerning
whether a structure or parcel has been elevated on fill above the base flood elevation and excluded from the
Special Flood Hazard Area.
Lowest Adjacent Grade: The lowest elevation, after completion of construction, of the ground, sidewalk, patio, deck
support, or basement entryway immediately next to the structure.
Lowest Floor: the lowest of the following:
1. The top of the lowest level of the structure;
2. The top of the basement floor;
3. The top of the garage floor, if the garage is the lowest level of the structure;
4. The top of the first floor of a structure elevated on pilings or pillars;
5. The top of the floor level of any enclosure, other than a basement, below an elevated structure where the walls of
the enclosure provide any resistance to the flow of flood waters unless:
6. The walls are designed to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on the walls by allowing for
the entry and exit of flood waters by providing a minimum of two (2) openings (in addition to doorways and
windows) in a minimum of two (2) exterior walls; if a structure has more than one enclosed area, each shall have
openings on exterior walls;
7. The total net area of all openings shall be at least one (1) square inch for every one (1) square foot of enclosed
areas; the bottom of all such openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above the exterior grade or the interior
grade immediately beneath each opening, whichever is higher; and
8. Such enclosed space shall be usable solely for the parking of vehicles and building access.
Manufactured Home: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is
designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term “manufactured
home” does not include a “recreational vehicle.”
Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more
manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
Market Value: The building value, excluding the land (as agreed to between a willing buyer and seller), as established
by what the local real estate market will bear. Market value can be established by independent certified appraisal,
replacement cost depreciated by age of building (actual cash value), or adjusted assessed values.
Mitigation: Sustained actions taken to reduce or eliminate long-term risk to people and property from hazards and
their effects. The purpose of mitigation is twofold: to protect people and structures, and to minimize the cost of
disaster response and recovery.
National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP): The Federal program that makes flood insurance available to owners of
property in participating communities nationwide through the cooperative efforts of the Federal Government and the
private insurance industry.
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929: As corrected in 1929, a vertical control used as a reference for
establishing varying elevations within the floodplain.
New Construction: Any structure for which the “start of construction” commenced after the effective date of the
community’s first floodplain ordinance.
New manufactured home park or subdivision: A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction
of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed on or after the effective date of the community’s first floodplain ordinance.
North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD 88): As adopted in 1993, a vertical control datum used as a
reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain.
Obstruction: Includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection,
excavation, canalization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill, structure,
vegetation, or other material in, along, across or projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or
change the direction and/or velocity of the flow of water; or due to its location, its propensity to snare or collect debris
carried by the flow of water, or its likelihood of being carried downstream.
One-hundred Year Flood (100-year flood): The flood that has a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year. Any flood zone that begins with the letter A is subject to the one-percent (1%) annual
chance flood. See “Regulatory Flood.”
Appendix
Appendix B: Flood Hazard Areas
Flood Hazard Areas B
B-7
One-percent Annual Chance Flood: The flood that has a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in
any given year. Any flood zone that begins with the letter A is subject to the one-percent (1%) annual chance flood.
See “Regulatory Flood”.
Participating Community: Any community that voluntarily elects to participate in the National Flood Insurance
Program by adopting and enforcing floodplain management regulations that are consistent with the standards of the
National Flood Insurance Program.
Physical Map Revision (PMR): An official republication of a community’s Federal Emergency Management Agency
map to effect changes to base [one percent (1%) annual chance] flood elevations, floodplain boundary delineations,
regulatory floodways, and planimetric features. These changes typically occur as a result of structural works or
improvements, annexations resulting in additional flood hazard areas, or correction to base flood elevations or Special
Flood Hazard Areas.
Public Safety and Nuisance: Anything which is injurious to the safety or health of an entire community, neighborhood
or any considerable number of persons; or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary manner,
of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal, or basin.
Recreational Vehicle: A vehicle which is (1) built on a single chassis; (2) 400 square feet or less when measured
at the largest horizontal projections; (3) designed to be self propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck;
and (4) designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as quarters for recreational camping, travel, or
seasonal use.
Regular Program: The phase of the community’s participation in the National Flood Insurance Program where more
comprehensive floodplain management requirements are imposed and higher amounts of insurance are available based
upon risk zones and elevations determined in a Flood Insurance Study.
Regulatory Flood: The flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year,
as calculated by a method and procedure that is acceptable to and approved by the Indiana Department of Natural
Resources and the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The regulatory flood elevation at any location is as
defined in Article 3, Section B of this ordinance. The “Regulatory Flood” is also known by the terms “Base Flood,”
“One-Percent (1%) Annual Chance Flood,” and “100-Year Flood.”
Repetitive Loss: Flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two (2) separate occasions during a ten (10) year
period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equaled or exceeded twentyfive
percent (25%) of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
Section 1316: The section of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968, as amended, which states that no new flood
insurance coverage shall be provided for any property that the Floodplain Administrator finds has been declared by
a duly constituted State or local zoning authority or other authorized public body to be in violation of State or local
laws, regulations, or ordinances that intended to discourage or otherwise restrict land development or occupancy in
flood-prone areas.
Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA): Those lands within the jurisdictions of the City subject to inundation by the
regulatory flood. The Special Flood Hazard Areas of the City of Auburn are generally identified as such on the
DeKalb County, Indiana and Incorporated Areas Flood Insurance Rate Map prepared by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency, dated September 29, 2006, as well as any future updates, amendments, or revisions. The
Special Flood Hazard Areas of those parts of unincorporated DeKalb County that are within the extraterritorial
jurisdiction of the City or that may be annexed into the City are generally identified as such on the DeKalb County,
Indiana and Incorporated Areas Flood Insurance Rate Map prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency
and dated September 29, 2006, as well as any future updates, maps, amendments, or revisions. (These areas are
shown on a Flood Insurance Rate Map as Zone A, AE, A1- A30, AH, AR, A99, or AO).
Start of Construction: Includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued,
provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit
date. The actual start means the first placement or permanent construction of a structure (including a manufactured
home) on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footing, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work
beyond the stage of excavation for placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does
not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/
or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, foundations, or the erection of temporary
forms. For substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling,
floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the
building.
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Appendix Flood Hazard Areas B
B-8
Structure: A structure that is principally above ground and is enclosed by walls and a roof. The term includes a gas
or liquid storage tank, a manufactured home, or a prefabricated building. The term also includes recreational vehicles
to be installed on a site for more than 180 days.
Substantial Damage: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its
before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
Substantial Improvement: Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost
of which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the “start of construction” of
the improvement. This term includes structures that have incurred “repetitive loss” or “substantial damage” regardless
of the actual repair work performed. The term does not include improvements of structures to correct existing
violations of State or local health, sanitary, or safety code requirements.
Suspension: The removal of a participating community from the National Flood Insurance Program because the
community has not enacted and/or enforced the proper floodplain management regulations required for participation
in the National Flood Insurance Program.
Variance: A grant of relief from the requirements of this ordinance, which permits construction in a manner otherwise
prohibited by this ordinance where specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship.
Violation: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with this ordinance. A structure
or other development without the elevation, other certification, or other evidence of compliance required in this
ordinance is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
Watercourse: A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel or other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at
least periodically. Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may occur.
X zone: The area where the flood hazard is less than that in the Special Food Hazard Area. Shaded X zones shown
on recent Flood Insurance Rate Maps (B zones on older Flood Insurance Rate Maps) designate areas subject to
inundation by the flood with a two-tenths percent (0.2%) chance of being equaled or exceeded (the 500-year flood).
Unshaded X zones (C zones on older Flood Insurance Rate Maps) designate areas where the annual exceedance
probability of flooding is less than two-tenths percent (0.2%).
Zone: A geographical area shown on a Flood Hazard Boundary Map or Flood Insurance Rate Map that reflects the
severity or type of flooding in the area.
Zone A: See “A Zone.”
Zone B, C, and X: Areas identified in the community as areas of moderate or minimal hazard from the principal
source of flood in the area. However, buildings in these zones could be flooded by severe, concentrated rainfall
coupled with inadequate local drainage systems. Flood insurance is available in participating communities but is not
required by regulation in these zones. (Zone X is used on new and revised maps in place of Zones B and C.)
Appendix
Appendix B: Flood Hazard Areas
Flood Hazard Areas B
B-9
Article 3: General Provisions
A. Lands to Which This Ordinance Applies: This ordinance shall apply to all Special Flood Hazard Areas and
known flood prone areas within the jurisdiction, including the extra-territorial jurisdiction, of the City of Auburn.
B. Basis for Establishing Regulatory Flood Data: This ordinance’s protection standard is the regulatory flood. The
best available regulatory flood data is listed below.
1. The regulatory flood elevation, floodway, and fringe limits for the studied Special Flood Hazard Areas within
the jurisdiction of the City of Auburn shall be as delineated on the one-percent (1%) annual chance flood
profiles in the Flood Insurance Study of DeKalb County, Indiana and Incorporated Areas dated September
29, 2006 and the corresponding Flood Insurance Rate Map dated September 29, 2006, as well as any future
updates, amendments, or revisions prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency with the most
recent date.
2. The regulatory flood elevation, floodway, and fringe limits for the Special Flood Hazard Areas within the
jurisdiction of the City of Auburn delineated as an “A Zone” on the DeKalb County, Indiana and Incorporated
Areas of Flood Insurance Rate Map prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and dated
September 29, 2006 as well as any future updates, amendments, or revisions, prepared by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency with the most recent date, shall be according to the best data available as
provided by the Indiana Department of Natural Resources; provided the upstream drainage area from the
subject site is greater than one (1) square mile.
3. In the absence of a published Federal Emergency Management Agency map, or absence of identification on
a Federal Emergency Management Agency map, the regulatory flood elevation, floodway, and fringe limits
of any watercourse in the community’s known flood prone areas shall be according to the best data available
as provided by the Indiana Department of Natural Resources; provided the upstream drainage area from the
subject site is greater than one (1) square mile.
4. Upon issuance of a Letter of Final Determination (LFD), any more restrictive data in the new (not yet
effective) mapping/study shall be utilized for permitting and construction (development) purposes, replacing
all previously effective less restrictive flood hazard data provided by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency.
C. Establishment of Floodplain Development Permit: A Floodplain Development Permit shall be required in
conformance with the provisions of this ordinance prior to the commencement of any development activities in
areas of special flood hazard.
D. Compliance: No structure shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or structurally altered within the Special
Flood Hazard Area without full compliance with the terms of this ordinance and other applicable regulations. No
land or stream within the Special Flood Hazard Area shall hereafter be altered without full compliance with the
terms of this ordinance and other applicable regulations.
E. Abrogation and Greater Restrictions: This ordinance is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this ordinance and another conflict or overlap,
whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
F. Discrepancy between Mapped Floodplain and Actual Ground Elevations: In cases where there is a discrepancy
between the mapped floodplain (Special Flood Hazard Area) on the Flood Insurance Rate Map and the actual
ground elevations, the elevation provided on the profiles shall govern.
1. If the elevation of the site in question is below the base flood elevation, that site shall be included in the
Special Flood Hazard Area and regulated accordingly.
2. If the elevation (natural grade) of the site in question is above the base flood elevation and not located within
the floodway, that site shall be considered outside the Special Flood Hazard Area and the floodplain regulations
will not be applied. The property owner should be advised to apply for a Letter of Map Amendment
(LOMA).
G. Interpretation: In the interpretation and application of this ordinance all provisions shall be
1. Considered as minimum requirements;
2. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
3. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under State statutes.
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Appendix Flood Hazard Areas B
B-10
H. Warning and Disclaimer of Liability: The degree of flood protection required by this ordinance is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on available information derived from engineering and scientific
methods of study. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Therefore, this ordinance does not create
any liability on the part of the City of Auburn, the Indiana Department of Natural Resources, or the State of
Indiana for any flood damage that results from reliance on this ordinance or any administrative decision made
lawfully thereunder.
I. Penalties for Violation: Failure to obtain a Floodplain Development Permit in the Special Flood Hazard Area or
failure to comply with the requirements of a Floodplain Development Permit or conditions of a variance shall be
deemed to be a violation of this ordinance. All violations shall be considered a common nuisance and be treated
as such in accordance with the provisions of the City of Auburn’s Unified Development Ordinance and Code of
Ordinances. All violations shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $500.
1. A separate offense shall be deemed to occur for each day the violation continues to exist.
2. The City of Auburn Common Council shall inform the owner that any such violation is considered a willful
act to increase flood damages and therefore may cause coverage by a Standard Flood Insurance Policy to be
suspended.
3. Nothing herein shall prevent the City from taking such other lawful action to prevent or remedy any violations.
All costs connected therewith shall accrue to the person or persons responsible.
Appendix
Appendix B: Flood Hazard Areas
Flood Hazard Areas B
B-11
Article 4: Administration
A. Designation of Administrator: The Common Council of the City of Auburn hereby appoints the Zoning
Administrator to administer and implement the provisions of this ordinance and is herein referred to as the
Floodplain Administrator.
B. Permit Procedures: Application for a Floodplain Development Permit shall be made to the Floodplain
Administrator on forms furnished by the City prior to any development activities. Submittal requirements may
include, but not be limited to, the following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location,
dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, earthen fill, storage of materials
or equipment, drainage facilities, and the location of the foregoing. Specifically the following information is
required:
1. Application Stage: The following information shall be required as part of the Floodplain Development Permit
Application:
a. A description of the proposed development.
b. Location of the proposed development sufficient to accurately locate property and structure(s) in relation
to existing roads and streams.
c. A legal description of the property site.
d. A site development plan showing existing and proposed development locations and existing and proposed
land grades.
e. Elevation of the top of the planned lowest floor (including basement) of all proposed buildings.
Elevation should be in NAVD 88 or NGVD.
f. Elevation (in NAVD 88 or NGVD) to which any non-residential structure will be floodproofed.
g. Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed
development. A hydrologic and hydraulic engineering study is required and any watercourse changes
submitted to the Indiana Department of Natural Resources for approval and then to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency as a Letter of Map Revision. (See Article 4: C.6. for additional
information.)
2. Construction Stage: The following information shall be required during the Construction Phase of the project:
a. Upon establishment of the lowest floor of an elevated structure or structure constructed on fill, it shall
be the duty of the applicant to submit to the Floodplain Administrator an Elevation Certificate. The
Elevation Certificate shall be of the NAVD 88 or NGVD elevation of the lowest floor, as built. Said certification
shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor, professional
engineer or architect, and certified by the same. The Floodplain Administrator shall review the lowest
floor elevation survey data submitted. The applicant shall correct deficiencies detected by such review
before any further work is allowed to proceed. Failure to submit the Elevation Certificate or failure to
make said corrections required herein shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project. Any work
undertaken prior to submission of the Elevation Certificate shall be at the applicant’s risk.
b. Upon establishment of the floodproofed elevation of a floodproofed structure, it shall be the duty of the
applicant to submit to the Floodplain Administrator a Floodproofing Certificate. The certification shall be
prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered professional engineer or architect and certified
by the same. The Floodplain Administrator shall review the Floodproofing Certificate submitted. The
applicant shall correct any deficiencies detected by such review before any further work is allowed to
proceed. Failure to submit the Floodproofing Certificate or failure to make required corrections shall be
cause to issue a stop work order for the project.
3. Finished Construction: Upon completion of construction, an Elevation Certificate (FEMA Elevation
Certificate Form 81-31 or any future updates) which depicts the “as-built” lowest floor elevation is
required to be submitted to the Floodplain Administrator. If the project includes a floodproofing measure, a
Floodproofing Certificate (FEMA Floodproofing Certificate Form 81-65 or any future updates) is required to
be submitted by the applicant to the Floodplain Administrator.
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Appendix Flood Hazard Areas B
B-12
C. Duties and Responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator: The Floodplain Administrator and/or designated
staff is authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this ordinance. The Floodplain Administrator is
further authorized to render interpretations of this ordinance, which are consistent with its spirit and purpose.
Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall include, but not be limited to:
1. Review all Floodplain Development Permits to assure that the permit requirements of this ordinance have
been satisfied.
2. Inspect and inventory damaged structures in the Special Flood Hazard Areas and complete substantial
damage determinations.
3. Ensure that construction authorization has been granted by the Indiana Department of Natural Resources for
all development projects subject to Article 5: E. and G.1. of this ordinance, and maintain a record of such
authorization (either copy of actual permit/authorization or floodplain analysis/regulatory assessment).
4. Ensure that all necessary Federal or State permits have been received prior to issuance of the local Floodplain
Development Permit. Copies of such permits/authorizations are to be maintained on file with the Floodplain
Development Permit.
5. Maintain and track permit records involving additions and improvements to residences located in the
floodway.
6. Notify adjacent communities and the State Floodplain Coordinator prior to any alteration or relocation of a
watercourse, and submit copies of such notifications to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
7. Maintain for public inspection and furnish upon request local permit documents, damaged structure
inventories, substantial damage determinations, regulatory flood data, Special Flood Hazard Area maps;
Letters of Map Change (LOMC); Letters of Map Revision (LOMR); copies of Indiana Department of
Natural Resources permits, letters of authorization, floodplain analysis and regulatory assessments (letters of
recommendation); Federal permit documents; and “as-built” elevation and floodproofing data for all buildings
constructed subject to this ordinance.
8. Utilize and enforce all Letters of Map Change (LOMC) or Physical Map Revisions (PMR) issued by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency for the currently effective Special Flood Hazard Area maps of the
community.
9. Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the
flood-carrying capacity is not diminished.
10. Verify and record the actual elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially
improved structures, in accordance with Article 4: B.
11. Verify and record the actual elevation to which any new or substantially improved structures have been
floodproofed in accordance with Article 4: B.
12. Review certified plans and specifications for compliance.
13. Perform inspections to ensure that all applicable ordinance and floodplain development requirements have
been satisfied. Authorized City officials shall have the right to enter and inspect properties located in Special
Flood Hazard Areas.
14. Stop Work Orders
a. Upon notice from the Floodplain Administrator, work on any building, structure or premise that is
contrary to the provisions of this ordinance shall immediately cease.
b. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, to his agent, or to the
person doing the work and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed.
15. Revocation of Permits
a. The Floodplain Administrator may revoke a permit or approval, issued under the provisions of the
ordinance, in cases where there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to the material fact
in the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based.
b. The Floodplain Administrator may revoke a permit upon determination that the construction, erection,
alteration, repair, moving, demolition, installation, or replacement of the structure for which the permit
was issued is in violation of, or not in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance.
Appendix
Appendix B: Flood Hazard Areas
Flood Hazard Areas B
B-13
Article 5: Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
A. General Standards: In all Special Flood Hazard Areas and known flood prone areas the following provisions are
required:
1. New construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral
movement of the structure.
2. Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of
anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This
standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable State requirements for resisting wind forces.
3. New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment
resistant to flood damage below the flood protection grade.
4. New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize
flood damage.
5. Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment, utility meters, and other service
facilities shall be located at/above the flood protection grade or designed so as to prevent water from entering
or accumulating within the components below the flood protection grade. Water and sewer pipes, electrical
and telephone lines, submersible pumps, and other waterproofed service facilities may be located below the
flood protection grade.
6. New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood
waters into the system.
7. New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood
waters into the system.
8. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination
from them during flooding.
9. Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure that is in compliance with the provisions
of this ordinance shall meet the requirements of “new construction” as contained in this ordinance.
10. Whenever any portion of the Special Flood Hazard Area is authorized for use, the volume of space which will
be occupied by the authorized fill or structure below the Base Flood Elevation (BFE) shall be compensated
for and balanced by an equivalent volume of excavation taken below the Base Flood Elevation (BFE). The
excavation volume shall be at least equal to the volume of storage lost (replacement ratio of 1 to 1) due to the
fill or structure.
a. The excavation shall take place in the floodplain and in the same property in which the authorized fill or
structure is located.
b. Under certain circumstances, the excavation may be allowed to take place outside of but adjacent to the
floodplain provided that the excavated volume will be below the regulatory flood elevation, will be in the
same property in which the authorized fill or structure is located, will be accessible to the regulatory flood
water, will not be subject to ponding when not inundated by flood water, and that it shall not be refilled.
c. The excavation shall provide for true storage of floodwater, but shall not be subject to ponding when not
inundated by flood water.
d. The fill or structure shall not obstruct a drainage way leading to the floodplain.
e. The grading around the excavation shall be such that the excavated area is accessible to the regulatory
floodwater.
f. The fill or structure shall be of a material deemed stable enough to remain firm and in place during
periods of flooding and shall include provisions to protect adjacent property owners against any increased
runoff or drainage resulting from its placement.
g. Plans depicting the areas to be excavated and filled shall be submitted prior to the actual start of
construction or any site work; once site work is complete, but before the actual start of construction, the
applicant shall provide to the Floodplain Administrator a certified survey of the excavation and fill sites
demonstrating the fill and excavation comply with this article.
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Appendix Flood Hazard Areas B
B-14
B. Specific Standards: In all Special Flood Hazard Areas, the following provisions are required:
1. In addition to the requirements of Article 5: A., all structures to be located in the Special Flood Hazard Area
shall be protected from flood damage below the flood protection grade. This building protection requirement
applies to the following situations:
a. Construction or placement of any structure having a floor area greater than 400 square feet.
b. Addition or improvement made to any existing structure where the cost of the addition or improvement
equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the value of the existing structure (excluding the value of the
land).
c. Reconstruction or repairs made to a damaged structure where the costs of restoring the structure to its
before damaged condition equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure
(excluding the value of the land) before damage occurred.
d. Installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a site for more than 180 days.
e. Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new manufactured home on an existing site. This
ordinance does not apply to returning the existing manufactured home to the same site it lawfully
occupied before it was removed to avoid flood damage.
2. Residential Structures: New construction or substantial improvement of any residential structure (or
manufactured home) shall have the lowest floor; including basement, at or above the flood protection grade
[two (2) feet above the base flood elevation]. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate
a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in
accordance with the standards of Article 5: B.4.
3. Non-Residential Structures: New construction or substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial,
or non-residential structure (or manufactured home) shall either have the lowest floor, including basement,
elevated to or above the flood protection grade [two (2) feet above the base flood elevation] or be floodproofed
to or above the flood protection grade. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate
a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in
accordance with the standards of Article 5: B.4. Structures located in all “A Zones” may be floodproofed in
lieu of being elevated if done in accordance with the following:
a. A Registered Professional Engineer or Architect shall certify that the structure has been designed so that
below the flood protection grade, the structure and attendant utility facilities are watertight and capable of
resisting the effects of the regulatory flood. The structure design shall take into account flood velocities,
duration, rate of rise, hydrostatic pressures, and impacts from debris or ice. Such certification shall be
provided to the official as set forth in Article 4: C.11.
b. Floodproofing measures shall be operable without human intervention and without an outside source of
electricity.
4. Elevated Structures: New construction or substantial improvements of elevated structures shall have the
lowest floor at or above the flood protection grade. Elevated structures with fully enclosed areas formed by
foundation and other exterior walls below the flood protection grade shall be designed to preclude finished
living space and designed to allow for the entry and exit of floodwaters to automatically equalize hydrostatic
flood forces on exterior walls. Designs must meet the following minimum criteria:
a. Provide a minimum of two (2) openings located in a minimum of two (2) exterior walls (having a total
net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every one (1) square foot of enclosed area.)
b. The bottom of all openings shall be no more than one (1) foot above the exterior grade or the interior
grade immediately beneath each opening, whichever is higher.
c. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they
permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in both directions.
d. Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow for parking for vehicles (garage
door) or limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises (standard
exterior door) or entry to the living area (stairway or elevator).
e. The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms.
f. The interior grade of such enclosed area shall be at an elevation at or higher than the exterior grade.
Appendix
Appendix B: Flood Hazard Areas
Flood Hazard Areas B
B-15
5. Structures Constructed on Fill: A residential or non-residential structure may be constructed on a permanent
land fill in accordance with the following:
a. The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than one (1) foot deep before compacting to ninety-five
percent (95%) of the maximum density obtainable with either the Standard or Modified Proctor Test
method. The results of the test showing compliance shall be retained in the permit file.
b. The fill should extend at least ten (10) feet beyond the foundation of the structure before sloping below
the base flood elevation.
c. The fill shall be protected against erosion and scour during flooding by vegetative cover, riprap, or
bulkheading. If vegetative cover is used, the slopes shall be no steeper than three (3) horizontal to one
(1) vertical.
d. The fill shall not adversely affect the flow of surface drainage from or onto neighboring properties.
e. The top of the lowest floor including basements shall be at or above the flood protection grade.
f. Fill shall be composed of clean granular or earthen material.
6. Standards for Manufactured Homes and Recreational Vehicles: Manufactured homes and recreational
vehicles to be installed or substantially improved on a site for more than 180 days shall meet one (1) of the
following requirements:
a. These requirements apply to all manufactured homes to be placed on a site outside a manufactured home
park or subdivision; in a new manufactured home park or subdivision; in an expansion to an existing
manufactured home park or subdivision; or in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on
which a manufactured home has incurred “substantial damage” as a result of a flood;
i. The manufactured home shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor shall
be at or above the flood protection grade (FPG) and securely anchored to an adequately anchored
foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
ii. Fully enclosed areas formed by foundation and other exterior walls below the flood protection grade
(FPG) shall be designed to preclude finished living space and designed to allow for the entry and exit
of floodwaters to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls as required for
elevated structures in Article 5, Section B.4.
iii. Flexible skirting and rigid skirting not attached to the frame or foundation of a manufactured home
shall not be required to have openings.
b. These requirements apply to all manufactured homes to be placed on a site in an existing manufactured
home park or subdivision that has not been substantially damaged by flood.
i. The manufactured home shall be elevated so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home chassis
is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elevations that are no less than 36 inches in
height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
ii. Fully enclosed areas formed by foundation and other exterior walls below the flood protection grade
(FPG) shall be designed to preclude finished living space and designed to allow for the entry and exit
of floodwaters to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls as required for
elevated structures in Article 5, Section B.4.
iii. Flexible skirting and rigid skirting not attached to the frame of foundation of a manufactured home
shall not be required to have openings.
c. Recreational vehicles placed on a site shall either:
i. Be on site for less than 180 days; and,
ii. Be fully licensed and ready for highway use (defined as being on its wheels or jacking system,
is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no
permanently attached additions); or
iii. Meet the requirements for “manufactured homes” as stated earlier in this section.
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Appendix Flood Hazard Areas B
B-16
7. Accessory Structures: Relief to the elevation or dry floodproofing standards may be granted for accessory
structures. Such structures shall meet the following standards:
a. Shall not be used for human habitation.
b. Shall be constructed of flood resistant materials.
c. Shall be constructed and placed on the lot to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters.
d. Shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation.
e. Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment shall be elevated or floodproofed to or above
the flood protection grade (FPG).
f. Shall be designed to allow for the entry and exit of floodwaters to automatically equalize flood forces on
exterior walls as required for elevated structures in Article 5:B.4.
8. Above Ground Gas or Liquid Storage Tanks: All above ground gas or liquid storage tanks shall be anchored
to prevent flotation or lateral movement.
C. Standards for Subdivision Proposals:
1. All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
2. All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water
systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.
3. All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
4. Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals and other proposed development
(including manufactured home parks and subdivisions), which is greater than the lesser of fifty (50) lots or
five (5) acres.
5. All subdivision proposals shall minimize development in the Special Flood Hazard Area and/or limit density
of development permitted in the Special Flood Hazard Area.
6. All subdivision proposals shall ensure safe access into/out of Special Flood Hazard Areas for pedestrians and
vehicles, especially emergency responders.
D. Critical Facility: Construction of new critical facilities shall be, to the extent possible, located outside the
limits of the Special Flood Hazard Area. Construction of new critical facilities shall be permissible within the
Special Flood Hazard Area if no feasible alternative site is available. Critical facilities constructed within the
Special Flood Hazard Area shall have the lowest floor elevated to or above the flood protection grade at the site.
Floodproofing and sealing measures must be taken to ensure that toxic substances will not be displaced by or
released into floodwaters. Access routes elevated to or above the flood protection grade shall be provided to all
critical facilities to the extent possible.
E. Standards for Identified Floodways:
1. Located within Special Flood Hazard Areas, established in Article 3: B., are areas designated as floodways.
The floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters, which carry debris, potential
projectiles, and has erosion potential. If the site is in an identified floodway, the Floodplain Administrator
shall require the applicant to forward the application, along with all pertinent plans and specifications, to the
Indiana Department of Natural Resources and apply for a permit for construction in a floodway. Under the
provisions of Indiana Code 14-28-1 a permit for construction in a floodway from the Indiana Department
of Natural Resources is required prior to the issuance of a local building permit for any excavation, deposit,
construction, or obstruction activity located in the floodway. This includes land preparation activities such
as filling, grading, clearing and paving etc. undertaken before the actual start of construction of the structure.
However, it does exclude non-substantial additions/improvements to existing (lawful) residences in a
non-boundary river floodway. (Indiana Code 14-28-1-26 allows construction of non-substantial additions/
improvements to residences in a non-boundary river floodway without obtaining a permit for construction in
the floodway from the Indiana Department of Natural Resources. Please note that if fill is needed to elevate
an addition above the existing grade, prior approval [construction in a floodway permit] for the fill is required
from the Indiana Department of Natural Resources.)
2. No action shall be taken by the Floodplain Administrator until a permit (when applicable) has been issued
by the Indiana Department of Natural Resources granting approval for construction in the floodway. Once
a permit for construction in a floodway has been issued by the Indiana Department of Natural Resources,
the Floodplain Administrator may issue the local Floodplain Development Permit, provided the provisions
contained in Article 5 of this ordinance have been met. The Floodplain Development Permit cannot be
less restrictive than the permit for construction in a floodway issued by the Indiana Department of Natural
Resources. However, a community’s more restrictive regulations (if any) shall take precedence.
Appendix
Appendix B: Flood Hazard Areas
Flood Hazard Areas B
B-17
3. No development shall be allowed, which acting alone or in combination with existing or future development,
that will adversely affect the efficiency of, or unduly restrict the capacity of the floodway. This adverse effect
is defined as an increase in the elevation of the regulatory flood of at least fifteen-hundredths (0.15) of a
foot as determined by comparing the regulatory flood elevation under the project condition to that under the
natural or pre-floodway condition as proven with hydraulic analyses.
4. For all projects involving channel modifications or fill (including levees) the City shall submit the data
and request that the Federal Emergency Management Agency revise the regulatory flood data per mapping
standard regulations found at 44 CFR § 65.12.
F. Standards for Identified Fringe: If the site is located in an identified fringe, then the Floodplain Administrator
may issue the local Floodplain Development Permit provided the provisions contained in Article 5 of this ordinance
have been met. The key provision is that the top of the lowest floor of any new or substantially improved
structure shall be at or above the flood protection grade.
G. Standards for Special Flood Hazard Areas Without Established Base Flood Elevation and/or Floodways/Fringes:
1. Drainage area upstream of the site is greater than one (1) square mile:
a. If the site is in an identified floodplain where the limits of the floodway and fringe have not yet been
determined, and the drainage area upstream of the site is greater than one (1) square mile, the Floodplain
Administrator shall require the applicant to forward the application, along with all pertinent plans and
specifications, to the Indiana Department of Natural Resources for review and comment. No action
shall be taken by the Floodplain Administrator until either a permit for construction in a floodway or a
floodplain analysis/regulatory assessment citing the one-percent (1%) annual chance flood elevation and
the recommended Flood Protection Grade has been received from the Indiana Department of Natural
Resources.
b. Once the Floodplain Administrator has received the proper permit for construction in a floodway
or floodplain analysis/regulatory assessment approving the proposed development, a Floodplain
Development Permit may be issued provided the conditions of the Floodplain Development Permit are
not less restrictive than the conditions received from the Indiana Department of Natural Resources and
the provisions contained in Article 5 of this ordinance have been met.
2. Drainage area upstream of the site is less than one square mile:
a. If the site is in an identified floodplain where the limits of the floodway and fringe have not yet been
determined and the drainage area upstream of the site is less than one (1) square mile, the Floodplain
Administrator shall require the applicant to provide an engineering analysis showing the limits of the
floodplain and one-percent (1%) annual chance flood elevation for the site.
b. Upon receipt, the Floodplain Administrator may issue the local Floodplain Development Permit,
provided the provisions contained in Article 5 of this ordinance have been met.
3. The total cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development, shall not adversely affect the efficiency of, or unduly restrict the capacity of the
floodway. This adverse effect is defined as an increase in the elevation of the regulatory flood of at least
fifteen-hundredths (0.15) of a foot as determined by comparing the regulatory flood elevation under the
project condition to that under the natural or pre-floodway condition as proven with hydraulic analyses.
H. Standards for Flood Prone Areas: All development in known flood prone areas not identified on Federal
Emergency Management Agency maps, or where no Federal Emergency Management Agency published map is
available, shall meet applicable standards as required in Article 5.
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Appendix Flood Hazard Areas B
B-18
Article 6: Variance Procedures.
A. Designation of Variance and Appeals Board: The City of Auburn Board of Zoning Appeals as established by the
City Council of the City of Auburn shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from requirements of
this ordinance.
B. Duties of Variance and Appeals Board: The City of Auburn Board of Zoning Appeals shall hear and decide
appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or determination is made by the Floodplain
Administrator in the enforcement or administration of this ordinance. Any person aggrieved by the decision of
the Board of Zoning Appeals may appeal such decision to the court of jurisdiction within DeKalb County.
C. Variance Procedures: In passing upon such applications, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall consider all technical
evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards specified in other sections of this ordinance, and;
1. The danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage.
2. The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on
the individual owner.
3. The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community.
4. The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable.
5. The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion
damage.
6. The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development.
7. The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that
area.
8. The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles.
9. The expected height, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment of transport of the floodwaters at the site.
10. The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance
and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and
bridges.
D. Conditions for Variances:
1. Variances shall only be issued when there is:
2. A showing of good and sufficient cause.
3. A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship.
4. A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights; additional threats to
public safety; extraordinary public expense; the creation of nuisances, fraud, or victimization of the public; or
conflict with existing laws or ordinances.
5. No variance for a residential use within a floodway subject to Article 5: E. or G.1. of this ordinance shall be
granted.
6. Any variance granted in a floodway subject to Article 5: E. or G.1. of this ordinance shall require a permit
from the Indiana Department of Natural Resources.
7. Variances to the Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction of Article 5: B. may be granted only when a new
structure is to be located on a lot of one half (½) acre or less in size, contiguous to and surrounded by lots
with existing structures constructed below the flood protection grade.
8. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering
the flood hazard, to afford relief.
9. Variances may be granted for the reconstruction or restoration of any structure individually listed on the
National Register of Historic Places or the Indiana State Register of Historic Sites and Structures in accordance
with Article 6: F.
10. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between
the base flood elevation and the elevation to which the lowest floor is to be built and stating that the cost of
the flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor
elevation (See Article 6: E).
11. The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain the records of appeal actions and report any variances to the
Federal Emergency Management Agency or the Indiana Department of Natural Resources upon request (See
Article 6: E.).
Appendix
Appendix B: Flood Hazard Areas
Flood Hazard Areas B
B-19
E. Variance Notification: Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice over the signature
of a community official that:
1. The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood elevation will result in increased
premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage; and
2. Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. A copy of the notice shall
be recorded by the Floodplain Administrator in the Office of the County Recorder and shall be recorded in a
manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land.
The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their
issuance.
F. Historic Structures: Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of “historic structures” upon a
determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure’s continued designation
as an “historic structure” and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the
structure.
G. Special Conditions: Upon the consideration of the factors listed in Article 6 and the purposes of this ordinance,
the Board of Zoning Appeals may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to
further the purposes of this ordinance.
Article 7: Severability
H. If any section, clause, sentence, or phrase of this ordinance is held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court
of competent jurisdiction, then said holding shall in no way effect the validity of the remaining portions of this
ordinance.
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Appendix Flood Hazard Areas B
B-20
© 2018, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Appendix
C
Amendment Tracking
City of Auburn, Unified Development Ordinance
Appendix
Ordinance
Number
Plan
Commission/
City Council
Approval Date
Effective
Date
Sections
Affected Pages Changed Brief Description of Changes Date
Codified
Internal
Use
2019-10 6/11/2019
7/16/2019
7/16/2019 2.12, 2.13, 2.18,
2.20, 2.25, 2.27,
2.30, 2.31, 5.15,
5.16, 5.25, 5.39,
5.48, 5.58, 5.65,
5.72, 5.73, 5.74,
5.75, 5.89, 6.01,
9.03, 9.06, 9.07,
9.11,9.12, 11.02,
Land Use Matrix
2-13, 2-14, 2-19,
2-21, 2-26, 2-28,
2-31, 2-32. 5-16,
5-17, 5-27, 5-39,
5-46, 5-52, 5-63,
5-64, 5-74, 5-78,
5-80, 5-83, 5-84,
5-88, 5-89, 5-92,
5-100, 6-2, 9-8,
9-17, 9-18, 9-33,
9-35, 11-14, A-5,
A-10
• Article 2: decrease R2 lot width to 70-feet; add bed and breakfast as
permitted/special exception uses in additional districts; reduces setbacks
between buildings in multiple family districts; increases structure height
in C2; adds offices as permitted/special exception uses in I1
• Article 5: removes roof pitch requirements; specifies "junk" as not
permitted in Environmental and Outdoor Storage; reduces off-street
parking requirements for medical offices; adds zero setback provisions
for certain cases in M1; adds "wall sign" as permitted temporary sign
type in non-residential districts; specifies electronic message signs are
not permitted as wall signs in all districts, but C2; aligns the number
of permitted projecting signs with customer entrances in DC and C1;
reduces the maximum sign area for projecting signs in DC and C1; and
increases districts where non-freestanding antenna are permitted.
• Article 6: removes language regarding incentives
• Article 9: updates terminolgy for consistency; requires .dwg files to be
included in submittals for primary and secondary plat approval
• Article 11: adds definition for front facade
• Appendix A: updates the matrix consistent with Article 2
8/06/2019 AMS
Amendment Tracking C
C-2
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Littering
CHAPTER 92
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 92-2
Littering
CHAPTER 92
Table of Contents
92.01 LITTER IN PUBLIC PLACES
92.02 TRUCK LOADS CAUSING LITTER
92.03 HAULING LOOSE MATERIAL; DEBRIS ON STREET; REMOVAL
92.04 DROPPING LITTER FROM AIRCRAFT
92.05 SWEEPING LITTER INTO GUTTERS PROHIBITED
92.06 MERCHANTS TO KEEP SIDEWALKS FREE OF LITTER
92.07 POSTING NOTICES PROHIBITED
92.08 LITTER ON PRIVATE PROPERTY
92.09 OWNER TO MAINTAIN PREMISES FREE OF LITTER
92.10 VEHICLES PLACED BETWEEN STREET AND SIDEWALK
92.11 LITTER ON VACANT LOTS
92.12 CLEARING OF LITTER FROM OPEN PRIVATE PROPERTY BY CITY
92.99 PENALTY
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 92-3
Littering
CHAPTER 92
92.01 LITTER IN PUBLIC PLACES
No person while a driver or passenger in a vehicle shall throw or deposit litter upon any street or other public
place within the city or upon private property.
92.02 TRUCK LOADS CAUSING LITTER
No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the city unless the vehicle is so constructed
or loaded as to prevent any load, contents, or litter from being blown or deposited upon any street, alley, or
other public place. Nor shall any person drive or move any vehicle or truck within the city, the wheels or tires
of which carry onto or deposit in any street, alley, or other public place, mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter, or
foreign matter of any kind.
92.03 HAULING LOOSE MATERIAL; DEBRIS ON STREET; REMOVAL
Every person hauling or causing to be hauled dirt, sand, gravel, cement, fill dirt, or loose material of any kind
in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, or other public place shall haul it, or cause it to be hauled in vehicles
provided with tight boxes or beds so constructed or loaded as to prevent any of the contents from falling or
being thrown, blown, or deposited upon any street, alley, sidewalk, or other public place. Any materials
which fall from, or which are thrown, blown, or deposited from any vehicle upon any street, alley, sidewalk,
or other public place, shall be removed immediately by the person in charge of the vehicle.
92.04 DROPPING LITTER FROM AIRCRAFT
No person in an aircraft shall throw out, drop, or deposit within the city any litter, handbill, or any other
object.
92.05 SWEEPING LITTER INTO GUTTERS PROHIBITED
No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street, or other public place within the city the
accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or drive- way. Persons
owning or occupying property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of litter.
92.06 MERCHANTS TO KEEP SIDEWALKS FREE OF LITTER
No person owning or occupying a place of business shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street, or other
public place within the city the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private
sidewalk. Persons owning or occupying places of business within the city shall keep the sidewalk in front of
their business premises free of litter.
92.07 POSTING NOTICES PROHIBITED
No person shall post or affix any notice, poster, or other paper or device which is calculated to attract the
attention of the public, to any lamp post, public utility pole, or shade tree, or upon any public structure or
building, except as may be authorized by law.
92.08 LITTER ON PRIVATE PROPERTY
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied private property within the city, whether owned by
that person or not, except that the owner or person in control of private property may maintain authorized
private receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter will be prevented from being carried or
deposited by the elements upon streets, sidewalks, or other public places, or upon any private property.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 92-4
Littering
CHAPTER 92
92.09 OWNER TO MAINTAIN PREMISES FREE OF LITTER
The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all times maintain the premises free of litter
and outside storage. However, this section shall not prohibit the storage of litter in authorized private
receptacles for collection.
92.10 VEHICLES PLACED BETWEEN STREET AND SIDEWALK
No person shall place any finished or unfinished vehicle, equipment, or machine in any parkway or public
area between the paved surface of the street and sidewalk, crosswalk, or private property line for any time
unless it is paved expressly for parking pursuant to prior authority granted by the Board of Public Works and
Safety.
92.11 LITTER ON VACANT LOTS
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private property within the city whether owned
by that person or not.
92.12 CLEARING OF LITTER FROM OPEN PRIVATE PROPERTY BY CITY
Notice to remove
The Chief of Police, Captain, or Sergeant is authorized and empowered to notify the owner of any
open or vacant private property within the city, or the agent of such owner, to properly dispose of
litter located on the owner's property, which is dangerous to public health, safety, or welfare. A
notice shall be sent by registered or certified mail, addressed to the owner at his last known
address, or the notice shall be delivered to the residence of the owner as disclosed by the Auditor's
office in DeKalb County or may be deposited on the premises in a conspicuous place.
Action upon noncompliance
Upon the failure, neglect, or refusal of any owner or agent so notified to properly dispose of litter
dangerous to the public health, safety, or welfare within ten days after receipt of written notice, or
within ten days after the date of the notice in the event it is returned to the city by the U.S. Post
Office Department because of its inability to make delivery, provided the notice was properly
addressed to the last known address of the owner or agent, the work of disposing of the litter shall
be done or caused to be done by the city. All authorized officers, employees, and contracting
agents of the city are expressly authorized to enter into and upon private property for the purpose of
removing and disposing of the litter. No person shall interfere with, hinder, or refuse to allow any
person so authorized to enter into and upon private property.
Cost constitutes lien and placing on tax duplicate
The actual cost to the city for removing and disposing of the litter shall be a lien in favor of the city
against the property, and all such cost, together with any penalty applicable thereto, shall be
collected in the manner hereinafter set forth. In all cases where the full amount due the city is not
paid to the Clerk-Treasurer by the owner of the property within 30 days after the removal and
disposal of the litter, the costs shall become delinquent, and a penalty of 10% of the amount of the
costs shall attach thereto and shall be included in the lien and shall be collectible in addition to the
cost. Whenever a delinquency occurs for nonpayment of the cost, the Clerk-Treasurer shall file in
the County Recorder's office a notice of lien setting forth the name or names of the owner or owners
of each property on which the cost has become delinquent and further setting forth the description
of the property as shown by the records of the County Auditor's office, the amount of the delinquent
cost, and the amount of penalty thereon. The lien shall attach to the property described in the
notice of lien from the time of the recording of the notice of lien. The Clerk-Treasurer is further
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 92-5
Littering
CHAPTER 92
directed to certify to the County Auditor a true copy of the notice of lien, and the amount of the
delinquent cost and penalty thereon shall be charged to the property on the tax duplicate and shall
be collected in the same manner that taxes are collected by law. The notice of lien so filed,
recorded, and certified in accordance with the provisions hereof shall be prima facie evidence that
the provisions of this section or chapter have been fully complied with and that the work has been
done in accordance with the provisions hereof. Such notice shall be full notice to any person that
the amount of the lien constitutes a charge and lien against the property therein described and that
the charge is due and collectible. Upon collection of the cost and penalty, the County Auditor or
other appropriate county official shall pay over to the Clerk-Treasurer of the city the amount of the
cost so collected, together with one-half of the penalty. He shall retain for the use and benefit of the
county the remaining one-half of the penalty as a fee for the collection.
92.99 PENALTY
Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined in an amount not exceeding $300. Each
day the violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense.
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Parks
CHAPTER 93
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 93-2
Parks
CHAPTER 93
Table of Contents
93.01 PARK SUPERINTENDENT
93.02 PARK FUNDS AND EXPENDITURES
93.03 CLEANUP REQUIRED
93.04 PROHIBITED ACTS
93.05 HOURS OF OPERATION
93.06 GROUP ACTIVITY
93.07 PICNIC AREAS AND USE
93.08 OTHER REGULATIONS
93.09 PROBABLE CAUSE CITATIONS
93.10 PROSECUTOR OF CHARGES
93.99 PENALTY
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 93-3
Parks
CHAPTER 93
93.01 PARK SUPERINTENDENT
A Park Superintendent shall be appointed by the Mayor and shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor
pursuant to state statute. The superintendent shall have general management of parks, the laying out,
beautifying, and control of the parks, and the superintendent shall for such purpose be clothed with authority
to maintain order and discipline therein and to enforce compliance with the terms of this chapter.
93.02 PARK FUNDS AND EXPENDITURES
The Common Council may, by ordinance, levy a tax on property, real and personal; or use other
means to raise funds, to defray the expenses of the maintenance and improvement of the public
parks of the city, to be expensed under the direction and supervision of the Common Council by
budgetary process and Park Board. Funds so raised shall pass into a fund called the park fund,
and shall not be diverted to any other use or purpose.
The Common Council is authorized to accept and receive any bequests, donations, or other gifts or
money or property made or given for the benefit of any public park under the supervision or control
of the Board, and to invest or apply the gift in the manner designated by the donor, provided that
the Board is of the opinion that the bequest, donation, or gift would be beneficial to the parks.
93.03 CLEANUP REQUIRED
Each person, group, association, organization, firm, or corporation using the public parks and grounds shall
clean up all debris, extinguish all fires, (when fires are permitted), and leave the premises in good order and
the facilities in a neat and sanitary condition.
93.04 PROHIBITED ACTS
It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person, group, association, organization, firm, or corporation
using the parks to either perform or permit to be performed any of the following acts:
Knowingly or intentionally mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with, displace, or remove any
structures, equipment, facilities, park property, or appurtenances, whether real or personal.
Throw, discharge, or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the waters of any fountain, pond,
lake, stream, or other body of water in or adjacent to any park or any tributary, stream, storm sewer,
or drain flowing into such waters, any substance, matter, or thing, whether liquid or solid, which will
or may result in the pollution of these waters.
Bring in or dump, deposit, or leave any bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper, boxes, cans, dirt,
rubbish, waste, garbage, refuse, or other trash. No such matter or material shall be placed in any
waters in or contiguous to any park, or left anywhere on the grounds thereof, but shall be placed in
the proper receptacles where these are provided. Where receptacles are not provided, all such
matter or material shall be carried away from the park by the person or group responsible for its
presence and properly disposed of elsewhere.
Possess fireworks of any kind, including but not limited to, firecrackers, sparklers, and smoke
bombs.
Carry, possess, or drink any alcoholic beverage in any park or park facility.
Swim, bathe, or wade in any waters or waterways in or adjacent to any park, except in such waters
and at such places as are provided thereof, and in compliance with the regulations as are herein set
forth or may be hereafter adopted.
Harass, intimidate, bother, or disturb any person within any park.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 93-4
Parks
CHAPTER 93
The use of motor vehicles or motorized vehicles of any sort upon any trail system located within or
controlled by the Municipal City of Auburn, Indiana.
All pets and / or animals located in the park system or any trail system owned or controlled by the
City of Auburn, Indiana shall be secured by a leash or tether to prevent the pet and / or animal from
moving freely. All animal excrement must immediately be cleaned up and disposed of in the nearest
trash receptacle by the owner or person in control of the animal.
93.05 HOURS OF OPERATION
The parks shall be opened daily to the public year-round during the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.
of any day. It shall be unlawful for any person, other than city personnel conducting city business
therein, to occupy or be present in a park during any hours in which the park is not open to the
public except by special permission of the Auburn Department of Parks and Recreation or while
engaged in organized recreational activities approved by the Auburn Department of Parks and
Recreation. Any City owned Trail system may only be used between dawn and dusk each day, with
the exception of those areas of the trail that are adjacent to City Streets.
Any section or part of the park may be declared closed to the public by the Park Superintendent or
the Chief of Police at any time and for any interval of time, either temporarily or at regular or stated
intervals.
93.06 GROUP ACTIVITY
Whenever any group, association, organization, firm, or corporation desires to use park facilities for
a particular purpose such as picnics, parties, or theatrical or entertainment performances, a
representative of the group, association, organization, firm, or corporation shall obtain a permit from
the Park Superintendent. The Auburn Department of Parks and Recreation may adopt an
application form to be used by the Park Superintendent for such situations.
The Park Superintendent shall grant the application if it appears that the group, association,
organization, firm, or corporation will not interfere with the general use of the park by the individual
members of the public and if the group, association, organization, firm, or corporation meets all
other conditions contained in the application. The application may contain a requirement for an
indemnity bond to protect the city from any liability of any kind and to protect city property from
damage, and shall contain such a provision if the swimming pool is to be utilized by the group.
93.07 PICNIC AREAS AND USE
No person, group, association, organization, firm, or corporation shall picnic or lunch in a place other than
those designated for that purpose. Attendants shall have the authority to regulate the activities in such
areas when necessary to prevent congestion and to secure the maximum use for the comfort and
convenience of all. Visitors shall comply with any directions given to achieve this end.
93.08 OTHER REGULATIONS
Special activities
It shall be a violation of this chapter to engage in special activities including but not limited to flying
model airplanes, golf practice, ice skating, games, and picnics except at locations specifically
designated for such activities by the Park Board. Areas for such activities may be reserved by
groups for use at specified times. Any special events that are contrary to the provisions of this
chapter may only take place upon a waiver being approved by the Auburn Parks Board and the
Auburn Board of Public Works.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 93-5
Parks
CHAPTER 93
Automobiles
It shall be a violation of this chapter to drive or park any automobile, motorcycle, moped,
snowmobile, ATV, or other motorized vehicle except on a street, driveway, or parking lot in any
park, or to park or leave any such vehicle in any place other than one established for public parking.
Sales
It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person other than employees and officials of this park
district acting on behalf of this district to vend, sell, peddle, or offer for sale any commodity or article
within any park without the consent of the Auburn Department of Parks and Recreation.
Signs
It shall be a violation of this chapter for anyone to paste, glue, tack, or otherwise post any sign,
placard, advertisement, or inscription. No person shall erect or cause to be erected any sign on any
public lands or highways or roads adjacent to a park.
These provisions shall not apply to any properly authorized government official in pursuit of any
official duty.
93.09 PROBABLE CAUSE CITATIONS
Whenever any law enforcement officer compiles information which leads the officer to have probable cause
to believe that a violation of this chapter has occurred, the officer may issue a citation on a form provided by
the Clerk-Treasurer for the offender.
93.10 PROSECUTOR OF CHARGES
The County Prosecutor and/or his duly appointed Deputy or City Attorney or his duly appointed Assistant
City Attorney is authorized to prosecute all charges of violation of this chapter.
93.99 PENALTY
Every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punished by a fine of
not more than $100. Upon a conviction of a third or subsequent offense committed within two years
after the date of the first offense the penalty shall be a fine of not more than $1,000.
1. Any person who receives a citation under this chapter shall have the privilege of paying a forfeit
to the Clerk-Treasurer of the city. Said forfeit shall be $25 if paid within ten days of the citation.
2. Any person who violates this chapter and fails to pay the forfeit shall be subject to the penalty
provision of division (A) above.
The forfeit and/or fine may be paid to the Clerk-Treasurer through the Violations Bureau.
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Weeds, Trees, and
Shrubbery
CHAPTER 94
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 94-2
Weeds, Trees, and Shrubbery
CHAPTER 94
Table of Contents
WEEDS AND OTHER VEGETATION
94.01 PURPOSE
94.02 STATUTORY AUTHORITY
94.03 APPLICATION.
94.04 DEFINITIONS
94.05 PUBLIC NUISANCE
94.06 EXEMPTIONS
94.07 DUTIES OF THE BOARD OF PUBLIC WORKS AND SAFETY
94.08 VIOLATIONS
94.09 DETERMINATION OF VIOLATION
94.091 APPEAL
TREES AND SHRUBBERY
94.10 DEFINITIONS
94.11 STREET TREE SPECIES TO BE PLANTED
94.12 SPACING
94.13 DISTANCE FROM CURBS AND SIDEWALKS
94.14 DISTANCE FROM STREET CORNERS AND FIREPLUGS
94.15 UTILITIES
94.16 PUBLIC TREE CARE
94.17 TREE TOPPING
94.18 PRUNING, CORNER CLEARANCE
94.19 DEAD OR DISEASED TREE REMOVAL ON PRIVATE PROPERTY
94.20 REMOVAL OF STUMPS
94.21 INTERFERENCE WITH CITY TREE COMMISSION
94.99 PENALTY
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 94-3
Weeds, Trees, and Shrubbery
CHAPTER 94
WEEDS AND OTHER VEGETATION
94.01 PURPOSE
The purpose of this subchapter is to promote public health, safety and welfare by requiring owners of real
property within the city to control the growth of weeds and other rank vegetation.
94.02 STATUTORY AUTHORITY
Indiana Code 36-7-10.1 et seq. is hereby adopted by the city as authority for the removal of weeds and rank
vegetation.
94.03 APPLICATION.
This subchapter applies to all real property within the city.
94.04 DEFINITIONS
• OWNER
Any one or more of the following:
1. The fee simple owner or owners of a parcel of real estate including the life tenant or tenants if
any;
2. The record owner or owners as reflected by the most current records in the DeKalb County
Auditor's office; or
3. The purchaser or purchasers of such real estate under any contract for conditional sale thereof.
• PRIVATE PROPERTY
All real estate within the city, except governmental property.
• GOVERNMENTAL PROPERTY
Real estate within the city which is owned, leased, controlled, or occupied by the United States, the
State of Indiana, or any political subdivision thereof.
• WEEDS AND VEGETATION
1. Any weeds, including but not limited to, jimson, burdock, thistle, cocklebur, ragweed, poison ivy,
poison sumac, poison oak, or other poisonous plant or other weeds of a like kind, or plants
detrimental to health.
2. Grass, plants, or other rank vegetation, allowed to grow to a height exceeding nine inches, other
than trees, bushes, flowers, other ornamental plants, or agricultural plants.
3. Any accumulation of dead weeds, grass or brush on private or governmental property that has
been allowed to become a health or safety hazard.
94.05 PUBLIC NUISANCE
An owner permitting weeds and/or rank vegetation to grow or remain on his/her property in violation of this
subchapter are hereby declared to be a public nuisance and shall be unlawful.
94.06 EXEMPTIONS
The following areas shall not be governed by this subchapter:
Unplatted areas;
Areas for agriculture;
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 94-4
Weeds, Trees, and Shrubbery
CHAPTER 94
Areas defined as wetland districts in the Auburn Zoning Code; and
Interior fields, wooded lots, the banks of streams and open drains, areas maintained in their natural
state in public parks and outdoor nature laboratories maintained by schools.
94.07 DUTIES OF THE BOARD OF PUBLIC WORKS AND SAFETY
The Board of Public Works and Safety is authorized and empowered to enforce this subchapter within the
city.
94.08 VIOLATIONS
A violation of this subchapter shall be construed as willful or negligent failure to abide by the rules and
regulations contained within this subchapter.
94.09 DETERMINATION OF VIOLATION
Complaint
Violations under this subchapter shall be cited by any department of the city which receives a complaint
regarding public nuisance on any property within the city, and they shall forward that complaint to the
Police Department which, after investigation shall report to the Board of Public Works and Safety.
Notice to abate
When a report addresses private property, the Police Department, through the Board of Public Works
and Safety, shall cause a written notice to abate to be served upon the owner of the property in
question, granting that owner a minimum of ten calendar days in which to remove the environmental
nuisance. This notice shall be served by a law enforcement officer. Should the law enforcement officer
be unable to serve notice upon the property owner, then notice shall be served by the Police
Department on the owner by certified mail, return receipt requested. Should the certified letter not be
accepted by the property owner, a "notice" placard shall be conspicuously posted on the subject
property. The Police Department, after posting a "notice" placard to abate, shall serve to the owner of
the subject property a copy of the notice by regular first class United States mail, postage prepaid, any
failure to give such written notice shall not constitute a defense to any action to enforce the provisions of
this subchapter.
1. Notices
All Notices shall contain the following information:
a. The address of the property;
b. The date of the notice;
c. The address and telephone number of the Board of Public Works and Safety; and,
d. A warning that if the environmental public nuisance is not removed within ten calendar days
after notice, the city will abate the nuisance and seek recovery of the actual costs.
Inspection
Following the expiration of the notice to abate, a police officer shall visually inspect the property to
determine whether a public nuisance exists. If a public nuisance exists, action shall be taken to abate
that nuisance in accordance with this subchapter.
Governmental property
Where a complaint addresses governmental property, and it is determined by the Police Department
that a violation exists and threatens the health and safety of the people of the city, the Board of Public
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 94-5
Weeds, Trees, and Shrubbery
CHAPTER 94
Works and Safety may notify the governmental unit which owns the property, and request said unit to
abate the public nuisance.
94.091 APPEAL
Any person accused of a violation shall have the opportunity to appeal said accusation to the Board of
Public Works and Safety at a regularly scheduled meeting. The appeal must be presented to the
Clerk-Treasurer in writing at least five days prior to the meeting at which the appeal is requested. The
appealing party must appear in person or by council to present his/her case. If not present the question will
be decided in his/her absence. Notwithstanding the appealing party's right of future appeal to any court, the
determination of the Board of Public and Works shall be final. Enforcement shall abate during the Appeal
Procedure to the Board of Public Works and Safety.
TREES AND SHRUBBERY
94.10 DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.
• STREET TREES
Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation on land lying between property lines on either
side of all streets, avenues or ways within the city.
• PARK TREES
Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation in public parks having individual names and all
areas owned by the city, or to which the public has free access to as a park.
94.11 STREET TREE SPECIES TO BE PLANTED
A current list of recommended trees, obtained from DeKalb County Extension Office, constitutes the official
street tree species for the city. No species other than those included in this current list may be planted as
street trees without written permission of the City Tree Commission.
94.12 SPACING
The spacing of street trees will be in accordance with the three species size classes as designated in 94.11
of this subchapter, and no trees may be planted closer together than the following: Small trees at maturity,
30 feet; medium trees at maturity, 40 feet; and large trees at maturity, 50 feet; except in special plantings
designed or approved by a landscape architect.
94.13 DISTANCE FROM CURBS AND SIDEWALKS
The distance trees may be planted from curbs or curb lines and sidewalks will be in accordance with the
three species size classes listed in ' 94.12 of this subchapter, and no trees may be planted closer to any
curb or sidewalk than the following: Small trees, two feet; medium trees, three feet; and large trees, four feet.
94.14 DISTANCE FROM STREET CORNERS AND FIREPLUGS
No street tree shall be planted closer than 35 feet from any street corner, measured from the point of the
nearest intersecting curbs or curblines. No street tree shall be planted closer than ten feet from any fire
hydrant.
94.15 UTILITIES
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 94-6
Weeds, Trees, and Shrubbery
CHAPTER 94
No street trees other than those species listed as small trees in ' 94.11 of this subchapter may be planted
under or within ten lateral feet of any overhead utility wire, or over or within five lateral feet of any
underground water line, sewer line, transmission line or other utility.
94.16 PUBLIC TREE CARE
The city shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove trees, plants and shrubs within
the lines of all streets, alleys, avenues, lanes, squares and public grounds, as may be necessary to
insure public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of the public grounds.
The City Tree Commission may remove or cause or order to be removed any tree or part thereof
which is in an unsafe condition or which by reason of its nature is injurious to sewers, electric power
lines, gas lines, water lines, or other public improvements, or is infested with any injurious fungus,
insect or other pest. This section does not prohibit the planting of street trees by adjacent property
owners providing that the selection and location of the trees is in accordance with 94.11 through
94.15.
94.17 TREE TOPPING
It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person, firm, or city department to top any street tree, park
tree, or any other tree on public property. Topping is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs
larger than three inches in diameter within the tree's crown to such a degree so as to remove the normal
canopy and disfigure the tree. Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes, or certain trees under
utility wires or other obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical may be exempted from this
section at the determination of the City Electric Department and Street Department.
94.18 PRUNING, CORNER CLEARANCE
The city shall be responsible for any tree overhanging any street or right-of-way within the city and shall
prune the branches so that the branches shall not obstruct the light from any street lamp or obstruct the view
of any street intersection and so that there shall be a clear space of eight feet above the surface of the street
or sidewalk. The city shall remove all dead, diseased or dangerous trees, or broken or decayed limbs which
constitute a menace to the safety of the public. The city shall have the right to prune any trees or shrubs on
private property when it interferes with the proper spread of light along the street from a street light or
interferes with the visibility of any traffic-control device or sign.
94.19 DEAD OR DISEASED TREE REMOVAL ON PRIVATE PROPERTY
The city shall have the right to cause the removal of any dead or diseased trees on private property within
the city, when the trees constitute a hazard to life and property, or harbor insects or disease which
constitutes a potential threat to other trees within the city. The City Tree Commission will notify in writing the
owners of the trees. Removal shall be done by the owners at their own expense within 60 days after the
date of service of notice. In the event of failure of the owners to comply with the provision, the city shall have
the authority to remove the trees and charge the cost of removal on the owner's property tax notice.
94.20 REMOVAL OF STUMPS
All stumps from street and park trees shall be removed below the surface of the ground so that the top of the
stump shall not project above the surface of the ground.
94.21 INTERFERENCE WITH CITY TREE COMMISSION
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 94-7
Weeds, Trees, and Shrubbery
CHAPTER 94
It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with the City Tree Commission, or any of its
agents, while engaging in and about the planting, cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying or removing of any
street trees, park trees, or trees on private grounds, as authorized in this subchapter.
94.99 PENALTY
Any person violating any provision of 94.10 through 94.21 shall be, upon conviction or a plea of
guilty, subject to a fine not to exceed $50.
1. Any person or persons found to be in violation of 94.01 through 94.091 shall be fined:
a. Twenty-five dollars for the first violation;
b. Thirty-five dollars for the second violation within five years of the first violation;
c. Forty-five dollars for the third violation within five years of the second violation;
d. Fifty dollars for the fourth violation within five years of the third violation;
e. Further, any person or persons found to be in violation of ' 94.01 through ‘ 94.091 shall pay
costs of removal of the public nuisance, administrative fees (not to exceed $100), legal fees,
and all recording fees associated with the collection of the outstanding balance. Such
penalties and costs shall be paid to the Clerk-Treasurer of the city within 30 days after
receipt of a statement to the property owner delivered by first-class mail.
2. Failure to pay
If the owner fails to pay the amount within 30 days after receiving a statement, a copy of all costs
shall be filed by the Clerk-Treasurer of the city in the Office of the Auditor of DeKalb County for the
purpose of placing the amount claimed on the tax duplicate against the property, so that the amount
claimed can be collected as taxes are collected, subject to the limitations above.
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Streets and Sidewalks
CHAPTER 95
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 95-2
Streets and Sidewalks
CHAPTER 95
Table of Contents
REGULATIONS GOVERNING STREETS
95.01 CERTAIN VEHICLES PROHIBITED ON STREETS
95.02 ACTS INJURIOUS TO STREETS
95.03 MOVING STRUCTURES
95.04 GRADING OF PARKINGS
95.05 OIL AND GAS TORCHES ON STREETS REPEALED, ORD. 2010-03, PASSED 2-16-10
95.10 OBSTRUCTION OF SIDEWALKS
95.11 AWNINGS REPEALED
95.12 ACCUMULATION OF ICE AND SNOW ON SIDEWALKS
95.13 REPAIR AND MAINTENANCE OF SIDEWALKS
95.14 MINIMUM DESIGN STANDARDS FOR SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION
ORGANIZATION OF STREETS
95.20 ERECTION OF STREET SIGNS AND SYSTEM OF NUMBERING HOUSES
95.21 MAJOR STREET OR HIGHWAY PLAN AND DRAWING
95.22 DESIGNATION OF THOROUGHFARES
95.24 RESIDENTIAL STREETS
95.25 FEEDER STREETS
95.26 ARTERIAL STREETS
95.27 DEVELOPMENT-THOROUGHFARE PLAN
EXCAVATIONS
95.35 EXCAVATIONS
REGULATIONS GOVERNING PORTLAND CEMENT
95.45 BOARD OF PUBLIC WORKS TO ADOPT SPECIFICATIONS
95.46 ADOPTION OF SPECIFICATIONS
95.47 DESCRIPTION
95.48 MATERIALS
95.49 REQUIREMENTS FOR CONCRETE
95.50 AGGREGATE CONTENT
95.51 CONSISTENCY OF CONCRETE
95.52 CONSTRUCTION METHODS
95.53 FORMS
95.54 PLACING CONCRETE
95.55 CONSOLIDATION AND STRIKE-OFF
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 95-3
Streets and Sidewalks
CHAPTER 95
95.56 FINISHING
95.57 CURING
95.58 SIDEWALK AND CURB AND GUTTER JOINTS
95.59 SEALING JOINTS
95.60 OPENING TO TRAFFIC
STREET ADDRESS NUMBERS
95.70 DEFINITIONS
95.71 MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS
95.72 ENFORCEMENT
95.99 PENALTY
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 95-4
Streets and Sidewalks
CHAPTER 95
REGULATIONS GOVERNING STREETS
95.01 CERTAIN VEHICLES PROHIBITED ON STREETS
No vehicle of any description with felloes and tires less than three inches in width where the vehicle
with its burden weighs more than 3,000 pounds, shall be drawn or pass over or along any paved
street, alley, or thoroughfare. No vehicle of any description whose weight with its burden exceeds
6,000 pounds shall be drawn or pass over or along any paved street, alley, or thoroughfare unless
the felloes and tires of the vehicle are four inches or more in width.
No person shall propel, draw, or cause to be propelled or drawn any traction engine over or along
any paved street of the city. However, a traction engine may cross paved streets where necessary,
but in these cases the person in charge shall securely muffle the wheels so that no injury results to
the paving.
No person shall propel or cause to be propelled or hauled any engine, engine and boiler, or other
vehicle over or along any paved street of the city unless the tires of the wheels are smooth.
95.02 ACTS INJURIOUS TO STREETS
No person shall burn or set fire to leaves, boxes, rubbish, or other combustible material upon any
street paved with asphalt within the city.
No person shall place upon or permit to escape, upon any street paved with asphalt within the city,
any kerosene, petroleum, gasoline, or other oil or substance harmful to the pavement of the street.
No person shall damage, mutilate, injure, destroy, or attempt to damage, mutilate, injure, or destroy
any paved street in the city.
95.03 MOVING STRUCTURES
Except for a vehicle licensed for operation on the highways of the State of Indiana, or transportation
of a State of Indiana certified manufactured, modular or mobile building, a relocation permit shall be
obtained before moving or relocating any structure that requires movement over or across any
public street or alley, or other public property owned by the city, where such move or relocation
satisfies at least one of the following conditions:
1. Any part of the structure is 15 feet or more above the ground when it is ready to be moved; or
2. The structure covers a horizontal area greater than 120 square feet.
The person(s) or company who will actually perform the work shall submit an application for
relocation of a structure for each structure to be relocated. The application shall be submitted to the
administrator of the Department of Building, Planning and Development, on forms provided by the
Department, setting forth the details of the proposed relocation, including but not limited to:
1. Height, width, length and weight of the structure;
2. The type of structure;
3. The beginning and end points of the move;
4. The route along which it is intended to be moved;
5. The estimated start date and length of time required to move the structure;
6. The method and means by which it is to be moved;
7. The name(s) of the company or person(s) who will actually perform the work; and
8. Any other information required by the administrator.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 95-5
Streets and Sidewalks
CHAPTER 95
The person(s) or company who will actually perform the work shall, not less than 48 hours before
the time scheduled for the work to begin, notify the following agencies of the date, time, route and
any other details of the proposed relocation:
1. The city utility, street and engineering departments, and police and fire dispatch;
2. The Indiana Underground Plant Protection Service or its successor organization;
3. The DeKalb Central Community Schools Bus Management Office; and
4. The DeKalb County Highway and Sheriff Departments, the Indiana Department of
Transportation and Indiana State Police, CSX Transportation and the City of Auburn Port
Authority, as required if any of the roads or lines operated, regulated and/or maintained by
these organizations are crossed.
The person(s) or company who will actually perform the work shall submit with each permit
application for each structure to be relocated, one of the following forms of surety:
1. A corporate surety bond issued by an insurance company licensed to bond in the State of
Indiana; or
2. An irrevocable letter of credit issued by an insured financial institution; and which in either form
complies with the following:
a. Is in the amount of $1,000, payable to the city Board of Public Works and Safety;
b. Is valid for a term of not less than the time required to complete the work; and
c. Provides either the address of the work and description of the work to be done, or the
statement "any and all purposes."
Any request for a reduction in the face value, or for early release, or for any other changes in or to a
bond or letter of credit, shall require approval of the city's Board of Public Works and Safety.
The person(s) or company who will actually perform the work shall submit with each permit
application, proof of insurance coverage for the person(s) who will actually perform the work, for not
less than $100,000 property damage and $50,000 personal injury.
The administrator of the Department of Building, Planning and Development shall issue the
relocation permit not more than 10 days following receipt of the application, subject to the following:
1. The city's Electric Superintendent shall have approved the plan for temporary or permanent
relocation of electric service wires, poles and related devices, as necessary, and shall have
signed the application;
2. The city's Water Superintendent shall have approved the plan for temporary or permanent
relocation of fire hydrants and related devices, as necessary, and shall have signed the
application;
3. The city's Police Chief shall have approved the plan for route safety and provision of police
escort, as necessary, and shall have signed the application;
4. The city's Street Superintendent shall have approved the plan for adequacy of the city's streets
and related infrastructure to accommodate the weight and bulk of the structure to be relocated,
and shall have signed the application;
5. Certification by the applicant that the conditions stated herein and on the application have been
satisfied;
6. Pre-payment by the applicant of a permit fee based on the following schedule:
a. Residential accessory structure: $25
b. Residential primary structure: $50
c. Commercial/Industrial structure: $100; and
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 95-6
Streets and Sidewalks
CHAPTER 95
7. Pre-payment of all special assessments levied by the various departments of the city as
compensation for the estimated cost to the city of relocating, modifying or removing utility lines,
pipes, curbs and gutters, streets, sidewalks, and other public infrastructure or structures owned
and/or maintained by the city, which must be temporarily or permanently relocated, or may be or
have been damaged or destroyed, as a result of the move or relocation; and any other actions
by the city required to facilitate the relocation of the structure. Actual assessments will be
determined following completion of the project, and the owner shall be responsible for paying
any additional assessments.
A relocation permit shall be valid for a period not to exceed 60 days.
Any appeal from the terms of this section shall be made to the Board of Public Works and Safety of
the city.
95.04 GRADING OF PARKINGS
All parkings along the line of paved streets in the city shall be graded down to the curb from the sidewalk in
a uniform manner consistent with the location, and as far as possible with the same grade, so that water will
run away from the sidewalks toward the street. The grading shall in all cases be subject to the inspection
and control of the City Director of Engineering and Superintendent of Streets, and shall be made, graded, or
changed to their satisfaction.
95.05 OIL AND GAS TORCHES ON STREETS REPEALED, ORD. 2010-03, PASSED 2-16-10
95.10 OBSTRUCTION OF SIDEWALKS
No person shall place on the sidewalks within the city any box, barrel, board, sign, or article for display, or
other things which would in any way be an obstruction to the free use of the entire width of the sidewalk,
except where goods are received by mer- chants. A period of six hours shall be allowed for the removal of
such goods and the boxes, barrels, or crates in which the goods are received, provided a sufficient walkway
for pedestrians is maintained during these periods.
95.11 AWNINGS REPEALED
(Ord. 2010-03, passed 2-16-10)
95.12 ACCUMULATION OF ICE AND SNOW ON SIDEWALKS
No owner or occupant of any premises which borders any street within the corporate limits of the
city shall fail to clear the sidewalk of all snow and ice within 12 hours after a snowfall. Any person
who neglects or refuses to do so shall pay the expense for having it removed and cleared away.
It shall be the duty of any police officer to clear away all snow and ice accumulated on the
sidewalks of the city or cause it to be cleared away within 12 hours after the fall of the snow unless
the owner or occupant of the property adjoining the street has cleared it away prior to that time.
The expense of clearing away the snow and ice shall be charged to the owner of the adjoining lot or
lots and shall be a lien on the property.
95.13 REPAIR AND MAINTENANCE OF SIDEWALKS
All property owners abutting the public ways of the city shall keep their respective sidewalks, curbs,
or gutters in repair, in safe condition, and in compliance with this code.
Any property owner who fails to repair or replace his sidewalks, curbs, or gutters abutting the public
ways of the city may be notified by the Street Commissioner, Building Commissioner, or other
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 95-7
Streets and Sidewalks
CHAPTER 95
officers designated by the Board of Public Works and Safety to inspect sidewalks. If, after 30 days
from posting by United States mail with proper postage affixed to a notice to the owner as determined
by the tax duplicates in the office of the Auditor of DeKalb County, the property owner fails to
make the necessary repairs, the city may do so and charge the property owner.
Upon failure of the owner to pay the charge for repair or replacement of sidewalks, curbs, or gutters
levied by the city within ten days after completion of the work, the Clerk-Treasurer shall file in the
office of the Recorder of DeKalb County for recordation in the miscellaneous records a notice that
the city claims a lien upon the real estate upon which work was done. From and after the filing of
the notice, the charge shall be a lien upon the real estate and may be enforced by foreclosure in the
same manner in which mechanic's and materialman's liens are enforced under the laws of the state.
Foreclosure proceedings shall be at the cost of the defendant owner or owners and with attorney
fees.
Any property owner who repairs or replaces his or her sidewalks, curbs, or gutters which abut the
public ways of the city so as to restore them to a safe condition in compliance with this code and
pursuant to a notice according to the provisions of this section may make the necessary repairs and
replacements in accordance with the standards and specifications in this chapter, and subject to the
permit requirements under 95.35 of this code. In the alternative the sidewalks, curbs, or gutters
may be replaced through the general improvement fund of the city.
In determining that sidewalks, curbs, or gutters are in unsafe condition, the inspecting and
enforcement officer shall consider upon inspection, including but not limited to, the following
problems: high joints, weathered surface, chipped surface, scaled surface, poor alignment, and
poor grade.
95.14 MINIMUM DESIGN STANDARDS FOR SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION
The minimum design standards for sidewalk construction that are or will be dedicated as public
sidewalks in the city shall be:
1. Cement types: Class A concrete, 4,000 psi in 28 days.
2. Depth of concrete: 4 inches; except where crossing driveways, 6 inches.
3. Surface width: 4-5 feet minimum, or match existing width where less than 4-5 feet.
4. Expansion joints: ½ inch thick pre-formed expansion joint material shall be installed in
expansion joints in the following locations:
a. Where new sidewalk abuts an existing sidewalk, a driveway or a curb;
b. Every 50 feet in sidewalks that are 100 feet or more in length; and
c. In the middle of a sidewalk that is less than 100 feet long.
5. Scored construction joints: ¾ inch deep, every 5 feet.
6. Cross slope: Not more than 2%, with the lowest part of the sidewalk above the adjacent curb.
7. Surface finish: Light broom finish applied from side-to-side of the sidewalk.
8. Setback from property lines: Where possible, sidewalks shall be installed one foot away from
the property line.
9. ADA compliance: All construction shall be in compliance with the requirements of the Americans
with Disabilities Act.
ORGANIZATION OF STREETS
95.20 ERECTION OF STREET SIGNS AND SYSTEM OF NUMBERING HOUSES
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 95-8
Streets and Sidewalks
CHAPTER 95
At diagonal corners of each street intersection in the city there shall be erected and maintained
suitable signs of metal, wood, or other suitable material upon which shall be placed in plain and
readable letters the names of the street intersections at these corners. The signs shall be placed
either upon the buildings located at the corner or upon a post or pole set for this purpose. Each
sign shall be placed so as to be easily distinguishable to one passing by.
A uniform system of numbering of the houses and premises in the city is established, and the
provisions thereof shall be carried out under the direction of the City Building Commissioner.
For the purpose of numbering the houses and premises upon the streets, the City of Auburn
Address Committee shall make recommendations for address numbers.
All street address numbers shall meet the requirements set forth in 95.70 through 95.72.
95.21 MAJOR STREET OR HIGHWAY PLAN AND DRAWING
The major street or highway plan of the city consists of a map entitled "City of Auburn, Indiana,
Thoroughfare Development Plan", as amended, which shows the locations of existing and proposed
thoroughfares within the jurisdiction of the Auburn Plan Commission. The major street or highway plan is
declared to be a part of this chapter, and notations, references, indications, and other details shown therein
are as much a part of this chapter as if they were fully described.
95.22 DESIGNATION OF THOROUGHFARES
The major streets and highways comprising the major street or highway plan are classified on the basis of
width and type in accordance with their proposed function as arterial, feeder, and residential streets, as
shown in the major street or highway plan.
(Ordinance 2019-23 passed 12/03/2019)
95.24 RESIDENTIAL STREETS
Residential streets shall be those streets in the city other than those designated on the thoroughfare
map as arterial streets and feeder streets.
The minimum right-of-way width for residential streets shall be 60 feet.
The right-of-way for residential streets shall be provided by the development of any land within the
planning jurisdiction of the Auburn Plan Commission, and no subdivision shall be approved unless it
contains residential streets abutting upon each lot or parcel of land therein except the lots or parcels
which abut upon the feeder street.
All improvements of residential streets within any development or necessitated by it shall be
provided by the developer in accordance with the specifications for improvement adopted by the
Board of Works. The improvements shall be provided prior to the issuance of any use permit for any
property abutting upon the residential street.
Where a development borders on a residential street, the developer shall be required to furnish and
improve only one-half thereof, but no use permit for the property proposed to be developed shall be
issued before the residential street is fully improved, except by a special use permit issued in
accordance with the procedures provided by the zoning code of the city.
Divided pavements may be permitted only by a special use permit issued in accordance with the
procedures provided by the zoning code of the city, and then only if the sub-divider provides or
arranges for the construction of both pavements and for the care of the area between the
pavements.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 95-9
Streets and Sidewalks
CHAPTER 95
95.25 FEEDER STREETS
The minimum right-of-way width for feeder streets shall be 66 feet.
The right-of-way for feeder streets shall be provided by the developer of any land within the
planning jurisdiction of the Auburn Plan Commission, and no subdivision shall be approved unless it
contains or has access to a feeder street or streets adequate to accommodate the traffic generated
by the development.
The right-of-way of all feeder streets within the development or necessitated by the development
shall be provided by the developer.
All improvements of feeder streets within any development or necessitated by it shall be provided
by the developer in accordance with the specifications for improvement adopted by the Board of
Works, and these improvements shall be provided prior to the issuance of any use permit for the
development.
To the extent feasible, developments shall be designed to avoid the entry of private drives into
feeder streets. Access by private drives into feeder streets shall be permitted only by a special use
permit issued under provisions of the zoning code of the city.
Where a development borders on a feeder street, the developer shall be required to furnish and
improve only one-half thereof, but no use permit for the property proposed to be developed shall be
issued before the feeder street is fully improved, except by a special use permit issued in
accordance with the procedures provided by the zoning code of the city.
95.26 ARTERIAL STREETS
The minimum right-of-way width shall be 80 feet.
Where the arterial street, or a part thereof, is wholly or substantially required to accommodate the
traffic generated by the development of land for residential, commercial, or industrial purposes, the
developer shall provide the right-of-way therefore. Otherwise, the right-of-way shall be provided by
the city.
Improvement of arterial streets shall be accomplished by the city when and if feasible.
No access shall be permitted to arterial streets from residential areas at intervals of less than 330
feet. Access thereto from an access devoted to other purposes shall be permitted only by a special
use permit granted under provisions of the zoning code of the city.
Future residential developments abutting on arterial streets shall be designed to prevent private
drives from entering arterial streets.
95.27 DEVELOPMENT-THOROUGHFARE PLAN
Designation
This section shall be known as the develop-ment-thoroughfare plan, a part of the master plan of the city.
The development plan - guide for future development
After the adoption of the development-thoroughfare plan, the Common Council, the Board of County
Commissioners of DeKalb County, or any other governing body or official agency within the territorial
jurisdiction of the City Plan Commission shall be guided by and give consideration to the general policy
and pattern of development set out in the development-thoroughfare plan: in the authorization,
construction, alteration, or abandonment of public highways and public structures; in the approval of
land subdivisions and the street patterns involved in land subdivisions; in the determination of sites for
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 95-10
Streets and Sidewalks
CHAPTER 95
schools, parks and recreational facilities, shopping centers, and industrial districts and the acquisition of
land therefore; and in other matters affecting the development of the territorial jurisdiction area of the
City Plan Commission.
Maps
1. A map entitled "Auburn, Indiana,Thoroughfare-Development Plan", which shows the land use
plan and the location of major thoroughfares and certain minor streets within the city limits.
2. A map entitled "Auburn, Indiana, Jurisdictional Area Thoroughfare-Development Plan", which
indicates the land use plan and the location of major thoroughfares located beyond the city.
Standards, policies, and directives
1. Right-of-way widths
The minimum right-of-way widths for major streets and secondary streets shall be:
a. Major streets Minimum of 80 feet
b. Secondary streets Minimum of 66 feet
c. Minor streets Minimum of 60 feet
2. Roadway widths (face to face of curbs).
a. Major streets Minimum of 36 feet
b. Secondary streets Minimum of 34 feet
c. Minor streets Minimum of 30 feet
3. Opening or widening of major streets
Whenever a major street designated on the plan is to be platted as part of a subdivision of land, the
right-of-way width shall conform to the policies and specified designations and indications in the
development-thoroughfare plan and the subdivision control ordinance of the city. However, where a
major street borders a tract of land to be subdivided, the owner of the land shall be required to plat
only one-half of the right-of-way width designated for the major street, measured at 90 degrees to
the center line thereof.
4. Location of major streets
Wherever the locations of major streets are indicated as following existing roads or streets, section
or half-section lines, or other established property lines, they shall conform to these locations. Major
streets which follow irregular alignments, or indicate revised alignments, or are not referenced to
established lines, shall follow in a general manner the alignment shown on the maps which
accompany the development-thoroughfare plan. They shall be subject to detailed surveys of their
alignments, which may be made by the City Engineer, the City Plan Commission or other public
agencies, or by the owners of the land to be subdivided. The surveys shall be subject to the
approval of the City Plan Commission prior to the acquisition of land or the filing of subdivision plans
affecting the major streets.
5. Consideration by public agencies
The Common Council shall be guided by and give consideration to the general policy and pattern of
development set out in the development-thoroughfare plan in the authorization, construction,
alteration, or abandonment of public highways and structures.
6. Issuance of permits
In the issuance of permits authorized by the Building Commissioner of the city for the erection or
alteration of structures and other improvements, the proposed street and thoroughfare rights-of-way
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 95-11
Streets and Sidewalks
CHAPTER 95
as set forth by this plan shall be protected and no permits shall be issued if the work proposed
thereunder would encroach upon the existing or proposed sites or existing or proposed rights-of-way
indicated on the development-thoroughfare plan.
7. Dead-end streets
The provisions of (1) and (2) above shall not apply to dead-end streets. No dead-end street shall be
platted, located, dedicated, or opened unless the City Plan Commission, with the approval of the
Board of Works of the city, shall determine the length, width, and turning facilities thereof,
considering the probable volume of traffic, the area to be served, the nature of the expected traffic,
the location of water mains, sewers, and other utilities, and the manner in which the streets will
affect the public health, safety, convenience, comfort, and general welfare of the community. The
Commission shall have the power to disapprove the establishment of the dead-end street if the
considerations require the continuation of the street to serve other property or through traffic.
Continuing authority of City Plan Commission
The City Plan Commission may:
1. Determine lines for new, extended, widened, or narrowed thoroughfares in any portion of the
city.
2. Certify to the Common Council the amended or additional plan under the same procedures as
established for the certification and approval of the original development-thoroughfare plan.
Amendments
In addition, amendments may be initiated as follows:
1. The Common Council may direct the City Plan Commission to prepare an amendment as
desired, and submit it to public hearing within 60 days after formal written request by the
Common Council.
2. The owners of 50 percent or more of the area of property abutting upon a major street may also
petition the City Plan Commission requesting an amendment to the Development- Thoroughfare
Plan.
A copy of the development-thoroughfare plan including maps shall be kept on file in the office of the
Clerk-Treasurer and shall be subject to public examination during the regular office hours of the
Clerk-Treasurer.
EXCAVATIONS
95.35 EXCAVATIONS
Permit required
1. Subject to the exemptions that follow, an excavation permit issued by the city shall be required
before any person, organization, agency or company ("party") undertakes any boring, drilling,
opening, cutting, excavating or earth-moving operations ("work") on or under property owned by
the city for any of the following purposes:
a. The installation, repair or replacement of pipes, wires, cables, lines, conduit, utility poles not
exceeding 50 feet in height, curbs and gutters, sidewalks, driveways, or pavement
("improvements");
b. Whenever the city's Street Superintendent or Engineer determines that work in progress or
proposed work is such that it compromises or may compromise public health, safety or
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 95-12
Streets and Sidewalks
CHAPTER 95
welfare, then the Superintendent or Engineer shall order that the work cease or that it not
begin, and said party shall secure the approval of the city's Board of Public Works and
Safety before continuing; or
c. Whenever required by the city's Board of Public Works and Safety.
2. The city Street Department shall be exempt from the requirement to obtain an excavation permit
when performing work using only its own workforce.
3. Where an accident or any other emergency has damaged or may damage an improvement, or
causes or may cause an interruption of service by a city utility, public utility or rural electric
membership corporation, and repair to or replacement of the improvement or service requires
work in city property, then upon verbal request the city's Street Superintendent or Engineer
may, after consulting with the managing superintendent for the utility in question, approve an
emergency permit for the work. In those cases where an excavation permit would normally be
required for the same work in non-emergency circumstances, an excavation permit shall be
obtained as soon as possible after the emergency has been resolved.
Application
1. The party that will actually perform the work shall submit an application for an excavation permit
for each location at which work is to be performed. However, a single application may be used
for multiple work sites when all of the following conditions exist:
a. The same improvement will be installed, repaired or relocated in more than one location;
b. The work locations are adjacent to one another and part of a common project;
c. The work is performed as a series of like operations, all of which are conducted by the party
that is applying for the permit; and
d. The work will be completed within one year after the date that the permit is issued.
2. The application shall be submitted to the Department of Building, Planning and Development,
on forms provided by the Department. The application shall provide details of the proposed
work, including but not limited to:
a. Names of the owner and contractor;
b. Location and description of the work and improvement;
c. Public property to be disturbed;
d. Estimated start and completion dates;
e. Proof of required insurance coverage;
f. A site plan and drawing showing the location of the work and the improvement; and
g. Any other information required by the special circumstances of a request as determined by
the Administrator of the Department of Building, Planning and Development.
Permit fee
Subject to the exemptions that follow, where a requirement exists to secure an excavation permit under
this section a permit fee of $25 shall be paid by the applicant after the application has been approved
and prior to issuance of the permit. The following parties are exempt from the requirement to pay the
permit fee:
1. Any unit of federal or state government, county or city government, or any city municipal
department, regardless of who performs the work.
2. Any party installing, repairing or replacing new or existing sidewalks or driveways, which does
not include modification or replacement of curbs and gutters.
Additional fees
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 95-13
Streets and Sidewalks
CHAPTER 95
The person, persons or other entity that will own and/or be responsible for the improvement after its
installation, repair or replacement, shall in addition to any permit fee pay all costs and expenses that the
city incurs for any improvements as defined herein or other public infrastructure and services that are
owned and/or maintained by the city, which improvements, infrastructure or services must be
temporarily or permanently interrupted, relocated, damaged or destroyed, as a result of the work. All
costs shall be based on true and actual costs as demonstrated by itemized receipts or itemized cost
accounting, which shall be provided to the owner of the property by the city's Board of Public Works and
Safety.
Permit issuance
The Administrator of the Department of Building, Planning and Development shall issue an excavation
permit within 10 days following receipt of the application package in the Department, subject to the
following:
1. All required information on the application has been provided;
2. A certificate of insurance as required in this section has been provided;
3. Required contacts have been completed including requests for marking of utility locations;
4. The plan for the work to be accomplished has been reviewed and determined to be consistent
with the city's safety policies;
5. The work methods and materials comply with city specifications as determined by the city's
Street Superintendent;
6. The application has been approved by the city's Street Superintendent;
7. Certification by the party performing the work that the conditions stated herein and on the permit
application have been satisfied; and
8. The permit fee and all other applicable fees have been paid.
Term of permit
An excavation permit shall be valid for a period not to exceed one year from the date that the permit was
issued.
Insurance
1. Subject to the exemptions that follow, where a requirement exists to secure an excavation
permit under this section, the party that will actually perform the work shall prior to application
approval submit a certificate of liability insurance issued by a company that is licensed to
provide liability insurance in the State of Indiana. The policy's coverage shall begin not later
than the date on which the work begins, and shall terminate not less than 30 days later than the
estimated completion date for the work shown on the permit application. No work shall be
conducted unless the required insurance coverage is in effect. The party that will actually
perform the work shall notify the city's Department of Building, Planning and Development of
any changes in coverage or changes in the beginning or termination dates of coverage. The
insurance certificate shall provide for the following types and minimum amounts of insurance
coverage:
a. General Commercial Liability Coverage:
General aggregate $1,000,000
Products-completed operations
aggregate
$500,000
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 95-14
Streets and Sidewalks
CHAPTER 95
Personal and advertising injury $500,000
Each occurrence $500,000
Fire Damage (any one fire) $100,000
Medical expenses (any one person) $5,000
b. Automobile Liability: $100,000.
c. Excess Liability: Not required.
d. Workers Comp and Employer Liability: Statutory State of Indiana coverage.
(As amended Ordinance 2017-04 passed 2/21/2017)
License to encroach
1. Subject to the exemptions that follow, where a requirement exists to secure an excavation
permit under this section for installation or relocation of an improvement, the city's Board of
Public Works and Safety shall approve a license to encroach upon the identified city property
prior to issuance of an excavation permit.
2. The following work shall be exempt from the requirement to obtain a license to encroach:
a. Installation, repair or replacement of new or existing sidewalks, driveways or curbs and
gutters.
b. Installation, repair or replacement of electric, water or sanitary sewer lateral service wires or
pipes, where those wires or pipes provide only a service connection between the structure
to be served and a city electric primary line, or water or sanitary sewer main.
c. Installation, repair or replacement of pipes, wires, cables, lines, conduit, or monopole utility
poles not exceeding 50 feet in height, that are required for delivery of the service that is
provided by a public utility or a rural electric membership corporation, as those terms are
defined and regulated at I.C. 8-1-2 and I.C. 8-1-13, respectively, that is performing the
installation, repair or replacement.
Notification and start of work
Not less than three working days before the date scheduled for the work to begin, excluding weekends
and holidays, the party that will actually perform the work shall notify the agencies listed below and
advise them of the date, time, location, duration and other relevant details of the proposed work. No
work shall be undertaken until all utility lines and pipes have been located and marked. The agencies
that shall be notified include:
1. City Electric, Water, and Water Pollution Control, Street and Engineering Departments, and
Police and Fire Dispatch;
2. Indiana Underground Plant Protection Service or its successor organization;
3. DeKalb Central Community Schools Corporation, Bus Management Office, if the work will take
place in a street; and
4. All other private and governmental companies and agencies that have improvements in the city
property where the work will be done.
Completion of work
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 95-15
Streets and Sidewalks
CHAPTER 95
The party performing the work shall be responsible for completing all necessary restoration and repairs
to city property that has been disturbed by the work, and shall return the area to its original condition in
accordance with the standards of the city's Street Department, including but not limited to:
1. Completion of the work within one year after the date on which the permit was issued;
2. Construction barricades shall be placed around the work site at all times;
3. All pavement, sidewalk and curb cuts shall be saw cuts;
4. Backfill of the type and placed in the manner specified by the city's Street Superintendent;
5. Not less than two inches of cold mix shall be used as a temporary patch on the day that the
work site is closed with backfill; and
6. Maintenance of all temporary patches and other work until the work has been accepted by the
city's Street Superintendent, and maintenance of permanent repairs to the site for one year after
acceptance of the work by the city's Street Superintendent.
Appeals
Any appeal of the terms of this section shall be made to the Board of Public Works and Safety.
Penalties
Any party that violates any of the provisions of this section shall be fined $100. Each day that a violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
REGULATIONS GOVERNING PORTLAND CEMENT
95.45 BOARD OF PUBLIC WORKS TO ADOPT SPECIFICATIONS
The Board of Public Works and Safety shall adopt specifications for portland cement concrete street
and alley pavement, curbs, gutters, and sidewalks. These specifications may from time to time be
amended by the Board.
All construction of concrete street and alley pavement, curbs, gutters, and sidewalks, shall adhere
to these specifications which shall always be considered minimum.
Any permit holder or contractor who does not adhere to the minimum specifications shall
immediately remove any work done pursuant to this section, and replace it with construction in
adherence to these minimum specifications. If the permit holder or contractor does not comply
within 30 days notice by certified mail to either the permit holder, the contractor, or the owner of the
adjacent real estate, the work shall be done at city expense and charged to the property owner.
The charge shall be certified to the County Treasurer with taxes due on the real estate, and it shall
become a lien on the real estate.
95.46 ADOPTION OF SPECIFICATIONS
Sections 95.47 through 95.60 shall be the minimum specifications to be followed by any person desiring to
determine specifications for portland cement concrete street and alley pavement, curbs, gutters, and
sidewalks within the public thoroughfare and within the city limits.
95.47 DESCRIPTION
This item consists of portland cement concrete pavement in one course on a prepared subgrade conforming
in all respects with the lines, grade, thickness, and typical cross section shown on the plans, or as may be
otherwise specified.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 95-16
Streets and Sidewalks
CHAPTER 95
95.48 MATERIALS
All materials shall conform to the Tentative Specifications as established by the American Society for Testing
Materials, except that aggregates failing to meet these specifications but which have been shown by special
test or actual service to produce concrete of the required quality may be used where authorized by the
Engineer. All coarse aggregate shall be limestone aggregate.
95.49 REQUIREMENTS FOR CONCRETE
All portland cement concrete pavement shall be constructed of air-entrained concrete, and the
concrete shall contain not less than 4% nor more than 7% entrained air. The required amount of
entrained air shall be obtained by using air-entraining portland cement and an approved admixture,
if necessary, or portland cement and an admixture approved by the Engineer.
Each cubic yard of concrete shall contain no less than 1-1/2 barrels of cement except when the
Engineer orders a cement content of more than this amount. In that case the contractor will be
compensated for the additional amount of cement over and above the 1-1/2 barrels of cement
required at the net unit price paid by the contractor for the cement as shown by certified vouchers.
95.50 AGGREGATE CONTENT
The coarse aggregate shall be proportioned to obtain the most satisfactory gradation. The aggregates shall
be proportioned to use the maximum amount of coarse aggregates that will produce a workable mix. The
fine aggregate shall be not less than 30% nor more than 40% of the total weight of the aggregate in each
cubic yard to concrete.
95.51 CONSISTENCY OF CONCRETE
In no case shall the water used, including any free water in the aggregate, exceed six gallons per bag of
cement used. If the characteristics of the combined materials are such that the required slump cannot be
obtained when using the allowable maximum amount of water, the cement content shall be increased
sufficiently to produce the required slump. This increased cement, as well as the maximum of 1-1/2 barrels,
shall be furnished by the contractor and included in the contract. The slump of machine-placed concrete
shall not be less than one nor more than three inches. If concrete is to be hand-placed, the slump shall be
not less than two nor more than four inches.
95.52 CONSTRUCTION METHODS
The subgrade shall be so constructed that it will have, as nearly as possible, uniform density throughout. All
soft, yielding, or other unsuitable material which will not compact readily when approximately dry shall be
removed. Any holes or depressions resulting from the removal of unsuitable materials shall be filled with
satisfactory material and compacted to conform with the surrounding subgrade surface. The subgrade shall
be moist but not muddy at the time the concrete is placed. If required by the Engineer, it shall be sprinkled
the evening prior to placing the concrete, or not less than six hours before concrete is placed thereon. If it
subsequently becomes too dry just prior to placing the concrete, it shall be sprinkled again, but mud or pools
of water shall not be formed. At the time of placing the concrete the subgrade shall not be muddy, soft, or
frozen.
95.53 FORMS
Forms will be set to the line and grade as established by the Engineer. Bent, twisted, or broken forms shall
be removed from the work until satisfactorily repaired.
95.54 PLACING CONCRETE
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 95-17
Streets and Sidewalks
CHAPTER 95
No concrete shall be placed around manholes or similar structures until they have been adjusted to
the proper grade and alignment.
The concrete shall be distributed to such depth that, when consolidated and finished, the required
slab thickness shall be no less than that called for in the plans. The batches shall be so deposited
as to require as little handling as possible. Any necessary re-handling shall be with powerdistributing
devices or shovels, not with rakes. Workmen shall not walk in the fresh concrete with
footwear coated with earth or other foreign matter.
Concrete which has developed initial set will not be permitted.
Retempering concrete by adding water or by other means or remixing will not be permitted.
Admixtures for lowering the freezing point, increasing workability, or accelerating hardening of the
concrete will not be permitted except when specifically approved in writing by the Engineer.
If the temperature in the shade and away from artificial heat is not less than 35° F. and rising,
concrete may be placed, but if 40° F. or below and falling, it shall not be placed. All concrete
placed when the temperature within the preceding 24 hours has reached 35° F. or lower shall, if
damaged by frost, be replaced by the contractor at his expense.
95.55 CONSOLIDATION AND STRIKE-OFF
A machine method of consolidation and strike-off shall be used except for areas where hand finishing is
permitted.
95.56 FINISHING
After initial consolidation and strike-off, the surface shall be further smoothed and consolidated by
longitudinal floating. Depressions appearing shall be filled with fresh concrete, and the float on its
final passage shall show full contact for its entire length and width.
As soon as the longitudinal floating is complete, the surface smoothness shall be checked with a
ten-foot straight edge. The surface shall be free from irregularities and make contact at all points
with the straight edge blade. After the surface has been prepared as described above, all curbs,
gutters, and pavements shall be finally finished by brooming. Corrugations shall be uniform and not
more than 1/8 inch deep. Brooming shall be perpendicular to the center line of the pavement.
Sidewalks shall be finished smooth and even by means of a wood float and light broom finish.
95.57 CURING
Provision shall be made for maintaining the concrete in a moist condition for at least five days. In lieu of
moist curing, an approved membrane cure can be used. It shall be uniformly applied at the rate of no less
than 200 square feet per gallon and shall be white pigmented only. Another acceptable alternative would be
covering with 15-pound roofing felt over both the form and finished concrete.
95.58 SIDEWALK AND CURB AND GUTTER JOINTS
Expansion joints shall be required at the ends of all returns, at intervals which do not exceed 100 feet, and at
all intersections of walks, driveways, curbs, and gutters. Scored joints shall be required at five-foot intervals
on sidewalks and a dummy groove contraction joint at 20-foot intervals. Curbs and gutters shall have a
dummy groove contraction joint at 20-foot intervals also. Expansion joint material shall be bituminous
expansion joint material 3/4 inch thick, have a height 1/2 inch less than the finished surface, and conform to
the cross section of the concrete item.
95.59 SEALING JOINTS
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 95-18
Streets and Sidewalks
CHAPTER 95
After the concrete has hardened sufficiently and before traffic is permitted, all joints must be filled with a
plastic joint-sealing material approved by the Engineer. Immediately before sealing the joints, they shall be
cleaned in such a manner that all loose and foreign material is removed. Joints shall be filled so that the
sealing material is flush with the surface. Any excess sealer on the pavement shall be removed.
95.60 OPENING TO TRAFFIC
Traffic will not be permitted on the pavement until the concrete has attained a flexural strength of at least
500 pounds per square inch.
STREET ADDRESS NUMBERS
95.70 DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.
• APARTMENTS
Structures which may include one or more residences.
• BUSINESS
An establishment located in some structure who is a purveyor of goods or services.
• HOUSE
A residence which may contain one or more residences.
• RESIDENCE
Any structure wherein persons live as distinguished from business.
• STREET ADDRESS NUMBERS
Identifying numerals which are consistent with identification as recognized by the United States Postal
Service.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 95-19
Streets and Sidewalks
CHAPTER 95
95.71 MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS
Every house, residence, apartment and business within the corporation borders of the city, shall
have numbers identifying the location. These numbers are herein referred to as street address
numbers for all structures subject to this subchapter.
All street address numbers shall be a minimum of 4-1/2 feet above the ground, sidewalk, driveway
or any other surface reasonably presumed to be a reference point.
All street address numbers shall be of a color which, when viewed from the street in a vehicle, can
be seen easily. It is required that said numbers are to be of a color contrasting or nearly contrasting
with the background surface color upon which they are mounted.
There shall be no obstructions to preclude the street address numbers from being seen as noted in
no95.71(C).
All street address numbers shall be a minimum of 3 inches in height and 1-1/2 inches in width.
95.72 ENFORCEMENT
It shall be the responsibility of the Police Department, the Fire Department and the Building
Administrator to enforce this subchapter.
Enforcement will be accomplished as follows:
1. Upon notice of violation of 95.71, an initial letter will be sent to the offending party advising of
the violation.
2. The violator will be allowed four days in which to correct or cure the violation.
3. If the violation is not cured or corrected within the four-day period, a notice of imposition of
penalty shall be delivered to the responsible violator.
The City Clerk-Treasurer or designee shall collect all paid penalties through the Collection Bureau.
The Clerk-Treasurer shall initiate suit for collection in the DeKalb Superior Court, Small Claims
Division, for all penalties assessed yet unpaid.
95.99 PENALTY
Any person who violates 95.01 shall, upon conviction, be fined any sum not exceeding $100.
Any person who violates 95.02 shall, upon conviction, be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall
be fined not more than $25.
Any person who violates any of the provisions of 95.03 shall be fined not less than $50 nor more
than $100.
Any person found guilty of the violation of 95.05 shall be fined in any sum not to exceed $10.
Any person who violates 95.10 shall, upon conviction, be fined not more than $10. Each day's
violation shall constitute a separate offense.
Any one who violates the provisions of 95.11 shall, upon conviction, be fined not more than $10.
Each day's violation shall constitute a separate offense.
Any person who maliciously injures, defaces, or destroys street signs or numbers placed upon
houses in pursuance of 95.20 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not more
than $25.
Failure to meet the minimum requirements prescribed in 95.71 will result in a fine of no more than
$30. Each day that a violation of 95.71 exist is considered a new offense.
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Garbage and Rubbish
CHAPTER 96
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 96-2
Garbage and Rubbish
CHAPTER 96
Table of Contents
96.01 DEFINITIONS
96.02 DUTIES OR THE BOARD OF WORKS AND SAFETY
96.03 COLLECTION
96.04 CONVEYANCES USED FOR COLLECTION
96.05 RETAIL AND COMMERCIAL SERVICE
96.06 UNLAWFUL DISPOSAL OF GARBAGE AND RUBBISH
96.07 RECYCLING
96.98 VIOLATIONS
99.99 PENALTY
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 96-3
Garbage and Rubbish
CHAPTER 96
96.01 DEFINITIONS
• BOARD OF WORKS
The Auburn City Board of Public Works and Safety.
• DWELLING UNIT
A single residence, within the City of Auburn, which has one mailing address.
• GARBAGE
Rejected wastes, rejected home products, including every waste of food, matter used or intended for
food or that attends the preparation, use, cooking, dealing in food preparation. Other waste items
intended to be disposed and authorized for regular disposal by the contract for services with the
Garbage and Rubbish Collection for the City of Auburn, Indiana.
• GARBAGE AND RUBBISH CONTAINERS
Sturdy plastic with capacity of up to 99 gallons for trash, rubbish, and / or for recycling purposes so as to
allow for automated pickup.
• RETAIL AND COMMERCIAL SERVICE
That service which is not residential in nature or which does not accommodate private individuals.
• RUBBISH
Useless waste or rejected matter including, but not limited to, ashes, cans, metal ware, or any kind of
type of refuse and / or discharge, excluding leaves, grass, weeds, construction material, electronics,
lightbulbs, metal, rubber products not pertaining to household goods, or used on a regular basis in a
household, plastics not pertaining to household goods, or used on a regular basis in a household, any
hazardous waste.
Hazardous waste is waste that poses substantial or potential threats to public health or the environment,
and/or is regulated under the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA). Hazardous wastes are
defined under RCRA in 40 CFR 261 where they are divided into two (2) major categories: Characteristic
wastes and listed wastes.
Characteristic hazardous wastes are materials that are known or tested to exhibit one or more of the
following four hazardous traits: ignitability, reactivity, corrosiveness, and or toxicity. Listed Wastes are
set forth under 40 CFR 261.31 through .33 and are materials specifically listed by regulatory authorities
as a hazardous waste which are from non-specific sources, specific sources, or discarded chemical
products.
96.02 DUTIES OR THE BOARD OF WORKS AND SAFETY
Collection and disposal
The Board of Works is authorized and empowered to collect and dispose of or provide for the collection
and disposal of residential garbage, rubbish and recycling within the City.
Rules and regulations
The Board of Works is authorized, to promulgate rules and regulations providing methods to be used in
the storage, collection and disposal of all garbage, rubbish and recycling in addition to the provisions set
forth in this section of the Auburn City Code.
Pricing of services
The Board of Works is authorized and empowered to determine and fix a fair and reasonable charge to
be made against every residential owner, occupant or lessee of property, and by rules and regulations of
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 96-4
Garbage and Rubbish
CHAPTER 96
the Board to establish a method of collection and assessment of these charges. The operation of
collection of rubbish, garbage and recycling shall be supported by a monthly charge to each residential
utility customer, and a per-container charge, for containers above the weekly limit set in these
regulations both as established by the Board of Works. Both charges may be amended annually by the
Board of Works.
96.03 COLLECTION
Garbage and rubbish containers
The containers to be used by occupants of dwelling units for the disposal of garbage and rubbish shall be
sturdy plastic garbage containers with a capacity of up to 99 gallons.
Trash containers must be approved by the City contractor so as to allow for automated trash pickup. Tags
may be purchased from the City Clerk-Treasurer for the purpose of picking up additional trash greater than
the 99-gallon capacity. Large items or special disposal items may be disposed of with purchase of an
authorized tag from the City Clerk-Treasurer.
Pick up
1. Residential garbage, rubbish and recycling shall be picked up once per week. Containers from
each dwelling unit are to be placed within three feet of curb, not in the street, no sooner than 24
hours prior to scheduled pick up.
2. Items placed at curbside more than 24 hours prior to pick up, and items placed in the street,
shall be construed as litter and could subject the responsible party to penalties prescribed by
the Auburn City Code.
Covering
All residential garbage, rubbish and recycling shall be placed in an approved container that is closed so
as to avoid scattering of contents by animals or other means. No person shall carry, on any vehicle or
any carrier of any kind, upon any street or alley within the City, any garbage or rubbish without a
covering; this would prevent littering of the contents along the City streets or alleys.
96.04 CONVEYANCES USED FOR COLLECTION
Conveyances
The collection and transportation of all garbage and rubbish shall be done in strict accordance with this
chapter. All conveyances used in the collection and transportation of garbage and rubbish shall be
watertight at the bottom and sides so that no drainage is permitted and the top shall be covered to
eliminate flies and keep the garbage and rubbish from falling from the vehicle or conveyance. The
conveyance shall be completely covered so that the garbage and rubbish are not blown or scattered on
the streets or area adjacent to the streets over which the hauling is done.
Rules and regulations
The collection and conveyance of garbage and rubbish shall be governed by the laws, rules, and
regulations of the United States, the State of Indiana, the County of DeKalb, and the City of Auburn.
96.05 RETAIL AND COMMERCIAL SERVICE
Garbage, rubbish and recycling collection service for any retail or commercial establishment is not governed
by these regulations.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 96-5
Garbage and Rubbish
CHAPTER 96
96.06 UNLAWFUL DISPOSAL OF GARBAGE AND RUBBISH
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to dispose of residential garbage and rubbish other
than as provided in these rules and regulations, which are made pursuant to authority from the Common
Council by ordinance or the Board of Works by rule.
96.07 RECYCLING
For the purpose of recycling a container capable of filling up to 99 gallons of recyclable materials with the
ability to collect said items by automated pick-up.
The following procedures shall apply to recycling: Please rinse all containers. Remove lids from containers
and recycle them loosely in your cart. Labels do not need to be removed.
Glass Bottles and Jars: Recycle brown, green and clear glass.
Plastics: Recycle plastics #1 thru #7 and Styrofoam. Look on the bottom of containers for a number inside
the recycling arrows.
Metal Cans, Aluminum Foil, and Aluminum Foil Pans: Recycle all food and beverage metal cans – steel, tin,
bi-metal and aluminum.
Cardboard, Newspaper and Magazines: You can also include newspaper inserts, catalogs, paperback
books, phone books and brochures.
Paper Food Containers: Recycle food boxes including juice boxes, egg, ice cream and milk cartons, cereal
and pasta boxes.
Paper: Recycle envelopes, office paper, junk mail, greeting cards, and file folders. Shredded paper should
be put in a paper bag.
Do NOT Recycle: Plastic bags, plastic food wrappers, plastics without numbers, greasy food containers,
food or liquid waste, yard waste, construction debris or scrap metal, hazardous waste, electronics, cables or
batteries, diapers, tissue or biohazardous waste, light bulbs, ceramics, dishes or mirrors, hoses, toys,
clothes, shoes, tools, plastic straws and to-go lids, and/or holiday decorations.
Christmas Trees: Will be collected during two (2) days in January usually Saturdays. Said dates will be set
by the City of Auburn, Indiana.
96.98 VIOLATIONS
A violation of this chapter shall be construed as willful or negligent failure to abide by the rules and
regulations contained within this chapter.
99.99 PENALTY
Any person or persons found to be in violation of any part of this chapter shall be fined no more than
$100.00 per violation. Each day the violation occurs shall be considered a separate violation. Such penalty
shall be paid to the Clerk-Treasurer of the City of Auburn, Indiana. Failure to pay said penalty shall subject
the violator to civil collection in a court of competent jurisdiction and possible suspension of services as
determined by the Board of Works.
(Ordinance 2015-16 Passed 1/5/2016)
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Fair Housing Standards
CHAPTER 97
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 97-2
Fair Housing Standards
CHAPTER 97
Table of Contents
97.01 POLICY STATEMENT
97.02 DEFINITIONS
97.03 UNLAWFUL PRACTICE
97.04 DISCRIMINATION IN THE SALE OR RENTAL OF HOUSING
97.05 DISCRIMINATION IN RESIDENTIAL REAL ESTATE-RELATED TRANSACTIONS
97.06 DISCRIMINATION IN THE PROVISION OF BROKERAGE SERVICE
97.07 INTERFERENCE, COERCION, OR INTIMIDATION
97.08 PREVENTION OF INTIMIDATION IN FAIR HOUSING CASES
97.09 EQUAL ACCESS TO HOUSING IN HUD PROGRAMS
97.10 EXEMPTIONS
97.11 ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT OF CHAPTER
97.12 SEVERABILITY OF PROVISIONS
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 97-3
Fair Housing Standards
CHAPTER 97
97.01 POLICY STATEMENT
It shall be the policy of the City of Auburn to provide, within constitutional limitation, for fair housing
throughout its corporate limits as provided for under the federal Civil Rights Act of 1968, as amended, the
federal Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, as amended, and Indiana Code 22-9.5-1 et. seq.
97.02 DEFINITIONS
The definitions set forth in this Section shall apply throughout this Ordinance:
Dwelling means any building, structure, or part of a building or structure that is occupied as, or
designed or intended for occupancy as, a residence by one (1) or more families; or any vacant land
which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or location of a building, structure, or part of a
building or structure that is occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as a residence by
one (1) or more families (I.C. 22-9.5-2-8).
Family includes a single individual (I.C. 22-9.5-2-9), with the status of such family being further
defined in subsection (H) of this Section.
Person (I.C. 22-9.5-2-11), includes one (1) or more individuals, corporations, partnerships,
associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies, joint-stock companies,
trusts, non-incorporated organizations, trustees, trustees in cases under Title 11 of the United
States Code, receivers, and fiduciaries.
To Rent (I.C. 22-9.5-2-13), includes to lease, to sublease, to let and otherwise to grant for a
consideration the rights to occupy the premises owned by the occupant.
Discriminatory Housing Practice means an act that is unlawful under Sections 4,5,6,7 or 8 of this
Ordinance or I.C. 22-9.5-5.
Handicap means, with respect to a person:
1. a physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or more of such person’s major
life activities.
2. a record of having such an impairment, or
3. being regarded as having such an impairment,
4. an impairment described or defined pursuant to the federal Americans with Disabilities Act of
1990.
5. Any other impairment defined in 910 IAC 2-3.
The term ‘Handicap’ shall not include current illegal use of or addictions to a controlled
substance as defined in Section 802 of Title 21 of the United States Code 910 IAC 2-3-2(14);
nor does the term ‘Handicap’ include an individual solely because that individual is a
transvestite 910 IAC 2-3-2(14).
An Aggrieved Person includes any person who (I.C. 22-9.5-2-2):
1. claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing practice; or
2. believes that such person will be injured by a discriminatory housing practice that is about to
occur.
Familial Status means one or more individuals who have not attained the age of 18 years being
domiciled with a parent or another person having legal custody of such individual or the written
permission of such parent or other person. The protections afforded against discrimination on the
basis of familial status shall apply to any person who is pregnant or is in the process of securing
legal custody of any individual who has not attained the age of 18 years.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 97-4
Fair Housing Standards
CHAPTER 97
Commission (I.C. 22-9.5-2-3) means the Indiana Civil Rights Commission created pursuant to I.C.
22-9-1-4, et. Seq.
Complainant (I.C. 22-9.5-2-4) means a person, including the Commission, who files a complaint
under I.C. 22-9.5-6.
97.03 UNLAWFUL PRACTICE
Subject to the provisions of subsection (B) of this Section, Section 9 of this Ordinance and Title 22-9.5-3 of
Indiana Code, the prohibitions against discrimination in the sale or rental of housing set forth Title 22-9.5-5-1
of Indiana Code and in Section 4 of this Ordinance shall apply to:
All dwellings except as exempted by subsection (B) and Title 22-9.5-3 of Indiana Code.
Other than the provisions of subsection (C) of this Section, nothing in Section 4 shall apply to:
1. Any single-family house sold or rented by an owner where the private individual owner does not
own more than three such single-family houses at any one time; provided that in the sale of
such single family house by a private individual owner not residing in the house at the time of
sale or exemption shall apply only to one such sale within any twenty-four (24) month period.
The private individual owner may not own any interest in, nor have owned or reserved on his
behalf, title to or any right to all or a portion of the proceeds from the sale or rental of more than
three such single-family houses at any one time. The sale or rental of any such single family
house shall be exempted from application of this section only if such house is sold or rented:
a. without the use in any manner of the sales or rental facilities or services of any real estate
broker, agent or salesman, or any person in the business of selling or renting dwellings, or
of any employee or agent of any such broker, agent or salesman, or person and
b. without the publication, posting or mailing, after notice of advertisement or written notice in
violation of Section 4(C) of this Ordinance, but noting in this provision shall prohibit the use
of attorneys, escrow agents, abstracters, title companies and other such professional
assistance as necessary to perfect or transfer this title, or
2. Rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by
no more than four families living independently of each other, if the owner actually maintains
and occupies one of such living quarters as his residence.
For the purposes of subsection (B), a person shall be deemed to be in the business of selling or
renting dwellings if:
1. They have, within the preceding twelve (12) months, participated as principal in three or more
transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein, or
2. They have, within the preceding twelve (12) months, participated as agent, other than in the
sale of his own personal residence, in providing sales or rental facilities or services in two or
more transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein, or
3. They are the owner of any dwelling unit designed or intended for occupancy by, or occupied by,
five (5) or more families.
97.04 DISCRIMINATION IN THE SALE OR RENTAL OF HOUSING
As made applicable by Section 3 and except as exempted by Section 3(B) and 9, it shall be unlawful:
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 97-5
Fair Housing Standards
CHAPTER 97
To refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer, or to refuse to negotiate for the sale or
rental of, or otherwise make unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any person because of race, color,
religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national origin.
To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or privileges of sale or rental of a
dwelling or in the provision of services of facilities in connection therewith, because of race, color,
religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national origin.
To make, print, or publish, or cause to be made, printed, or published any notice, statement or
advertisement, with respect to the sale or rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference,
limitation, or discrimination based on race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national
origin, or an intention to make any such preference, limitation or discrimination.
To represent to any person because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status or
national origin that any dwelling is not available for inspection, sale or rental when such dwelling is
in fact so available.
For profit, to induce or attempt to induct any person to sell or rent any dwelling by representations
regarding the entry or perspective entry into the neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular
race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national origin.
To discriminate in the sale or rental, or to otherwise make unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any
buyer or renter because of a handicap of:
1. that buyer or renter;
2. a person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling after it is sold, rented, or made
available; or
3. any person associated with that person.
To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or privileges of sale or rental of a
dwelling, or in the provision of services or facilities in connection with such dwelling, because of a
handicap of:
1. that person; or
2. a person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling after it is sold, rented, or made
available; or
3. any person associated with that person.
For purposes of this subsection, discrimination includes:
1. a refusal to permit, at the expense of the handicapped person, reasonable modifications of
existing premises occupied or to be occupied by such person if such modifications may be
necessary to afford such person full enjoyment of the premises except that, in the case of a
rental, the landlord may where it is reasonable to do so condition permission for a modification
on the renter agreeing to restore the interior of the premises to the condition that existed before
the modifications, reasonable wear and tear excepted;
2. a refusal to make reasonable accommodations in rules, policies, practices, or services when
such accommodations may be necessary to afford such person equal opportunity to use and
enjoy a dwelling; or
3. in connection with the design and construction of covered multi-family dwellings for first
occupancy after the date that is 30 months after September 13, 1998, a failure to design and
construct those dwellings in such a manner that;
a. the public use and common use portions of such dwellings are readily accessible to and
usable by handicapped persons;
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 97-6
Fair Housing Standards
CHAPTER 97
b. all the doors designed to allow passage into and within all premises within such dwellings
are sufficiently wide to allow passage by handicapped persons in wheelchairs; and
c. all premises within such dwellings contain the following features of adaptive design:
i. an accessible route into and through the dwelling;
ii. light, switches, electrical outlets, thermostats, and other environmental controls in
accessible locations;
iii. reinforcements in bathrooms such that an individual in a wheelchair can maneuver
about the space.
Compliance with the appropriate requirement Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 and of the American
National Standard for Buildings and Facilities providing accessibility and usability for physically handicapped
people (commonly cited as ANSI A117.1") suffices to satisfy the requirements of paragraph (3)(C)(iii).
Nothing in this subsection requires that a dwelling be made available to an individual whose tenancy would
constitute a direct threat to the health of safety of other individuals of whose tenancy would result in
substantial physical damage to the property of others.
97.05 DISCRIMINATION IN RESIDENTIAL REAL ESTATE-RELATED TRANSACTIONS
It shall be unlawful for any person or other entity whose business includes engaging in residential
real estate-related transactions to discriminate against any person in making available such a
transaction, or in the terms or conditions of such a transaction, because of race, color, religion, sex,
handicap, familial status, or national origin.
As used in this section, the term residential real estate-related transaction means any of the
following:
1. The making or purchasing of loans or providing other financial assistance:
a. or purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing, or maintaining a dwelling; or
b. secured by residential real estate.
2. The selling, brokering, or appraising of residential real property.
Nothing in this Ordinance prohibits a person engaged in the business of furnishing appraisals of real
property to take into consideration factors other than race, color, religion, national origin, sex,
handicap, or familial status.
97.06 DISCRIMINATION IN THE PROVISION OF BROKERAGE SERVICE
It shall be unlawful to deny any person access to or membership or participation in any multiple-listing
service, real estate brokers’ organization or other service, organization, or facility relating to the business of
selling or renting dwellings, or to discriminate against him in the terms or conditions of such access,
membership, or participation, on account of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national
origin.
97.07 INTERFERENCE, COERCION, OR INTIMIDATION
It shall be unlawful to coerce, intimidate, threaten, or interfere with any person in the exercise or enjoyment
of, or on account of his having exercised or enjoyed, or on account of his having aided or encouraged any
other person in the exercise or enjoyment of, any right granted or protected by sections 3, 4, 5 or 6 of this
Ordinance.
97.08 PREVENTION OF INTIMIDATION IN FAIR HOUSING CASES
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 97-7
Fair Housing Standards
CHAPTER 97
Whoever, whether or not acting under code or law, by force or threat of force willfully injures, intimidates or
interferes with, or attempt to injure, intimidate or interfere with:
any person because of his race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin and
because he is or has been selling, purchasing, renting, financing, occupying, or contracting or
negotiating for the sale, purchase, rental, financing or occupation of any dwelling, or applying for or
participating in any service, organization, or facility relating to the business of selling or renting
dwellings; or
any person because he is or has been, or in order to intimidate such person or any other person or
any class of persons from:
1. participating, without discrimination on account of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial
status, or national origin, in any of the activities, services, organizations or facilities described in
subsection (A); or
2. affording another person or class of persons’ opportunity or protection so to participate; or
any citizen because he is or has been, or in order to discourage such citizen or any other citizen
from lawfully aiding or encouraging other persons to participate, without discrimination on account
of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin, in any of the activities,
services, organizations or facilities described in subsection (A), or participating lawfully in speech or
peaceful assembly opposing any denial of the opportunity to participate shall be fined according to
local, state and federal law; and if bodily injury results shall be fined not more than $10,000 or
imprisoned not more than ten years, or both; and if death results shall be subject to imprisonment
for any term of years or for life.
97.09 EQUAL ACCESS TO HOUSING IN HUD PROGRAMS
Pursuant to 24 CFR Part 5.403 and 24 CFR Part 574.3 the definition of “family” is revised to include families
regardless of the actual or perceived sexual orientation, gender identity, or marital status of its members.
97.10 EXEMPTIONS
Exemptions defined or set forth under Title 22-9.5-3 et. seq. of Indiana Code shall be exempt from
the provisions of this Ordinance to include those activities or organizations set forth under
subsections (B) and (C) of this Section.
Nothing in this Ordinance shall prohibit a religious organization, association, or society, or any
nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a
religious organization, association, or society, from limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of
dwellings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to persons of the same
religion, or from giving preference to such persons, unless membership in such religion is restricted
on account of race, color or national origin. Nor shall anything in this Ordinance prohibit a private
club not in fact open to the public, which as an incident to its primary purpose or purposes provides
lodgings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose, from limiting the rental or
occupancy of such lodging to its members or from giving preference to its members.
Nothing in this Ordinance regarding familial status shall apply with respect to housing for older
persons. As used in this Section, ‘housing for older persons’ means housing:
1. provided under any state or federal program that the Secretary of the Federal Department of
Housing and Urban Development or the state civil rights commission determines is specifically
designed and operated to assist elderly person (as defined in the state or federal program) or;
2. intended for, and solely occupied by, person 62 years of age or older; or
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 97-8
Fair Housing Standards
CHAPTER 97
3. intended and operated for occupancy by at least one person 55 years of age or older per unit.
97.11 ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT OF CHAPTER
The authority and responsibility for properly administering this Ordinance and referral of complaints
hereunder to the Commissioner as set forth in subsection (B) hereof shall be vested in the Chief
Elected Official of the City of Auburn, Indiana.
Notwithstanding the provisions of I.C. 22-9.5-4-8, the City of Auburn, Indiana, because of lack of
financial and other resources necessary to fully administer enforcement proceedings and possible
civil actions under the Ordinance, herein elects to refer all formal complaints of violation of the
articles of this Ordinance by complainants to the Indiana Civil Rights Commission for administrative
enforcement actions pursuant to Title 22-9.5-6 of Indiana Code and the Chief Elected Official of the
City of Auburn, Indiana, shall refer all said complaints to the Commission as provided for under
subsection (A) of this Section to said Commission for purposes of investigation, resolution and
appropriate relief as provided for under Title 22-9.5-6 of Indiana Code.
All executive departments and agencies of the City of Auburn, Indiana shall administer their
departments, programs and activities relating to housing and urban development in a manner
affirmatively to further the purposes of this Ordinance and shall cooperate with the Chief Elected
Official and the Commission to further such purposes.
The Chief Elected Official of the City of Auburn, Indiana, or the Chief Elected Official’s designee,
shall provide information on remedies available to any aggrieved person or complainant requesting
such information.
97.12 SEVERABILITY OF PROVISIONS
If any provision of this Ordinance or the application thereof to any person or circumstances shall be
determined to be invalid, the remainder of the Ordinance and the application of its provisions to other
persons not similarly situated or to other circumstances shall not be affected thereby.
(Ordinance 2016-12 passed 10/4/20
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Collection of Recyclables
CHAPTER 98
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 98-2
Collection of Recyclables
CHAPTER 98
Table of Contents
98.01 DEFINITIONS
98.02 DUTIES OF THE BOARD OF WORKS AND SAFETY
98.03 COLLECTION
98.04 CONVEYANCES USED FOR COLLECTION
98.05 RETAIL AND COMMERCIAL SERVICE
98.06 UNLAWFUL DISPOSAL OF RECYCLABLES
98.98 VIOLATIONS
98.99 PENALTY
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 98-3
Collection of Recyclables
CHAPTER 98
98.01 DEFINITIONS
• BOARD OF WORKS
The Auburn City Board of Public Works and Safety.
• DWELLING UNIT
A single residence, within the city of auburn, which has one mailing address.
• RECYCLABLES
1. Glass
All glass food and beverage containers; excluding light bulbs, plate glass, mirrors, drinking
glasses, ceramics, any glass that is not a container.
2. Plastic
Soft drink bottles, water jugs, juice jugs, and milk jugs marked #1 or #2; excluding plastic wrap,
tubs or bowls with food debris, plastics #3-7.
3. Aluminum
Beverage cans and foil; excluding foil with food debris.
4. Newspaper
Newspapers and non-glossy inserts; excluding glossy magazines or inserts, wet newsprint,
paper products other than newspapers.
5. Tin Cans (Steel)
Fruit, vegetable, and other food containers; excluding non-rinsed containers, aerosol or
pressurized cans.
6. Any other recyclables as may be required by federal or state agencies or as desired by
Contractor.
• RECYCLING BINS
Plastic bins of 18-gallon minimum capacity, approved by the Board of Works, to be used for the storage
of recyclables.
• RETAIL AND COMMERCIAL SERVICE
That service which is not residential in nature or which does not accommodate private individuals.
98.02 DUTIES OF THE BOARD OF WORKS AND SAFETY
Collection and disposal
The Board of Works is authorized and empowered to collect and dispose of or provide for the collection
and disposal of all residential recyclables within the city.
Rules and regulations
The Board of Works is authorized, to promulgate rules and regulations providing methods to be used in
the storage, collection and disposal of residential recyclables subject to approval by the Common
Council of the city, and to advertise and publish these rules and regulations. The rules shall have the
same force and effect as ordinances and resolutions of the city.
Pricing of services
The Board of Works is authorized and empowered to determine and fix a fair and reasonable charge to
be made against every residential owner, occupant or lessee of property, and by rules and regulations of
the Board to establish a method of collection and assessment of these charges. The operation of
collection of recyclables shall be supported by a monthly charge to each residential utility customer, as
established by the Board of Works. The charges may be amended annually by the Board of Works.
These charges and amendments are subject to approval by the Common Council of the city.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 98-4
Collection of Recyclables
CHAPTER 98
98.03 COLLECTION
Recycling bins
Recycling contractor shall use the recycling bins currently owned and used by the city. Contractor shall
furnish, at its cost, one bin to each new residence. Contractor shall sell to residents at cost any
replacement or additional bins as requested by resident. Price of said bins to be pre-approved by the
Board of Works. At the end of the contract all bins provided by city or contractor at its cost shall become
or remain, as the case may be, the property of city.
Pick up
1. Residential recyclables shall be picked up once every two weeks. Bins are to be placed by the
occupant within three feet of curb, not in the street, no sooner than 24 hours prior to scheduled
pick up.
2. Items placed at curbside more than 24 hours prior to pick up, and items placed in the street,
shall be construed as litter and could subject the responsible party to penalties prescribed by
the Auburn City Code.
Covering
No person shall carry, on any vehicle or any carrier of any kind, upon any street or alley within the city,
recyclables without a covering; this will prevent littering of the contents along the city streets or alleys.
98.04 CONVEYANCES USED FOR COLLECTION
Conveyances
The collection and transportation of all recyclables shall be done in strict accordance with this chapter.
All conveyances used in the collection and transportation of recyclables shall be watertight at the bottom
and sides so that no drainage is permitted and the top shall be covered to eliminate flies and keep the
recyclables from falling from the vehicle or conveyance. The conveyance shall be completely covered
so that the recyclables are not blown or scattered on the streets or area adjacent to the streets over
which the hauling is done.
Rules and regulations
From and after January 1, 1996, the collection and conveyance of recyclables shall be governed by the
laws, rules, and regulations of the United States, the State of Indiana, the County of DeKalb, and the
City of Auburn.
98.05 RETAIL AND COMMERCIAL SERVICE
Recyclables collection service for any retail or commercial establishment is not governed by these
regulations.
98.06 UNLAWFUL DISPOSAL OF RECYCLABLES
Disposal
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to dispose of residential recyclables other than as
provided in these rules and regulations, which are made pursuant to authority from the Common Council
by ordinance.
Collected materials must be recycled
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 98-5
Collection of Recyclables
CHAPTER 98
The recycling contractor shall recycle or cause to be recycled the materials collected for that purpose.
The contractor shall certify to the Board of Public Works and Safety the names and addresses of all third
party facilities to which the recyclables are delivered along with receipts showing their delivery.
98.98 VIOLATIONS
A violation of this chapter shall be construed as willful or negligent failure to abide by the rules and
regulations contained within this ordinance.
98.99 PENALTY
Any person or persons found to be in violation of any part of this chapter shall be fined no more than $45 per
violation. Each day the violation occurs shall be considered a separate violation. Such penalty shall be paid
to the Clerk-Treasurer of the City of Auburn, Indiana, through the violations bureau.
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Transition Plan and
Procedure Under the
Americans with
Disabilities Act
CHAPTER 100
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 100-2
CHAPTER 100 Transition Plan and Procedure Under the Americans with Disabilities Act
Table of Contents
100.001 CITY ADA POLICY
100.002 ADA COORDINATOR
100.003 MAINTENANCE OF THE AMERICANS WITH DISABILITIES TRANSITION PLAN
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 100-3
CHAPTER 100 Transition Plan and Procedure Under the Americans with Disabilities Act
100.001 CITY ADA POLICY
In accordance with the requirements of Title II of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (“ADA”), the
City of Auburn will not discriminate against qualified individuals with disabilities on the basis of disability in its
services, programs, or activities.
Employment: Auburn does not discriminate on the basis of disability in its hiring or employment practices
and complies with all regulations promulgated by the U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
under Title I of the ADA.
Effective Communication: The City of Auburn will generally, upon request, provide appropriate aids and
services leading to effective communication for qualified persons with disabilities so they can participate
equally in City programs, facilities, services, and activities, including qualified sign language interpreters,
documents in Braille, and other ways of making information and communications accessible to people who
have speech, hearing, or vision impairments.
Modifications to Policies and Procedures: Auburn will make all reasonable modifications to policies and
programs to ensure that people with disabilities have an equal opportunity to enjoy all of its programs,
facilities, services, and activities. For example, individuals with service animals are welcome in City offices,
even where pets are generally prohibited.
Anyone who requires an auxiliary aid or service for effective communication, or a modification of policies or
procedures to participate in a program, service, or activity of Auburn should contact the ADA Coordinator as
soon as possible but no later than 48 hours before the scheduled event.
The ADA does not require the City to take any action that would fundamentally alter the nature of its
programs or services, or impose an undue financial or administrative burden.
Complaints that a program, service, or activity of the City is not accessible to persons with disabilities should
be directed to the ADA Coordinator.
The City of Auburn will not place a surcharge on a particular individual with a disability or any group of
individuals with disabilities to cover the cost of providing auxiliary aids/services or reasonable modifications
of policy, such as retrieving items from locations that are open to the public but are not accessible to
persons who use wheelchairs.
100.002 ADA COORDINATOR
The general public is encouraged to participate in identifying needs or barriers to accessibility. This may be
done by contacting the ADA Coordinator.
ADA Coordinator
PO Box 506
101 Ensley Avenue
Auburn, IN 46706
The Transition Plan shall be available in the City Hall for viewing. Anyone that would like to comment on the
Transition Plan can submit their comments to the Office of the Clerk-Treasurer or contact the ADA
Coordinator.
Opportunity of the public to learn and comment on how Auburn, Indiana is working to meet the Federal
Americans with Disabilities Act requirements may be provided during any City meeting. Every two years, the
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 100-4
CHAPTER 100 Transition Plan and Procedure Under the Americans with Disabilities Act
City will also include ADA as an official agenda item for a City Council meeting, to ensure the public and City
officials may be updated, and learn more about City progress at making the community accessible under the
Americans with Disabilities Act.
100.003 MAINTENANCE OF THE AMERICANS WITH DISABILITIES TRANSITION PLAN
The City of Auburn Americans with Disabilities Act Transition Plan shall be maintained by the City of Auburn,
Indiana and be available for public inspection. Copies of the Plan shall be available at the Office of the
Clerk-Treasurer, the Office of the ADA Coordinator, and the Office of the City Engineer. In addition, said
plan shall be made available on the City of Auburn web-based internet site and any other electronic location
available to the general public.
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Commercial Amusements
CHAPTER 110
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 110-2
Commercial Amusements
CHAPTER 110
Table of Contents
SHOWS, THEATERS, AND STREET PERFORMANCES
110.01 REPEALED
110.02 REPEALED
110.03 REPEALED
110.04 REPEALED
POOL TABLES AND OTHER GAMING DEVICES
110.05 REPEALED
110.06 REPEALED
110.07 REPEALED
110.08 REPEALED
110.09 REPEALED
110.99 REPEALED
SHOWS, THEATERS, AND STREET PERFORMANCES
110.01 LICENSE REQUIRED – REPEALED
110.02 LICENSE REQUIREMENT EXCEPTIONS – REPEALED
110.03 LICENSE FEES – REPEALED
110.04 GAMBLING PROHIBITED – REPEALED
POOL TABLES AND OTHER GAMING DEVICES
110.05 LICENSE REQUIRED - REPEALED
110.06 LICENSE FEES – REPEALED
110.07 REVOCATION OF LICENSE – REPEALED
110.08 HOURS OF OPERATION – REPEALED
110.09 UNOBSTRUCTED VIEW OF INTERIOR – REPEALED
110.99 PENALTY – REPEALED
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 110-3
Commercial Amusements
CHAPTER 110
SHOWS, THEATERS, AND STREET PERFORMANCES
110.01 REPEALED
(Ord. 2010-03, passed 2-16-10)
110.02 REPEALED
(Ord. 2010-03, passed 2-16-10)
110.03 REPEALED
(Ord. 2010-03, passed 2-16-10)
110.04 REPEALED
(Ord. 2010-03, passed 2-16-10)
POOL TABLES AND OTHER GAMING DEVICES
110.05 REPEALED
(Ord. 2010-03, passed 2-16-10)
110.06 REPEALED
(Ord. 2010-03, passed 2-16-10)
110.07 REPEALED
(Ord. 2010-03, passed 2-16-10)
110.08 REPEALED
(Ord. 2010-03, passed 2-16-10)
110.09 REPEALED
(Ord. 2010-03, passed 2-16-10)
110.99 REPEALED
(Ord. 2010-03, passed 2-16-10 )
SHOWS, THEATERS, AND STREET PERFORMANCES
110.01 LICENSE REQUIRED – REPEALED
(Ord. 2010-03, passed 2-16-10)
110.02 LICENSE REQUIREMENT EXCEPTIONS – REPEALED
(Ord. 2010-03, passed 2-16-10)
110.03 LICENSE FEES – REPEALED
(Ord. 2010-03, passed 2-16-10)
110.04 GAMBLING PROHIBITED – REPEALED
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 110-4
Commercial Amusements
CHAPTER 110
(Ord. 2010-03, passed 2-16-10)
POOL TABLES AND OTHER GAMING DEVICES
110.05 LICENSE REQUIRED - REPEALED
(Ord. 2010-03, passed 2-16-10)
110.06 LICENSE FEES – REPEALED
(Ord. 2010-03, passed 2-16-10)
110.07 REVOCATION OF LICENSE – REPEALED
(Ord. 2010-03, passed 2-16-10)
110.08 HOURS OF OPERATION – REPEALED
(Ord. 2010-03, passed 2-16-10)
110.09 UNOBSTRUCTED VIEW OF INTERIOR – REPEALED
(Ord. 2010-03, passed 2-16-10)
110.99 PENALTY – REPEALED
(Ord. 2010-03, passed 2-16-10)
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Advertising
CHAPTER 111
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 111-2
Advertising
CHAPTER 111
Table of Contents
111.01 LICENSE REQUIRED FOR DISTRIBUTION OF ADVERTISEMENTS – REPEALED
111.02 BILLBOARDS – REPEALED
111.99 PENALTY – REPEALED
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 111-3
Advertising
CHAPTER 111
111.01 LICENSE REQUIRED FOR DISTRIBUTION OF ADVERTISEMENTS – REPEALED
(Ord. 2010-03, passed 2-16-10)
111.02 BILLBOARDS – REPEALED
(Ord. 2010-03, passed 2-16-10)
111.99 PENALTY – REPEALED
(Ord. 2010-03, passed 2-16-10)
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Itinerant Vendors
CHAPTER 112
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 112-2
Itinerant Vendors
CHAPTER 112
Table of Contents
112.010 DEFINITIONS
112.020 OPERATIONS GENERALLY.
112.030 BUSINESS LICENSE—REQUIRED.
112.040 BUSINESS LICENSE—APPLICATION.
112.050 BUSINESS LICENSE—PREREQUISITES.
112.060 BUSINESS LICENSE—DURATION AND FEE.
112.070 APPLICATION FEE—REFUND ON DENIAL.
112.080 EFFECT OF CESSATION OF BUSINESS
112.090 BUSINESS LICENSE—INSURANCE AND INDEMNITY.
112.100 BUSINESS LICENSE—ISSUANCE.
112.110 BUSINESS LICENSE—TRANSFERABILITY.
112.120 BUSINESS LICENSE—IDENTIFICATION.
112.130 BUSINESS LICENSE—SAFETY INSPECTION REQUIRED.
112.140 LOCATION RESTRICTIONS.
112.150 PROHIBITED HOURS FOR THE OPERATION OF SOLICITORS/PEDDLERS, MOBILE VENDORS, AND
PUSHCARTS.
112.160 STANDARDS OF CONDUCT FOR SOLICITORS OR PEDDLERS OF MERCHANDISE.
112.170 SAFETY REQUIREMENTS—SOLICITORS, MOBILE FOOD VENDOR UNITS, MOBILE VENDOR UNITS,
AND PUSHCARTS.
112.180 PENALTIES—REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
112.190 RESTRICTION ON USE AND LICENSES.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 112-3
Itinerant Vendors
CHAPTER 112
112.010 DEFINITIONS
The following terms shall have the following meanings:
• “Political”
Means on behalf of a political party or candidate or for the purpose of influencing legislation or personal
belief.
• “Religious”
Means on behalf of an established religion which means a particular system of faith and worship
recognized and practiced by a particular church, sect or denomination.
• “Solicitation”
1. Means the act of any person traveling by foot, vehicle or any other type of conveyance who
goes on private or public property to:
a. Request, either directly or indirectly, money, credit, funds, contributions, personal property
or anything of value;
b. Take or attempt to take orders for the sale of any goods, wares, merchandise or services of
any kind, or description for future delivery or for services to be performed in the future either
in person or by distributing flyers and leaflets;
c. Does not include a realtor or auctioneer conducting private listings or auctions of real or
personal property.
2. Does not mean the following:
a. A person communicating or otherwise conveying ideas, views or beliefs or otherwise
disseminating oral or written information to a person willing to directly receive such
information, provided that such information is of a political, religious or charitable nature;
b. A person seeking to influence the personal belief of the occupant of any residence
regarding any political or religious matter;
c. A person seeking to obtain, from any occupant of any residence, an indication of the
occupant’s belief in regard to any political or religious matter;
d. A person conducting a poll, survey or petition drive in regard to any political matter;
e. A person carrying, conveying, delivering or transporting food or beverage products,
newspapers or other goods to regular customers on established routes or to the premises of
any person who had previously ordered such products or goods is entitles to receive the
same;
f. A person whose business is to solicit dealers or permanent merchants in the usual course of
business; or
g. Any person exempted from this Chapter’s requirement under Ind. Code 8-1-34-30.
h. Mobile Food vendor units invited on private property selling to employees on said private
property require no City permits.
i. Special events located on private property selling to invited guests, regardless of the
number of said invited guests and not the public at large who would not have received an
invitation or be part of a special event open to individuals on said private property.
• “Solicitor”
Means a person, whether a resident of the City or not, engaged in solicitation. In addition, a Solicitor
may also be considered a Peddler or Transient Merchant as defined in Indiana Code 25-37-1 et al.,
which includes any method of selling goods, wares, or merchandise door to door or in open public on
the streets, alleys, avenues, sidewalks or other common public places with in the City limits of Auburn,
Indiana.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 112-4
Itinerant Vendors
CHAPTER 112
• “Beverage”
Means any nonalcoholic liquid, hot or cold, intended for use in whole in part for human consumption.
• “Mobile food vendor unit”
Means a person who sells, serves, offers for sale, or gives away food or beverage from any selfcontained
mobile unit, independent with respect to water, sewer and power utilities, capable of moving
or being moved, is meant to be portable and is not permanently attached to the ground consisting of an
enclosed truck, trailer, bus, or similar vehicle that contains equipment used for the sale and/or
preparation of food or beverages merchandise and is closed up when not in operation. An ice cream
truck that does not park or locate in any one place for longer than ten minutes is not considered a mobile
food vendor unit for purposes of this Chapter.
• “Mobile vendor unit”
Means a person who sells, offers for sale or gives away any goods, wares, or merchandise from any
self-contained mobile unit, independent with respect to water, sewer and power utilities, capable of
moving or being moved, is meant to be portable and is not permanently attached to the ground
consisting of a truck, trailer, bus, or other vehicle.
• “Pushcart”
Means a non-motorized wheeled cart which may be moved by one or more persons and which is
designed and used for displaying, keeping or storing any food or beverage or products for sale by a
vendor.
• “City property”
Means all outdoor areas which are owned, or leased as lessee, by the City or one of the City’s
departments, or upon which the City or one of its departments has an easement or right-of-way
including, but not limited to, streets, sidewalks, plazas or other areas adjacent to building owned by the
city or one of its departments.
• “Food”
Means any raw, cooked, frozen or processed edible substance or beverage intended for use in whole or
in part for human consumption.
• “Private property”
Means all outdoor areas which are not owned or leased by any governmental agency or entity,
including, but not limited to, streets, sidewalks, plazas, parking lots, or other areas adjacent to buildings
not owned by a governmental agency or entity.
• “Special Event”
Is any event so designated by the City of Auburn Board of Public Works and Safety.
• “Enforcement Officer”
Is a person designated by the Department of Building, Planning and Development to enforce the
provisions of this Ordinance.
112.020 OPERATIONS GENERALLY.
It is unlawful to locate as a solicitor, as a mobile food vendor unit, or as a pushcart in the City except in
accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.
112.030 BUSINESS LICENSE—REQUIRED.
No person shall carry on the business of soliciting, acting as a solicitor, peddling, acting as a
peddler, operate a pushcart, or mobile food unit within the corporate limits of the City , wholesale, or
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 112-5
Itinerant Vendors
CHAPTER 112
retail by carrying, exposing, or representing for sale, either on foot or in vehicle, within any street,
avenue, alley, square, sidewalk or similarly situated open public place, or by going from house to
house with the City, any item, article, merchandise, food, beverage, food items, or other similar
products without obtaining a license as set forth in this Chapter.
It is unlawful to locate as a solicitor, as a mobile food vendor unit, as a mobile vendor unit, or as a
pushcart in the City without first having secured a license to do if required by this Ordinance.
A separate license shall be required for each mobile food vendor unit, mobile vendor unit, or
pushcart.
This Chapter does not apply to any recognized participant of a Special Event authorized by the City
Board of Works.
112.040 BUSINESS LICENSE—APPLICATION.
Any person desiring a license under this Chapter shall submit a fully completed application to the
Department of Building, Planning, and Development as a solicitor, as a mobile food vendor unit, mobile
vendor unit, or as a pushcart. The application must set forth or have attached the following information as
specified:
The applicant’s name, current physical address, telephone number, email address and date of birth;
The name, current physical address, tax identification number, and telephone number of the person,
firm, limited liability company, corporation or organization which the applicant is employed by or
represents;
If the applicant is employed by or represents a firm, limited liability company or corporation, the
applicant shall provide the name and current physical address of all members of the firm or limited
liability company, or all officers of the corporation, as the case may be;
If the applicant is employed by or represents a corporation or limited liability company then there
shall be stated on the application the date of incorporation or organization, the state of incorporation
or organization, and if the applicant is a corporation or limited liability company formed in a state
other than the State of Indiana, the date on which such corporation or limited liability company
qualified to transact business as a foreign corporation or foreign limited liability company in the
State of Indiana;
The type of products or services to be sold and the hours of the day the applicant plans to conduct
business;
The place or places where said business may be conducted, and a written statement, if applicable,
from the owner of any private property wherein the business may be conducted authorizing the
applicant to use the property;
The duration of the license being sought;
A statement as to whether or not a license, under the provisions of this Chapter, or any other similar
ordinance of the City of Auburn, or any other county, town or municipality, or the State of Indiana
has been revoked, together with the details thereof; and
The designation of a resident of the State of Indiana as a registered agent for purposes of receiving
notices from the City of Auburn or other service of process, as a result of doing business in the City
of Auburn.
112.050 BUSINESS LICENSE—PREREQUISITES.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 112-6
Itinerant Vendors
CHAPTER 112
An application for a license under this Chapter for all forms of business regulated by this Chapter shall not
be considered unless proof of the following are provided with the application:
A letter indicating all required permits have been approved by the DeKalb County Health
Department, including but not limited to a Food Service Establishment License or a Certified Food
Handler Certificate;
Proof of registration as a business with the Indiana Secretary of State;
Proof of an Employer Identification Number;
If business is to be conducted on City property, a resolution or minutes approving the same from the
City’s Board of Public Works and Safety;
If business is to be conducted on or in property owned or managed by the City of Auburn Parks
Department, a letter of approval from the Auburn Parks Board.;
Proof of insurance in accordance with the amounts established in this Chapter;
If any type of spark, flame or fire will be produced, proof of an Open Burn Permit issued by the City
of Auburn’s Fire Department;
A copy of the Indiana registration for the vehicle, for a mobile food vendor unit or mobile vendor
unit;
Copy of a valid driver’s license, for a mobile food vendor unit or mobile vendor unit;
Proof of an independent safety inspection of all vehicles to be used in the business in accordance
with the provisions of this Chapter, for a mobile food vendor unit or mobile vendor unit;
For a mobile food vendor unit or a pushcart, a scaled site plan showing the location of the proposed
mobile food vendor unit, mobile vendor unit, or pushcart and the properties: drives, parking access
aisles, fire lanes, sidewalks and accessible routes; and
Proof of payment for, or exemption from, the applicable fee.
112.060 BUSINESS LICENSE—DURATION AND FEE.
Each applicant shall pay a license fee in accordance with the schedule set forth below (all licenses
are for a consecutive period of time):
1. One Day License: $25.00;
2. Three Day License: $35.00;
3. Seven Day License: $50.00;
4. Thirty Day License: $75.00;
5. Three Month License: $150.00;
6. Six Month License: $200.00;
7. One Year License: $300.00.
The following listed organization and/or entities while required to obtain a license under this Chapter
are exempt from having to pay fees, so long as the proceeds thereof are to be used exclusively for
religious, charitable, educational or scientific purposes:
1. Churches;
2. Schools;
3. Benevolent organizations;
4. Fraternal organizations; and
5. Other similarly situated organizations.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 112-7
Itinerant Vendors
CHAPTER 112
6. The Farmer’s Market or other similar ventures approved by the City of Auburn Board of Works
and Public Safety.
Pursuant to Ind. Code 25-25-2-1, while all honorably discharged veterans are required to obtain a
license under this Chapter they are exempt from having to pay any fees.
112.070 APPLICATION FEE—REFUND ON DENIAL.
An applicant shall pay an application fee in the minimum amount of $25.00, unless exempted under Section
112.060. In the event the license is granted, the application fee shall be retained by the City and applied
toward the license fee. In the event that the license is denied, the application fee shall be retained to defray
the administrative expense incurred in investigating and processing the application.
112.080 EFFECT OF CESSATION OF BUSINESS
No deductions shall be allowed from the fee for a license issued pursuant to this Chapter for any part of the
term of which the license does not engage in such business.
112.090 BUSINESS LICENSE—INSURANCE AND INDEMNITY.
Each applicant for a license shall provide a certificate of liability insurance to the Department of
Building, Planning, and Development upon a form approved by the Corporation Counsel of the City
of Auburn, insuring the applicant, and naming the City of Auburn as co-insured, against the
following liability and in the following amounts relative to such activity:
1. Personal Injury: $100,000.00 per occurrence and $300,000.00 in the aggregate; and
2. Property Damage: $25,000.00 per occurrence and $50,000.00 in the aggregate.
Each applicant shall provide a document approved by the Corporation Counsel for the City of
Auburn, in which the applicant agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the City of Auburn for losses
or expenses arising out of the operation of his/her business.
All business operations conducted under this Chapter shall require the proof of Worker’s
Compensation Insurance on all employees or the submission of a State of Indian affidavit of selfemployment
112.100 BUSINESS LICENSE—ISSUANCE.
The Department of Building, Planning, and Development shall within fourteen days of receipt of the
completed application issue the business license to the applicant if the Department of Building,
Planning, and Development finds the following:
1. Compliance with all provisions of this Chapter;
2. The applicant has not had a prior license issued under this Chapter, or any other similar
licensed authorized by a different governmental entity, suspended or revoked; and
3. The applicant has not been previously found to be in violation of this Chapter, or any other
similar law promulgated by a different governmental entity.
The Department of Building, Planning, and Development may, upon a finding of appropriateness,
issue a business license to the applicant who has been found to meet the terms of the above
subsections 112.100.
112.110 BUSINESS LICENSE—TRANSFERABILITY.
A license issued pursuant to this Chapter shall not be transferable to another licensee.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 112-8
Itinerant Vendors
CHAPTER 112
112.120 BUSINESS LICENSE—IDENTIFICATION.
All licenses issued by the Department of Building, Planning, and Development under this Chapter
shall be displayed at all times on the unit or on the person operating the business.
Failure to display or exhibit a license in accordance with this Section may be grounds for
suspension or revocation of said license.
Failure to display or exhibit a license in accordance with this Section may be grounds for
suspension or revocation of said license.
112.130 BUSINESS LICENSE—SAFETY INSPECTION REQUIRED.
No license shall be issued to locate a mobile food vendor unit or mobile vendor unit unless each
vehicle to be used by the business has undergone an independent safety inspection within the last
two years; a copy of the safety inspection report shall be included with the application.
It is unlawful to locate a mobile food vendor unit or mobile vendor unit which has not undergone and
passed an independent safety inspection in accordance with this Section.
If, at any time, the City of Auburn has probable cause to believe that mobile food vendor unit or
mobile vendor unit, is unsafe or in mechanically unsound condition, the Chief of Police, Chief of the
Fire Department or a designee of either person may order a mobile food vendor unit or mobile
vendor unit licensed under this Chapter to undergo an immediate safety inspection. If the safety
inspection reveals deficiencies with the mobile food vendor unit or mobile vendor unit, the mobile
food vendor unit or mobile vendor unit cannot be used until such time as the deficiencies have been
remedied.
112.140 LOCATION RESTRICTIONS.
No solicitor, mobile food vendor unit, mobile vendor unit, or pushcart shall locate in any parking lot,
parking space, or parking facility owned, leased or managed by the City of Auburn unless approval
has been given by the City’s Board of Public Works and Safety.
No solicitor, mobile food vendor unit, mobile vendor unit, or pushcart shall locate in the street, street
median strip or alleyway that is adjacent to any other property without having the specific written
consent of all adjacent property owners.
No solicitor, mobile food vendor unit, mobile vendor unit, or pushcart shall locate on the street of a
Special Event authorized by the Board of Works and Safety unless prior approval has been granted
by both the operator of the Special Event and the City’s Board of Public Works and Safety.
No solicitor, mobile food vendor unit, mobile vendor unit, or pushcart shall be located in a manner
which would significantly impede or prevent the use of any City of Auburn property, or which would
endanger the safety or property of the public.
No solicitor, mobile food vendor unit, mobile vendor unit, or pushcart shall locate in a neighborhood
or on property wherein a sign reading “No Solicitation”, or something of a similar nature, has been
duly erected and displayed.
No solicitor, mobile food vendor unit, mobile vendor unit, or pushcart shall locate within one
hundred (100) feet- of any façade of a ground level establishment that also sells food, beverages, or
similar products or locate within fifty (50) feet of the perimeter of such an establishment’s outdoor
seating area. The distance restriction only applies from an hour before the opening time to an hour
after the closing time posted by a ground level establishment on the façade of its building.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 112-9
Itinerant Vendors
CHAPTER 112
Solicitors, mobile food vendor units, mobile vendor units, and pushcarts shall be located a
reasonable distance from all posted crosswalks, driveways, alleyways, right-of-way lines or two or
more intersecting streets and building entrances or walk-up windows.
Solicitors, mobile food vendor units, mobile vendor units, and pushcarts shall only be located on or
in front of private property if the private property owner has provided the business operator written
permission for the mobile food vendor unit, mobile vendor unit, or pushcart to locate on or in front of
said property.
No solicitor, mobile food vendor unit or mobile vendor unit shall park on City property in violation of
any City parking regulation, restriction, or ordinance.
No solicitor, mobile food vendor unit, mobile vendor unit, or pushcart shall be located within fifteen
feet of any fire hydrant.
Solicitors, mobile food vendor units, mobile vendor units, and pushcarts shall locate within any
zoning district, excepting therefrom any residential zone.
No solicitor, mobile food vendor unit, mobile vendor unit, or pushcart operating on private property
shall displace required parking or landscaping nor block any drives, parking access aisles, fire
lanes, sidewalks, or accessible routes required for the private parking by the City’s zoning code.
No solicitor, mobile food vendor unit or mobile vendor unit shall be located more than one foot away
from the curb of the street on which it is parked.
No solicitor, mobile food vendor unit, mobile vendor unit, or pushcart shall park near an intersection
and in a manner that blocks the line-of-sight of drivers using adjacent roadways.
112.150 PROHIBITED HOURS FOR THE OPERATION OF SOLICITORS/PEDDLERS, MOBILE VENDORS, AND
PUSHCARTS.
No solicitor, mobile vendor, pushcart, or peddler shall locate on the public streets or sidewalks in the City of
Auburn, Indiana between the hours of 8.00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Special events may receive extended hours,
with specific approval of the Auburn Board of Works and Public Safety. Solicitors, Peddlers, and/ or
Transient Merchants shall be restricted from operating earlier than 10.00 am and later than 5.00 p.m. in any
and all districts and zones in the City of Auburn, Indiana.
112.160 STANDARDS OF CONDUCT FOR SOLICITORS OR PEDDLERS OF MERCHANDISE.
All solicitors shall conform to the following standards of conduct:
Solicitors shall conduct themselves at all times in an orderly and lawful manner, and shall not make,
or cause to be made, any unreasonable noise of such volume as to be in violation of the City of
Auburn’s Noise Ordinance as stated in Title 13 of the Auburn Municipal Code;
A device may not be used which would amplify sounds nor may attention be drawn to the solicitor
by an aural means or a light-producing device (examples of such devices may include, but are not
meant to be limited to the following: bull horns and strobe lights);
No solicitor shall expose any person to any undue safety or health hazards nor create a public
nuisance;
Solicitors shall be required to obey the commands of law enforcement officers or fire officials with
respect to activity carried out inside of the City’s jurisdiction;
No person shall engage in abusive solicitation. Such abusive activity shall mean to do one or more
of the following while soliciting or immediately thereafter:
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 112-10
Itinerant Vendors
CHAPTER 112
1. Coming closer than three feet to the person solicited unless and until the person solicited
indicates that the person wishes to make a purchase or otherwise receive the solicitation;
2. Blocking or impeding the passage of the person solicited;
3. Repeating the solicitation after the person solicited has indicated an objection to the solicitation;
4. Following the person solicited by proceeding behind, ahead or alongside such person after the
person has indicated an objection to the solicitation;
5. Threatening the person solicited with physical harm by word or gesture;
6. Abusing the person solicited with words which are offensive and inherently likely to provide an
immediate violent reaction; or
7. Intentionally touching the solicited person without the solicited person’s consent.
No solicitor shall approach any vehicle driving upon, stopped upon, or parked upon any public or
private street or alley; and
No solicitor shall conduct his/her business from a street, alley, traffic island, or median.
All mobile food vendor unit operators, mobile vendor unit operators, and pushcart operators shall conform to
the following standards of conduct:
Mobile food vendor unit operators, mobile vendor unit operators, and pushcart operators shall
conduct themselves at all times in an orderly and lawful manner, and shall not make, or cause to be
made, any unreasonable noise of such volume as to be in violation of the City of Auburn’s Offenses
related to Public Peace as stated in Title 13, Chapter 130 of the Auburn Code of Ordinances;
A device may not be used which would amplify sounds nor may attention be drawn to the mobile
food vendor unit, mobile vendor unit, or pushcart by an aural means or a light-producing device
(examples of such devices include, but are not meant to be limited to the following: bull horns and
strobe lights);
No mobile food vendor unit, mobile vendor unit, or pushcart may be permanently or temporarily
affixed to any object, including but not limited to buildings, trees, telephone poles, streetlight poles,
traffic signal poles or fire hydrants;
No mobile food vendor unit, mobile vendor unit, or pushcart may be used to advertise any product
which is not authorized to be sold from that unit;
No mobile food vendor unit, mobile vendor unit, or pushcart shall be permitted to use any on-street
signage;
No mobile food vendor unit, mobile vendor unit, or pushcart may make use of any public electrical
outlet without permission from the Board of Works
Each mobile food vendor unit, mobile vendor unit, or pushcart shall protect against littering and
shall have an adequate trash receptacle for trash:
1. The trash and recyclable receptacles shall be emptied sufficiently often to allow disposal of litter
and waste by the public at any time;
2. The trash and recyclable receptacles on the mobile food vendor unit, mobile vendor unit, or
pushcart shall not be emptied into trash or recyclable receptacles owned by the City of Auburn;
3. Liquid from the mobile food vendor unit, mobile vendor unit, or pushcart shall not be discharged
on or in a City sewer or drain or elsewhere on City property, nor on private property without the
express written consent of the owner thereof;
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 112-11
Itinerant Vendors
CHAPTER 112
Before leaving any location each mobile food vendor unit, mobile vendor unit, or pushcart shall first
pick up, remove and dispose of all trash and/or recyclable materials, including products spilled on
the ground within twenty feet of the mobile food vendor unit, mobile vendor unit, or pushcart;
No mobile food vendor unit, mobile vendor unit, or pushcart shall expose any pedestrian to any
undue safety or health hazards not shall it be maintained so as to create a public nuisance;
Each mobile food vendor unit, mobile vendor unit, and pushcart shall be maintained free and clear
of dirt and finishes shall not be chipped, faded or unduly marred;
Foods or beverages which present a substantial likelihood that liquid matter or particles will drop to
the street or sidewalk during the process of carrying or consuming the food or beverage shall be
sold in proper containers so as to avoid falling to the street or sidewalk;
Mobile food vendor units and pushcarts which utilize a grill or device that may result in a spark,
flame or fire shall adhere to the following additional standards:
1. Be placed approximately six feet away from a building or structure;
2. Provide a barrier between the grill or device and the general public;
3. The spark, flame or fire shall not exceed twelve inches in height;
4. A fire extinguisher shall be within reaching distance of the mobile food vendor unit operator or
pushcart operator at all times.
Mobile food vendor unit operators, mobile vendor unit operators, and pushcart operators shall be
required to obey the commands of law enforcement officers or fire officials with respect to activity
carried out inside of the City’s jurisdictional limits, including, where possible, the removal of the
mobile food vendor unit or pushcart and cessation of such sales;
No mobile food vendor unit, mobile vendor unit, or pushcart shall ever be left unattended while in
use;
Mobile food vendor units, mobile vendor units, or pushcarts shall not be stored, parked or left
overnight on any City property;
All mobile food vendor units and pushcarts which are food service establishments shall install an
approved grease interceptor or grease trap. Foods, oils and greases shall never be discharged into
the City’s sewer or storm drains;
All mobile food vendor unit operators, mobile vendor unit operators, and pushcart operators are
required to collect and pay all applicable and appropriate sales taxes;
No mobile food vendor operator, mobile vendor unit operator, or pushcart operator shall provide
customer seating unless approval has been provided by the City’s Board of Public Works and
Safety and the City’s Planning and Transportation Department;
No detached generators or loose cords on the ground shall be allowed.
112.170 SAFETY REQUIREMENTS—SOLICITORS, MOBILE FOOD VENDOR UNITS, MOBILE VENDOR UNITS,
AND PUSHCARTS.
All mobile food vendor units, mobile vendor units, and pushcarts shall comply with the following safety
requirements:
All equipment installed shall be secured in order to prevent movement during transit and to prevent
detachment in the event of a collision or overturn.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 112-12
Itinerant Vendors
CHAPTER 112
All utensils shall be stored in a manner to prevent their being hurled about in the event of a sudden
stop, collision or overturn. A safety knife holder shall be provided by the vendor to avoid loose
storage of knives and other sharp or bladed instruments.
All foods and beverages to be used, prepared, cooked, displayed, sold, served, offered for sale or
stored in a mobile food vendor unit, or during transportation to or between locations shall be from
sources approved by the health authorities of the point of origin and must be clean, wholesome,
free from spillage, adulteration, contamination or misbranding and safe for human consumption.
The standards for judging wholesomeness for human food shall be those promulgated and
amended from time to time by the United State Food and Drug Administration, United State
Department of Agriculture, the State Department of Health, the State Department of Agriculture, and
the DeKalb County Health Department and published in the United States Code of Federal
Regulations, the Indiana Code Annotated or the Indiana Administrative Code, and the DeKalb
County Code.
Each mobile food vendor unit shall be constructed so that the portions of the unit containing food
shall be covered so that no dust or dirt will settle on the food; and such portions of the unit which
are designed to contain food shall be at least eighteen inches above the surface of the public way
while the unit is being used for the conveyance of food.
The food storage areas of each mobile food vendor unit shall be kept free from rats, mice, flies and
other insects and vermin. No living animals, birds, fowl, reptiles or amphibians shall be permitted in
any area where food is stored.
Hazardous non-food items such as detergents, insecticides, rodenticides, plants, paint and paint
products that are poisonous or toxic in nature shall not be stored in the food area of the mobile food
vendor unit.
If a cooking operation involves grease-laden (grills, fryers), a class K rated portable extinguisher
shall be required to be maintained on site.
The Department of Building, Planning and Development or an agent of said department may enforce this
section by ordering operations to suspend until corrective action is taken. In addition, penalties may be
enforced for violations in accordance with 112.180.
112.180 PENALTIES—REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
Any person, partnership, limited liability company or corporation which violated any provision of this
Chapter, shall be subject to the following penalties:
1. Soliciting or operating without a license:
• First offense - $250.00
• Second offense within any 12-month period - $1,000.00
• Third offense, or each thereafter, within any 12-month period - $3,000.00
2. Failure to comply with any other provisions of this Chapter:
• First offense - $250.00;
• Second offense within any 12-month period - $500.00;
• Third offense, or each thereafter, within any 12-mo. Period - $1,000.00.
In addition, the Department of Building, Planning, and Development shall, after notice and hearing
before the City’s Board of Public Works and Safety, suspend or revoke, by written order, any
license issued hereunder if the Board of Public Works and Safety finds:
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 112-13
Itinerant Vendors
CHAPTER 112
1. The licensee has violated any provision of this Chapter or any rule or regulation lawfully
made under and within the authority of this Chapter;
2. The licensee is operating the solicitor license under this Chapter in a manner contrary to the
State of local code; or
3. Any fact of condition exists which, if it had existed at the time of the original application for such
license, would have permitted the Department of Building, Planning, and Development to refuse
originally to issue such license.
Any person charged with violating the provisions of this Chapter may, in the discretion of the
enforcement officer, be issued an official warning. If an official warning is issued it shall be
considered as affording the violator one opportunity to comply with this Chapter’s provisions.
112.190 RESTRICTION ON USE AND LICENSES.
The City of Auburn has exclusive authority to restrict the use of mobile food vendor units, mobile vendor
units, or pushcarts and the issuance of business licenses for mobile food vendor units or pushcarts under
the following conditions:
The City may restrict the use of mobile food vendor units, mobile vendor units, pushcarts, or
solicitors in certain designated areas of the City in the event of an emergency declared by the
Mayor, the Chief of Police, the Fire Chief, the Director of Public Works, the Director of Utilities,
and/or any of the aforementioned duly appointed designees.
Absent an emergency as described above, the City may restrict the use of mobile food vendor units,
mobile vendor units, pushcarts or solicitors in certain designated areas of the City provided the City
has given each mobile food vendor, mobile vendor, pushcart or solicitor licensee written notice of
the restriction at least seventy-two hours in advance of the restriction going into effect.
All persons who meet the definition of “Transient Merchant(s)” (this shall include “Solicitors” and / or
“Peddlers”) under Indiana Code shall comply with all provisions under Indiana Code Section 25-37-
1. This shall include if applicable proof from the County Auditor, that all applicable provisions of
Indiana Code Section 25-37-1 et al. have been complied with.
(Ordinance 2015-07 Passed 01.05.2016)
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Junkyards
CHAPTER 114
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 114-2
Junkyards
CHAPTER 114
Table of Contents
114.01 JUNKYARDS
114.99 PENALTY
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 114-3
Junkyards
CHAPTER 114
114.01 JUNKYARDS
All junkyards within the corporate limits of the city shall be kept and maintained in a clean and
sanitary condition and free from offensive odors, and they shall each be surrounded by a light board
fence of sufficient height so that no junk can be seen from outside the enclosure. The fence shall
be not less than ten feet high and shall at all times be kept in good repair and in a neat and sightly
condition.
No person shall establish a junkyard in the city within 250 feet of any residence at the time the
junkyard is established. Any junkyard established within this distance shall constitute a nuisance
and shall be abated as such.
114.99 PENALTY
Any person violating 114.01 shall, upon conviction, be fined in any sum not exceeding $50 and each day
that this is violated shall constitute a separate offense.
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Taxicabs
CHAPTER 113
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 113-2
Taxicabs
CHAPTER 113
Table of Contents
113.01 DEFINITIONS
113.02 CERTIFICATES REQUIRED
113.03 APPLICATION FOR CERTIFICATE
113.04 PERMIT REQUIRED
113.05 CERTIFICATE AND PERMIT FEES
113.06 INSURANCE
113.99 PENALTY
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 113-3
Taxicabs
CHAPTER 113
113.01 DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.
• MOTOR VEHICLE
Any motor or self-propelled vehicle, trailer, or semi-trailer.
• TAXICAB
Any motor vehicle designed or constructed to accommodate or transport passengers, the principal
operation of which is confined to the corporate limits and suburban areas of the city, which does not
operate over any definite route, and the destination of which is designated by the passenger or
passengers at the time of transportation.
113.02 CERTIFICATES REQUIRED
No person shall operate any taxicab on the public streets of the city without having received a certificate to
operate a taxicab service in the city from the Clerk-Treasurer. The certificate shall be in full force and effect
at the time of the operation of the taxicab.
113.03 APPLICATION FOR CERTIFICATE
Any person desiring to operate a taxicab on the public streets of the city shall make application to the Clerk-
Treasurer for a certificate for a taxicab service, giving the name of the person desiring to operate the taxicab
service, stating the number of taxicabs to be used, and any other material information as may be required
with reference to the application. The Clerk-Treasurer shall refer the application, together with information
he may have received relative to the application, to the Board of Public Works and Safety. The Board shall
consider the information and if in the opinion of a majority of the members there is a public need for
additional taxicab service and it would be for the best interest to have additional taxicab service, the
Treasurer shall issue a certificate to that person to operate a taxicab service in the city.
113.04 PERMIT REQUIRED
No person shall operate any taxicab upon the public streets of the city until the driver or owner has made
application for and received a permit from the Clerk-Treasurer, and the permit shall be in addition to the
certificate. The permit shall authorize the operation of that particular taxicab only, and the permit shall be
obtained in the same manner as the certificate. If at any time additional taxicabs are desired to be used, the
owner of a valid certificate to operate a taxicab service shall make application for and pay for a permit to
operate the additional taxicabs.
113.05 CERTIFICATE AND PERMIT FEES
The fee to be charged for a certificate to operate a taxicab service in the city shall be $10 annually. In
addition, the fee to be charged for each taxicab to be operated within the city shall be $5 annually. All
certificates or permits shall be charged and paid for in an amount proportional to the remaining part of the
year ending December 31 of the year in which the certificate or permit is issued. A certificate for a taxicab
service or a permit to operate any taxicab shall be sold or assigned only on written petition to and approval
of the Board of Public Works and Safety of the city.
113.06 INSURANCE
No driver of any taxicab shall operate it upon the streets of the city until fully covered by insurance by a
reliable insurance company to cover all accidents and damages caused from negligent operation of the
driver, and the insurance has been approved by the Board of Public Works and Safety of the city. The
Board shall determine the kind and the amount of the insurance.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 113-4
Taxicabs
CHAPTER 113
113.99 PENALTY
Any person or driver of any taxicab violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined in any sum not exceeding $50.
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Sexually Oriented
Business
CHAPTER 117
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 117-2
Sexually Oriented Business
CHAPTER 117
Table of Contents
117.000 PURPOSE AND FINDINGS
117.001 DEFINITIONS
117.002 CLASSIFICATION
117.003 SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS LICENSE
117.004 REGULATIONS
117.005 PROHIBITION AGAINST CHILDREN IN A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS
117.006 EXEMPTIONS
117.007 INJUNCTION
117.008 SEVERABILITY; CONFLICTING ORDINANCESREPEALED
117.009 HOURS OF OPERATION
117.010 PROHIBITION AGAINST EMPLOYEES OF THE POLICEDEPARTMENT BEING EMPLOYED AT A
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS
117.011 PENALTY
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 117-3
Sexually Oriented Business
CHAPTER 117
117.000 PURPOSE AND FINDINGS
Purpose
It is the purpose of this subchapter to regulate sexually oriented businesses in order to promote
health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the citizens of the city, and to establish reasonable
and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious location and concentration of sexually oriented
businesses within the city. The provisions of this subchapter have neither the purpose nor effect of
imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually
oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this subchapter to restrict or deny
access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny
access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market.
Neither is it the intent or effect of this subchapter to condone or legitimize the distribution of
obscenematerial.
Findings
Based on evidence concerning the adverse secondary effects of adult uses on the community
presented in hearings and in reports made available to Council, and on findings incorporated in the
case of City of Renton v. Playtime Theaters, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986), Young v. American Mini
Theaters, 426 U.S. 50 (1976), Barnes v. Glen Theater, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991), and all other
relevant court decisions related to and concerning the adverse secondary effects of adult uses on
the community.
This subchapter has also taken into account land usage studies performed in other communities
including, but not limited to Phoenix, Arizona; Minneapolis, Minnesota; Houston, Texas;
Indianapolis, Indiana; Amarillo, Texas; Garden Grove, California; Los Angeles, California; Whittier,
California; Austin, Texas; Seattle, Washington; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma; Cleveland, Ohio; and
Beaumont, Texas; and also on findings from the Report of the Attorney General's Working Group
on the Regulation of Sexually Oriented Businesses, (June 6, 1989, State of Minnesota), the Council
finds:
1. Sexually oriented businesses lend themselves to ancillary unlawful and unhealthy activities that
are presently uncontrolled by the operators of the establishments. Further, there is presently no
mechanism to make the owners of these establishments responsible for the activities that occur
on their premises.
2. Certain employees of sexually oriented businesses defined in this subchapter as adult theaters
and cabarets engage in higher incidence of certain types of illicit sexual behavior than
employees of other establishments.
3. Sexual acts, including masturbation, and oral and anal sex, occur at sexually oriented
businesses, especially those, which provide private or semi-private booths or cubicles for
viewing films, videos, or live sex shows.
4. Offering and providing such space encourages such activities, which create unhealthy
conditions.
5. Persons frequent certain adult theaters, adult arcades, and other sexually oriented businesses
for the purpose of engaging in sex within the premises of such sexually oriented businesses.
6. At least 50 communicable diseases may be spread by activities occurring in sexually oriented
businesses, including but not limited to, syphilis, gonorrhea, human immunodeficiency virus
infection (HIV-AIDS), genital herpes, hepatitis B, Non A, Non B amebiasis, salmonella infections
and shigella infections.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 117-4
Sexually Oriented Business
CHAPTER 117
7. Since 1981 and to the present, there has been an increasing cumulative number of reported
cases of AIDS caused by the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) in the United States - 600 in
1982, 2,200 in 1983, 4,600 in 1984, 8,555 in 1985 and 253,448 through December 31, 1992.
8. As of December 31, 1999, there are a significant number of reported cases of AIDS in the State
of Indiana.
9. Since 1981 and to the present, there have been a number of persons in Auburn and DeKalb
County, Indiana testing positive for the HIV antibody.
10. The number of cases of early (less than one year) syphilis in the United States reported
annually has risen, with 33,613 cases reported in the 1982 and 45,200 through November
1990.
11. The number of cases of gonorrhea in the United States reported annually remains at a high
level, with over one-half million cases reported in 1990.
12. The surgeon general of the United States in his report of October 22, 1986, has advised the
American public that AIDS and HIV infection may be transmitted through sexual contact,
intravenous drug abuse, exposure to infected blood and blood components, and from an
infected mother to her newborn.
13. According to the best scientific evidence, AIDS and HIV infection, as well as syphilis and
gonorrhea, can be transmitted, among other ways, by sexual acts.
14. Sanitary conditions in some sexually oriented businesses are unhealthy, in part, because the
activities conducted there are unhealthy, and, in part, because of the unregulated nature of the
activities and the failure of the owners and the operators of the facilities to self-regulate
those activities and maintain those facilities.
15. Numerous studies and reports have determined that semen is found in the areas of sexually
oriented businesses where people view "adult" oriented films.
16. The findings noted in divisions (1) through (15) above raise substantial governmental concerns
and a substantial governmental interest .
17. Sexually oriented businesses have operational characteristics, which should be reasonably
regulated in order to protect those substantial governmental concerns and or interests.
18. A reasonable licensing procedure is an appropriate mechanism to place the burden of that
reasonable regulation on the owners and the operators of the sexually oriented businesses.
Further, such a licensing procedure will place a heretofore nonexistent incentive on the
operators to see that the sexually oriented business is run in a manner consistent with the
health, safety and welfare of its patrons and employees, as well as the citizens of the city. It is
appropriate to require reasonable assurances that the licensee is the actual operator of the
sexually oriented business, fully in possession and control of the premises and activities
occurring therein.
19. Removal of doors on adult booths and requiring sufficient lighting on premises with adult
booths advances a substantial governmental interest in curbing the illegal and unsanitary
sexual activity occurring in adult theaters.
20. Requiring licensees of sexually oriented businesses to keep information regarding current
employees and certain past employees will help reduce the incidence of certain types of
criminal behavior by facilitating the identification of potential witnesses or suspects and by
preventing minors from working in such establishments.
21. The disclosure of certain information by those persons ultimately responsible for the day-to-day
operation and maintenance of the sexually oriented business, where such information is
substantially related to the significant governmental interest and or concern in the operation of
such uses, will aid in preventing the spread of sexually transmitted diseases.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 117-5
Sexually Oriented Business
CHAPTER 117
22. It is desirable in the prevention of the spread of communicable diseases to obtain a limited
amount of information regarding certain employees who may engage in the conduct, which this
subchapter is designed to prevent or who are likely to be witnesses to such activity.
23. The fact that an applicant for an adult use license has been convicted of a sexually or violent
related crime leads to the rational assumption that the applicant may engage in that conduct in
contravention of this subchapter.
24. The barring of such individuals from the management of adult uses for a period of years serves
as a deterrent to and prevents conduct, which leads to the transmission of sexually transmitted
diseases.
25. The general welfare, health, morals and safety of the citizens of the city will be promoted by the
enactment of this subchapter.
117.001 DEFINITIONS
• ADULT ARCADE
Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated, slug-operated, or for any
form of consideration, electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture
machines, projectors, video or laser disc players, or other image-producing devices are maintained to
show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed
are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of "specified sexual activities" or
"specified anatomical areas."
• ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT NOVELTY STORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE
A commercial establishment in which 20% or more of the inventory by quantity is offered for sale or
rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the following:
1. Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures,
video cassettes or video reproductions, slides, or other visual representations which are
characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified
anatomical areas"; or
2. Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia, which are designed for use in connection with
"specified sexual activities."
A commercial establishment may have other principal business purposes that do not involve the offering
for sale or rental of material depicting or describing "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical
areas" and still be categorized as ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT NOVELTY STORE, or ADULT VIDEO
STORE. Such other business purposes will not serve to exempt such commercial establishments from
being categorized as an ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT NOVELTY STORE, or ADULT VIDEO STORE
so long as more than 20% of the business purposes are offered for sale or rental for consideration the
specified materials which are characterized by the depiction or description of “specified sexual activities"
or "specified anatomical areas."
• ADULT CABARET
A nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar commercial establishment, which regularly features:
1. Persons who appear in a state of nudity or semi-nude; or
2. Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of "specified anatomical
areas" or by "specified sexual activities;" or
3. C. Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions, which
are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified
anatomical areas".
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 117-6
Sexually Oriented Business
CHAPTER 117
• ADULT MOTEL
A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which:
1. Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; provides patrons with
closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other
photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified
sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas"; and has a sign visible from the public right of
way which advertises the availability of this adult type of photographic reproductions; or
2. Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than 10 hours; or
3. Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to sub rent the room for a period of time that is
less than 10 hours.
• ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER
A commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video
cassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are characterized by
the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical area". R-rated movies
are not intended to meet this definition. NC-17 and or X-rated type movies are intended to meet this
definition.
• ADULT THEATER
A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial establishment which regularly features persons
who appear in a state of nudity or semi-nude, or live performances which are characterized by the
exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities". R-rated movies are not
intended to meet this definition. NC-17 and X-rated movies are intended to meet this definition.
• CONNECTED or CONNECTION
The person receives consideration in return for providing as service to or for sexually oriented business.
• EMPLOYEE
A person who performs any service on the premises of a sexually oriented business on a full time, part
time or contract basis, whether or not the person is denominated an employee, independent contractor,
agent or otherwise and whether or not said person is paid a salary, wage or other compensation by the
operator of said business. Employee does not include a person exclusively on the premises for repair or
maintenance of the premises or equipment on the premises, or for the delivery of goods to the premises.
• ESCORT
A person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a sexual companion for another person, or
who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another person.
• ESCORT AGENCY
A person or business association who furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one
of its primary business purposes for a fee, tip or other consideration.
• ESTABLISHMENT
Includes any of the following:
1. The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new business;
2. The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented business, to any
sexually oriented business;
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 117-7
Sexually Oriented Business
CHAPTER 117
3. The additions of any sexually oriented business to any other existing sexually oriented
business; or
4. The relocation of any sexually oriented business.
• LICENSEE
A person in whose name a license to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as well as
the individual listed as an applicant on the application for a license; and in the case of an employee, a
person in whose name a license has been issued authorizing employment in a sexually oriented
business.
• NUDE MODEL STUDIO
Any place where a person who appears semi-nude, in a state of nudity, or who displays "specified
anatomical areas" and is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed,
or similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration.
NUDE MODEL STUDIO shall not include a proprietary school licensed by the state or a college, junior
college or university supported entirely or in part by public taxation; a private college or university which
maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior
college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or in a structure:
1. That has no sign visible from exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a
nude or semi-nude person is available for viewing; and
2. Where in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at least three days in advance of
the class; and
3. Where no more than one nude or semi-nude model is on the premises at any one time.
• NUDITY or a STATE OF NUDITY
The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage with
less than a fully opaque covering, the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque
covering of the nipple, or the showing of the covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state.
• PERSON
An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association, limited liability company or
partnership or any other legal entity recognized under local, state, federal or international law.
• SEMI-NUDE or in a SEMI-NUDE CONDITION
The showing of the female breast below a horizontal line across the top of the areola at its highest point
or the showing of the male or female buttocks. This definition shall include the entire lower portion of the
human female breast, but shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the human female breast,
exhibited by a dress, blouse, skirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other wearing apparel provided the areola is
not exposed in whole or in part.
• SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER
A business or commercial enterprise that, as one of its business purposes, offers for any form of
consideration:
1. Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the opposite sex; or
2. Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same sex when one or more
of the persons is in a state of nudity or semi-nude.
• SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 117-8
Sexually Oriented Business
CHAPTER 117
An adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult novelty store, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult
motion picture theater, adult theater, escort agency, nude model studio or sexual encounter center.
• SPECIFIED ANATOMIC AREAS
1. The human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered;
or
2. Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or a female
breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola.
• SPECIFIED CRIMINAL ACTIVITY
Any of the following offenses:
1. Prostitution or promotion of prostitution; dissemination of obscenity; sale, distribution or display
of harmful material to a minor; sexual performance by a child; possession or distribution of child
pornography; public lewdness; indecent exposure; indecency with a child; engaging in
organized criminal activity; sexual assault; molestation of a child; gambling; or distribution of a
controlled substance; or any similar offenses to those described above under the criminal or
penal code of other states or countries; for which:
a. Less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from
confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a
misdemeanor offense;
b. Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from
confinement for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony
offense; or
c. Less than five years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release
from confinement for the last conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of
two or more misdemeanor offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring
within any 24-month period.
2. The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the disqualification of the
application or a person residing with the applicant.
• SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES
Any of the following:
1. The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female
breasts;
2. Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation,
masturbation, or sodomy; or
3. Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in divisions (1)
and (2) above.
• SUBSTANTIAL ENLARGEMENT
The increase in floor areas occupied by the business by more than 25%, as the floor areas exist on the
date this subchapter takes effect.
• TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL
Includes any of the following:
1. The sale, lease or sublease of the business;
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 117-9
Sexually Oriented Business
CHAPTER 117
2. The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale,
exchange, or similar means; or
3. The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device which transfers the ownership or
control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the
death of the person possessing the ownership or control.
117.002 CLASSIFICATION
Sexually oriented businesses are classified as follows:
Adult arcades;
Adult bookstores, adult novelty stores, or adult video stores;
Adult cabarets;
Adult motels;
Adult motion picture theaters;
Adult theaters;
Escort agencies;
Nude model studios; and
Sexual encounter centers.
117.003 SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS LICENSE
License required
1. It is a violation of this subchapter:
a. For any person to operate a sexually oriented business without a valid sexually oriented
business license issued by the city pursuant to this subchapter.
b. For any person who operates a sexually oriented business to employ a person to work for
the sexually oriented business who is not licensed as a sexually oriented business
employee by the city pursuant to this subchapter.
c. For any person to obtain employment with a sexually oriented business without having
secured a sexually oriented business employee license pursuant to this subchapter.
2. An application for a license must be made on a form provided by the city.
3. All applicants must be qualified according to the provisions of this subchapter. The application
may request and the applicant shall provide such information (including fingerprints) as to
enable the city to determine whether the applicant meets the qualifications established in this
subchapter.
4. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an individual, the person must
sign the application for a license as an applicant. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually
oriented business is other than an individual, each individual who has a 20% or greater interest
in the business must sign the application for a license as applicant. Each applicant must be
qualified under the division (B) below and each applicant shall be considered a licensee if a
license is granted.
5. The completed application for a sexually oriented business license shall contain the following
information and shall be accompanied by the following documents:
a. If the applicant is:
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 117-10
Sexually Oriented Business
CHAPTER 117
i. An individual, the individual shall state his or her legal name and any aliases and submit
proof that he or she is 18 years of age;
ii. A partnership, the partnership shall state its complete name, and the names of all
partners, whether the partnership is general or limited, and a copy of the partnership
agreement, if any;
iii. A corporation, the corporation shall state its complete name, the date of its
incorporation, evidence that the corporation is in good standing under the laws of its
state of incorporation, the names and capacity of all officers, directors and principal
stockholders, and the name of the registered corporate agent and the address of the
registered office for service of process.
iv. A Limited Liability Company
The LLC shall state its complete name, and the names of all managers and or members,
evidence that the LLC is in good standing under the laws of its state of organization.
The names and capacity of all officers, directors and principal members, and the name
of the registered company agent and the address of the registered office for service of
process.
v. Any other business entity recognized or able to be operated in the state, and the name
of all individuals with an ownership interest therein, evidence that said business is in
good standing under the law. Also, the names and capacity of all officers, members,
directors, owners, partners, or any other individual who has decision making power
within the business and the registered agent of the business for service of process.
b. If the applicant intends to operate the sexually oriented business under a name other than
that of the applicant: he or she must state the sexually oriented business's trade name and
submit the required registration documents.
c. Whether the applicant, or a person residing with the applicant, has been convicted of a
specified criminal activity as defined in this subchapter, and, if so, the specified criminal
activity involved, the date, place, and jurisdiction of each.
d. Whether the applicant, or a person residing with the applicant, has had a previous license
under this subchapter or other similarly sexually oriented business ordinances from another
city or county denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the
sexually oriented business for which the permit was denied, suspended or revoked, as well
as the date of the denial, suspension or revocation, and whether the applicant or a person
residing with the applicant has been a partner in a partnership or an officer, director or
principal stockholder of a corporation, member manager or member of an LLC or any other
person with a private business interest that is licensed under this subchapter whose license
has previously been denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the
sexually oriented business for which the permit was denied, suspended or revoked as well
as the date of denial, suspension or revocation.
e. Whether the applicant or a person residing with the applicant holds any other licenses under
this subchapter or other similar sexually oriented business ordinance from another city or
county and, if so, the names and location of such other licensed businesses.
f. The single classification of license for which the applicant is filing.
g. The location of the proposed sexually oriented business, including a legal description of
the property, an up to date survey prepared by a licensed surveyor in the state, evidence of
clear title by way of title insurance, the street address and telephone number(s), if any of
said business.
h. The applicant's mailing address and residential address and the applicant's home and
business phone numbers.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 117-11
Sexually Oriented Business
CHAPTER 117
i. A recent photograph of the applicant(s) and any individual who is involved with the business
including all professionals involved with the development of the business at the time of
application.
j. The applicant's driver's license number, Social Security Number, and/or his or her state or
federally issued tax identification number.
k. A sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of
total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram should be professionally
prepared, and it must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of
the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches.
l. A current certificate and straight-line drawing prepared within 30 days prior to application by
a registered land surveyor depicting the property lines and the structures containing any
existing sexually oriented businesses within 1,000 feet of the property to be certified; the
property lines of any established religious institution/synagogue, residential zone, school or
public park or recreation area, institutions licensed to sell alcohol, and family oriented
businesses within 1,000 feet of the property to be certified. For purposes of this section, a
use shall be considered existing or established, if it is in existence at the time an application
is submitted.
m. If an applicant wishes to operate a sexually oriented business, other than an adult motel,
which shall exhibit on the premises, in a viewing room or booth of less than 150 square feet
of floor space, films, video cassettes, other video reproductions, or live entertainment which
depict specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, then the applicant shall
comply with the application requirements set forth in this code.
6. Before any applicant may be issued a sexually oriented business employee license, the
applicant shall submit on a form to be provided by the city the following information:
a. The applicant's name or any other name (including "stage" names) or aliases used by the
individual;
b. Age, date, and place of birth;
c. Height, weight, hair and eye color;
d. Present residence address and telephone number;
e. Present business address and telephone number;
f. Date, issuing state and number of driver's permit or other identification card information;
g. Social security number; and
h. Proof that the individual is at least 18 years of age.
i. Address for the last 10 years.
j. Any denial of a sexually oriented business application in any other municipality, county or
state for the last 10 years by the business or any individual acting on behalf of the
company.
7. Attached to the application form for a sexually oriented business employee license as provided
above, shall be the following:
a. A color photograph of the applicant clearly showing the applicant's face and the applicant's
fingerprints on a form provided by the police department. The applicant shall pay any fees
for the photographs and fingerprints.
b. A statement detailing the license history of the applicant for the five years immediately
preceding the date of the filing of the application, including whether such applicant
previously operated or is seeking to operate, in this or any other county, city or state has
ever had a license, permit or authorization to do business denied, revoked, or suspended,
or had any professional or vocational license or permit denied, revoked or suspended. In the
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 117-12
Sexually Oriented Business
CHAPTER 117
event of any such denial, revocation, or suspension, state the name, the name of the
issuing or denying jurisdiction, and describe in full the reason for the denial, revocation, or
suspension shall be attached to the application.
c. A statement whether the applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal activity as
defined in this subchapter and, if so, the specified criminal activity involved, the date, place
and jurisdiction of each.
Issuance of license
1. The Clerk-Treasurer or like kind position shall be the individual charged with processing the
license requirements and issuing the license under this subchapter. The Clerk-Treasurer or like
kind position shall be charged with delegating authority and assigning responsibilities in order to
carry out the functions and procedures under this subchapter.
2. The applicant under this subchapter must be in compliance with all health and safety laws
promulgated by any county, state or federal agency.
3. The applicant must be in compliance and have written evidence from the DeKalb County Health
Department that the business applied for will meet all health and safety provisions under the
guidance and authority of the County Health Department.
a. Upon the filing of said application for a sexually oriented business employee license, the city
shall issue a temporary license to said applicant. The application shall then be referred to
the appropriate city departments for an investigation to be made on such information as is
contained on the application. The application process shall be completed within 90 days
from the date the completed application is filed. After the investigation, the city shall issue a
license, unless it is determined by a preponderance of the evidence that one or more of the
following findings is true: The applicant has failed to provide information reasonably
necessary for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a question or request for
information on the application form;
b. The applicant is under the age of 18 years of age;
c. The applicant has been convicted of a "specified criminal activity" as defined in this
subchapter;
d. The sexually oriented business employee license is to be used for employment in a
business prohibited by local or state law, statute, rule or regulation, or prohibited by a
particular provision of this subchapter; or
e. The applicant has had a sexually oriented business employee license revoked by any
governmental body within four years of the date of the current application. If the sexually
oriented business employee license is denied, any temporary license previously issued is
immediately deemed null and void. Denial, suspension, or revocation of a license issued
pursuant to this subsection shall be subject to appeal as set forth in division (G) of this
section.
4. A license granted pursuant to this section shall be subject to annual renewal upon the written
application of the applicant and a finding by the city that the applicant has not been convicted of
any specified criminal activity as defined in this subchapter or committed any act during the
existence of the previous license, which would be grounds to deny the initial license application.
The renewal of the license shall be subject to the payment of the fee as set forth in division (C)
of this section.
5. Within 90 days after receipt of a completed sexually oriented business application, the city shall
approve or deny the issuance of a license to an applicant. The city may extend this period for a
time of up to 60 days upon good cause shown. The city shall approve the issuance of a license
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 117-13
Sexually Oriented Business
CHAPTER 117
to an applicant unless it is determined by a preponderance of the evidence that one or more of
the following findings is true:
a. An applicant is under 18 years of age.
b. An applicant or a person with whom applicant is residing is overdue in payment to the city of
taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed against or imposed upon him or her in relation to
any business.
c. An applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary for issuance of the
license or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application
form.
d. An applicant or a person with whom the applicant is residing has been denied a license by
the city to operate a sexually oriented business within the preceding 12 months or whose
license to operate a sexually oriented business has been revoked within the preceding 12
months.
e. An applicant or a person with whom the applicant is residing has been convicted of a
specified criminal activity defined in this subchapter.
f. The premises to be used for the sexually oriented business have not been approved by the
health department, fire department, and the building official as being in compliance with
applicable laws and ordinances.
g. The license fee required by this subchapter has not been paid.
h. An applicant of the proposed establishment is in violation of or is not in compliance with any
of the provisions of this subchapter.
6. The license, if granted shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is
granted, the expiration date, the address of the sexually oriented business and the classification
for which the license is issued pursuant to 117.002. All licenses shall be posted in a
conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business so that they may be
easily read at any time.
7. The health department, fire department, police department and the building official and or like
kind department shall complete their certification that the premises is in compliance or not in
compliance within 75 days of receipt of the application by the city. An extension of this time may
be made upon good cause shown.
8. A sexually oriented business license shall issue for only one classification as found in 117.002.
9. The applicant herein must be in compliance and present written evidence from the DeKalb
County Health Department that all standards and regulations under their authority have been
met.
Fees
1. Every application for a sexually oriented business license (whether for a new license or for
renewal of an existing license) shall be accompanied by a $750 non-refundable application and
investigation fee.
2. In addition to the application and investigation fee required above, every sexually oriented
business that is granted a license (new or renewal) shall pay to the city an annual nonrefundable
license fee of $250 within 30 days of license issuance or renewal.
3. Every application for a sexually oriented business employee license (whether for a new license
or for a renewal of an existing license) shall be accompanied by an annual $250 non-refundable
application, investigation, and license fee, referred to above.
4. All license applications and fees shall be submitted to the Clerk-Treasurer.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 117-14
Sexually Oriented Business
CHAPTER 117
5. The above referenced fees shall be used for investigations and administrative purposes. The
purpose of the fee is not to limit or prohibit the ability to establish such businesses under this
subchapter in any way.
Inspection
1. An applicant or licensee shall permit representatives of the Police Department, Health
Department, Fire Department, Zoning/Building Department or other relevant city departments or
agencies to inspect the premises of a sexually oriented business for the purpose of insuring
compliance with the law, at any time it is occupied or open for business.
2. A person who operates a sexually oriented business or his or her agent or employee violates
this subchapter if he or she refuses to permit such lawful inspection of the premises at any time
it is open for business.
Expiration of license
1. Each license shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be renewed only by
making application as provided in division (A) above. Application for renewal shall be made at
least 30 days before the expiration date; the expiration of the license will not be affected.
2. When the city denies renewal of a license, the applicant shall not be issued a license for one
year from the date of denial.
Suspension
The city shall suspend a license for a period not to exceed 30 days if it determines that a license or an
employee of a licensee has:
1. Violated or is not in compliance with any section of this subchapter;
2. Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business premises as authorized by this
subchapter.
Revocation
1. The city shall revoke a license if a cause of suspension in division (F) above occurs and license
has been suspended within the preceding 12 months.
2. The city shall also revoke a license if it determines that:
a. A licensee gave false or misleading information in the material submitted during the
application process;
b. A licensee has knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the
premises;
c. A licensee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises;
d. A licensee knowingly operated the sexually oriented business during a period of time
when the licensee's license was suspended;
e. A licensee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation,
masturbation, or other sex act to occur in or on the licensed premises; or
f. A licensee is delinquent in payment to the city, county, or state for any taxes or fees past
due.
3. When the city revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for one year, and the licensee
shall not be issued a sexually oriented business license for one year from the date the
revocation became effective. If, subsequent to revocation, the city finds that the basis for the
revocation has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license if at least 90
days have elapsed since the date the revocation became effective.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 117-15
Sexually Oriented Business
CHAPTER 117
4. After denial of an application, or denial of renewal of an application, or suspension or revocation
of any license, the applicant or licensee may seek prompt judicial review of such administrative
action in any court of competent jurisdiction. However, before seeking judicial review the
applicant must request an administrative hearing before Board of Public Works and Safety. The
Board of Public Works and Safety shall conduct an administrative hearing in which evidence will
be presented and findings will be made which will: either affirm the revocation, modify the
revocation in some manner or overturn the revocation. After the administrative review, the
applicant may then seek a competent court to promptly review the administrative action as soon
as the court's calendar may permit.
Transfer of license
A licensee shall not transfer his or her license to another, nor shall a licensee operate a sexually
oriented business under the authority of a license at any place other than the address designated in the
application.
117.004 REGULATIONS
Additional regulations for adult motels
1. Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or a similar commercial establishment has been
rented and vacated two or more times in a period of time that is less than 10 hours creates a
rebuttal presumption that the establishment is an adult motel as that term is defined in this
subchapter.
2. A person commits a violation of this subchapter if, as the person in control of a sleeping room in
a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment that does not have a sexually oriented
license, he or she rents or sub rents a sleeping room to a person and, within 10 hours from the
time the room is rented, he or she rents or sub rents the same sleeping room again.
3. For purposes of division (2) above, the terms "rent" or "sub rent" mean the act of permitting a
room to be occupied for any form of consideration.
Regulations pertaining to exhibition of sexually explicit films, videos or live entertainment in viewing
rooms
1. A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, other than an
adult motel, which exhibits on the premises in a viewing room of less than 150 square feet of
floor space, a film, video cassette, live entertainment or other video reproduction which depicts
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, shall comply with the following
requirements:
a. Upon application for a sexually oriented license, the application shall be accompanied by a
diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof specifying the location of one or more
manager's stations and the location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any
portion of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. A manager’s station may
not exceed 32 square feet of floor area. The diagram shall also designate the place at which
the permit will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the
nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram
should be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and should be drawn
to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal
dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six
inches. The city may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant
adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the
premises has not been altered since it was prepared.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 117-16
Sexually Oriented Business
CHAPTER 117
b. The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the applicant.
c. No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's station may be made without
the prior approval of the city.
d. It is the duty of the licensee of the premises to ensure that at least one licensed employee is
on duty and situated in each manager's station at all times that any patron is present inside
the premises.
e. The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an
unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of the premises to which any
patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not
contain video reproduction equipment. If the premises has two or more manager's stations
designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that
there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is
permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the manager's stations. The view
required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight from the manager's station.
f. It shall be the duty of the licensee to ensure that the view area specified in division (e)
above remains unobstructed by any doors, curtains, partitions, walls, merchandise, display
racks or other materials and, at all times, to ensure that no patron is permitted access to
any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be
permitted in the application filed pursuant to division (a) of this subsection.
g. No viewing room may be occupied by more than one person at any time.
h. The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to
illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less
than five foot-candles as measured at the floor level.
i. It shall be the duty of the licensee to ensure that the illumination described in division (B) (1)
(h) above is maintained at all times that any patron is present in the premises.
j. No licensee shall allow openings of any kind to exist between viewing rooms or booths.
k. No person shall make or attempt to make an opening of any kind between viewing booths or
rooms.
l. The licensee shall, during each business day, regularly inspect the walls between the
viewing booths to determine if any openings or holes exist.
m. The licensee shall cause all floor coverings in viewing booths to be nonporous, easily
cleanable surfaces with no rugs or carpeting.
n. The licensee shall cause all wall surfaces and ceiling surfaces in viewing booths to be
constructed of, or permanently covered by, nonporous, easily cleanable material. No wood,
plywood, composition board or other porous material shall be used within 48 inches of the
floor.
2. A person having a duty under divisions (1) (a) through (n) above is in violation of this
subchapter if he or she knowingly fails to fulfill that duty.
Additional regulations for escort agencies
1. An escort agency shall not employ any person under the age of 18 years.
2. A person is in violation of this subchapter if the person acts as an escort or agrees to act as an
escort for any person under the age of 18 years.
Additional regulations for nude model studios
1. A nude model studio shall not employ any person under the age of 18 years.
2. A person under the age of 18 years is in violation of this subchapter if the person appears seminude
or in a state of nudity in or on the premises of a nude model studio. It is a defense to
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 117-17
Sexually Oriented Business
CHAPTER 117
prosecution under this division if the person under 18 years was in a restroom not open to
public view or visible to any other person.
3. A person when applicable and is in violation of this subchapter if the person appears in a state
of nudity, or knowingly allows another to appear in a state of nudity in an area of a nude model
studio premises which can be viewed from the public right of way.
4. A nude model studio shall not place or permit a bed, sofa, or mattress in any room on the
premises; except that a sofa may be placed in a reception room open to the public.
Additional regulations concerning public nudity
1. It shall be a violation of this subchapter for a person who knowingly and intentionally, in a
sexually oriented business, appears in a state of nudity or depicts specified sexual activities.
2. It shall be a violation of this subchapter for a person who knowingly or intentionally in a sexually
oriented business appears in a semi-nude condition unless the person is an employee who,
while semi-nude, shall be at least ten feet from any patron or customer and on a stage at least
two feet from the floor.
3. It shall be a violation of this subchapter for an employee, while semi-nude in a sexually oriented
business, to solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron or customer or for any patron or
customer to pay or give any gratuity to any employee, while said employee is semi-nude in a
sexually oriented business.
4. It shall be a violation of this subchapter for an employee, while semi-nude to touch a customer
or the clothing of a customer.
117.005 PROHIBITION AGAINST CHILDREN IN A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS
A person violates the provisions of this subchapter if the person knowingly allows a person under the age of
18 years on the premises of a sexually oriented business.
117.006 EXEMPTIONS
It is a defense to prosecution that a person appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling class
operated:
By a proprietary school, licensed by the state; a college, junior college, or university supported
entirely or partly by taxation;
By a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which
credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by
taxation; or
In a structure:
1. Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that
indicates a nude person is available for viewing; and
2. Where, in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at least three days in advance of
the class; and
3. Where no more than one nude model is on the premises at any one time.
117.007 INJUNCTION
A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business without a valid license or in
violation of this subchapter is subject to a suit for injunction or other applicable court ordered relief. Such
violations shall be punishable by a fine of up to $2,500.00 by the City. Each day a sexually oriented business
so operates in violation is a separate violation.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 117-18
Sexually Oriented Business
CHAPTER 117
117.008 SEVERABILITY; CONFLICTING ORDINANCESREPEALED
If any section, subsection, or clause of this subchapter shall be deemed to be unconstitutional or
otherwise invalid, the validity of the remaining sections, subsections, and clauses shall not be
affected.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of this subchapter are hereby
repealed.
117.009 HOURS OF OPERATION
All businesses operating under this subchapter shall close by 10:00 P.M. each day and may not open before
12:00 P.M. each day. All businesses operating under this subchapter shall not be open on Sunday.
117.010 PROHIBITION AGAINST EMPLOYEES OF THE POLICEDEPARTMENT BEING EMPLOYED AT A
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS
It is hereby and henceforth, a policy of the Board of Public Works and Safety that no member, employee, or
volunteer of the Police Department of the city shall be an employee of a sexually oriented business.
117.011 PENALTY
Violation of any provision of this chapter shall result in the application of the enforcement and penalty
provisions in addition to the all other remedies available at law under State and Federal Law, including but
not limited to fines of up to $2,500.00 per day for each violation, and possible injunction, restraining order,
and any other remedy available at law or equity.
Ordinance 2018-25 as approved 2/5/2019
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Farmers’ Market
CHAPTER 116
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 116-2
Farmers’ Market
CHAPTER 116
Table of Contents
116.01 ESTABLISHMENT OF MARKET
116.02 FEE; DAYS AND HOURS
116.03 REGULATION OF VENDORS
116.04 OPERATION OF MARKET
116.05 VIOLATIONS
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 116-3
Farmers’ Market
CHAPTER 116
116.01 ESTABLISHMENT OF MARKET
The Auburn Business Association, or its successor, is hereby authorized to conduct an "Auburn
Farmers' Market" during the months of May, June, July, August, September, and October.
The market shall be located at an area near the DeKalb County Courthouse as determined by the
Auburn Board of Public Works and Safety. The Board of Public Works and Safety shall establish the
area and authorize the closing of any streets necessary to provide space for the market.
116.02 FEE; DAYS AND HOURS
The Downtown Auburn Business Association may charge a fee to vendors participating in the market to
cover incidental costs. Market days and hours shall be established by the Downtown Auburn Business
Association with the approval of the Auburn Board of Public Works and Safety.
116.03 REGULATION OF VENDORS
The Auburn Board of Public Works and Safety shall establish the rules for the market.
No part of a vehicle shall extend more than 20 feet from the curb, such measurement made from
the curb on a perpendicular line.
Sections of the code of ordinances applicable to itinerant vendors, to backing into parking spaces,
and to parking limitations, shall not be applicable to participants during market hours.
116.04 OPERATION OF MARKET
In respect to the operation of the market, the Downtown Auburn Business Association shall comply with the
following requirements:
The farmers' market area shall be kept in a clean, sightly, and healthful condition, free from debris
and offensive odors.
Sidewalks within the area shall be kept free from any obstruction whereby the passage of persons
thereon would be hindered.
Upon the cessation of the farmers' market activities on any market day, the area shall be promptly
vacated and placed in the same condition of sightliness, healthfulness, and cleanliness as existed
prior to such market activity on that day.
The Downtown Auburn Business Association shall designate a chairman of the farmers' market who
shall be the contact person with the city and its respective departments.
The market shall not be held during the period of the Auburn-Cord-Duesenberg Festival and the
DeKalb County Free Fall Fair. The Common Council or the Board of Public Works and Safety of the
city may designate other days during which the farmers' market shall not be held due to conflict with
other community activities.
The city and its respective departments, officers, and employees shall be held harmless from any
and all liability of any kind or character incurred or asserted as a result of the farmers' market.
116.05 VIOLATIONS
Violations of Chapter 116 shall result in a fine of Fifty Dollars ($50.00) per occurrence.
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Cable Television
Franchise
CHAPTER 115
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 115-2
Cable Television Franchise
CHAPTER 115
Table of Contents
115.01 GRANT OF FRANCHISE – REPEALED
115.02 REPLACEMENT OF STREETS AND SIDEWALKS – REPEALED
115.03 OPERATION AND RULES FOR COMPANY – REPEALED
115.04 POLES TO BE USED FOR DISTRIBUTION – REPEALED
115.05 DURATION OR TERM OF FRANCHISE – REPEALED
115.06 PSCI OR FCC CONTROL OR OTHER FEDERAL AND STATE REGULATIONS – REPEALED
115.07 SERVICES TO BE PROVIDED – REPEALED
115.08 INSTALLATION; MONTHLY FEES; COMPENSATION TO THE CITY – REPEALED
115.09 CHANGE OF RATES – REPEALED
115.10 USE OF HOOKUPS BY THE CITY – REPEALED
115.11 USE BY NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS – REPEALED
115.12 INSURANCE AND LIABILITY PROTECTION FOR THE CITY – REPEALED
115.13 OPERATION OF FRANCHISE – REPEALED
115.14 COMPLAINTS – REPEALED
115.15 PROVISIONS OF CHAPTER TO BIND ASSIGNEES – REPEALED
115.16 WAIVERS AND AMENDMENTS – REPEALED
115.17 PUBLIC ACCESS; PROGRAM SCHEDULING – REPEALED
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 115-3
Cable Television Franchise
CHAPTER 115
115.01 GRANT OF FRANCHISE – REPEALED
(Ord. 2010-03, passed 2-16-10)
115.02 REPLACEMENT OF STREETS AND SIDEWALKS – REPEALED
(Ord. 2010-03, passed 2-16-10)
115.03 OPERATION AND RULES FOR COMPANY – REPEALED
(Ord. 2010-03, passed 2-16-10)
115.04 POLES TO BE USED FOR DISTRIBUTION – REPEALED
(Ord. 2010-03, passed 2-16-10)
115.05 DURATION OR TERM OF FRANCHISE – REPEALED
(Ord. 2010-03, passed 2-16-10)
115.06 PSCI OR FCC CONTROL OR OTHER FEDERAL AND STATE REGULATIONS – REPEALED
(Ord. 2010-03, passed 2-16-10)
115.07 SERVICES TO BE PROVIDED – REPEALED
(Ord. 2010-03, passed 2-16-10)
115.08 INSTALLATION; MONTHLY FEES; COMPENSATION TO THE CITY – REPEALED
(Ord. 2010-03, passed 2-16-10)
115.09 CHANGE OF RATES – REPEALED
(Ord. 2010-03, passed 2-16-10)
115.10 USE OF HOOKUPS BY THE CITY – REPEALED
(Ord. 2010-03, passed 2-16-10)
115.11 USE BY NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS – REPEALED
(Ord. 2010-03, passed 2-16-10)
115.12 INSURANCE AND LIABILITY PROTECTION FOR THE CITY – REPEALED
(Ord. 2010-03, passed 2-16-10)
115.13 OPERATION OF FRANCHISE – REPEALED
(Ord. 2010-03, passed 2-16-10)
115.14 COMPLAINTS – REPEALED
(Ord. 2010-03, passed 2-16-10)
115.15 PROVISIONS OF CHAPTER TO BIND ASSIGNEES – REPEALED
(Ord. 2010-03, passed 2-16-10)
115.16 WAIVERS AND AMENDMENTS – REPEALED
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 115-4
Cable Television Franchise
CHAPTER 115
(Ord. 2010-03, passed 2-16-10)
115.17 PUBLIC ACCESS; PROGRAM SCHEDULING – REPEALED
(Ord. 2010-03, passed 2-16-10)
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Offenses Relating to
Public Peace
CHAPTER 130
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 130-2
Offenses Relating to Public Peace
CHAPTER 130
Table of Contents
130.01 DISORDERLY CONDUCT - REPEALED
130.02 FIREWORKS REGULATIONS
130.03 AMPLIFYING DEVICES PROHIBITED ON STREETS
130.04 DISCHARGING DANGEROUS WEAPON
130.05 THROWING STONES
130.06 UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLY
130.07 LOITERING AND DISTURBING PEACE
130.08 NOISY OPERATION OF MOTOR VEHICLES
130.09 JUVENILE CURFEW
130.10 USE OF ENGINE COMPRESSION BRAKES PROHIBITED
130.11 BANNING OF SYNTHETIC CANNABINOIDS COMMONLY KNOWN AS K-2 AND SPICE
130.99 PENALTY
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 130-3
Offenses Relating to Public Peace
CHAPTER 130
130.01 DISORDERLY CONDUCT - REPEALED
(Ord. 2010-03, passed 2-16-10)
130.02 FIREWORKS REGULATIONS
DEFINITIONS:
• CONSUMER FIREWORKS
A small firework that is designed primarily to produce visible or audible effects by combustion, and
that is required to comply with the construction, chemical composition, and labeling regulations
promulgated by the United States Consumer Product Safety Commission under 16 CFR 1507. The
term also includes some small devices designed to produce an audible effect, such as whistling
devices, ground devices containing fifty (50) milligrams or less of explosive composition, and aerial
devices containing one hundred thirty (130) milligrams or less of explosive composition. Propelling
and expelling charges consisting of a mixture of charcoal sulfur, and potassium nitrate are not
considered to be designed to produce an audible effect. Consumer fireworks include:
a. aerial devices, which include, but are not limited to, sky rockets, missile type rockets,
helicopter or aerial spinners, roman candles, mines, and shells;
b. ground audible devices, which include, but are not limited to, firecrackers, salutes, and
chasers; and
c. firework devices containing combinations of the effects described in clauses (a) and (b).
• FIREWORK
Any composition or device designed for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect by
combustion, deflagration, or detonation. Fireworks consist of consumer fireworks. The following
items are excluded from the definition of fireworks:
a. Model rockets.
b. Toy pistol caps.
c. Emergency signal flares.
d. Matches.
e. Fixed ammunition for firearms.
f. Ammunition components intended for use in firearms, muzzle loading cannon, or small
arms.
g. Shells, cartridges, and primers for use in firearms, muzzle loading cannons, or small arms.
h. Indoor pyrotechnics special effects material.
i. M-80s, cherry bombs, silver salutes, and any device banned by the federal government.
CONSUMER USE OF FIREWORKS
No person within the corporate boundaries of the City shall use or display or permit to be used or
displayed any type of consumer fireworks on any other day or time other than the following:
1. June 29, June 30, July 1, July 2, July 3, July 5, July 6, July 7, July 8, July 9, between the hours
of 5:00 p.m. to two hours after sunset;
2. Labor Day and the Sunday before Labor Day from 10:00 a.m. until two (2) hours after
sunset;
3. July 4 between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight;
4. Between the hours of 10:00 a.m. on December 31 and 1:00 a.m. on January 1; and
5. No other date or time is permitted for consumer use of fireworks.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 130-4
Offenses Relating to Public Peace
CHAPTER 130
130.03 AMPLIFYING DEVICES PROHIBITED ON STREETS
NEAR HOSPITALS, SCHOOLS, OR EDUCATIONAL FACILITIES
It shall be unlawful for any person, by himself or by the operation of any instrument, agency, motorized
or mechanical device, and/or vehicle, to maintain plainly audible noise that can be heard within 30 feet
of any portion of the grounds and premises on which is located a hospital or other institution reserved for
the sick, or any school, library or educational facility during school hours. These areas shall be
considered noise sensitive areas.
PUBLIC NOISE
No person shall play, use, operate or permit to be played, used, or operated, any mechanical machine
or device for the producing or reproducing of sound, if it is located in or on any of the following:
1. Any public property, including any public right-of-way, highway, building, sidewalk, park or
thoroughfare, if the sound generated is plainly audible at a distance of 30 feet from its source;
2. Any motor vehicle on a public right-of-way, highway, or public space if the sound generated is
plainly audible at a distance of 30 feet from the device producing the sound.
NUISANCE
The following acts are declared to be a public nuisance:
1. The continuous or repeated sounding of any horn or signal device of a motor vehicle when not
used as a danger signal.
OPERATION OF SOUND-MAKING DEVICES—GENERALLY
It shall be unlawful for any person owning, occupying or having charge of any business establishment,
vehicle, residence, or any part thereof, in the City, to cause or suffer to cause the playing or operating of
music boxes, jukeboxes, radios, musical instruments or any other musical devices on or about the
premises between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. the following day, unless such music boxes,
jukeboxes, radios, musical instruments and other devices are played or operated in an environment that
is self-contained and the sound is not plainly audible from 10 feet outside the building, structure, vehicle,
or abode so as to not disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any dwelling, hotel or other type
of abode.
LOUDSPEAKERS AND SOUND AMPLIFIERS
The use of or operation of any loudspeaker system, sound amplifier or other similar service between the
hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m., within or adjacent to residential, noise-sensitive areas, public rightsof-
way or public space such that the sound therefrom is plainly audible across the real property line of
the source; provided that this shall not apply to any public performance, gathering or parade for which a
permit from the Board of Public Works and Safety has been obtained.
SPECIAL PERMITS
Any person desiring relief from the provisions set forth in this article shall apply for a special permit to
cause or create noise which would otherwise be in violation of this article at least 7 days prior to a
scheduled Board of Public Works and Safety meeting. Applications for a special permit shall be made in
writing to the Board of Public Works and Safety. Applications shall be available through the Police
Department or Clerk-Treasurer’s office. The Board shall grant a special permit upon a showing by the
applicant of the following:
1. Additional time is necessary for the applicant to alter or modify the activity in order to comply
with the provisions of this article; or
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 130-5
Offenses Relating to Public Peace
CHAPTER 130
2. The activity, operation or noise source will be of a temporary duration and cannot be sufficiently
completed or done in a manner that would comply with the provisions of this article; and
3. No reasonable alternative is available to the applicant
Any permit granted pursuant to this section shall contain thereon all conditions upon which the permit
has been granted, including but not limited to, the effective date, time of day, location and equipment
limitation. No special permit shall be issued for a period in excess of 15 consecutive days. Any special
permit granted pursuant to this section may be renewed upon application to the Board of Public Works
and Safety upon a showing that the reasons for which the permit was granted still exist.
PLAINLY AUDIBLE
Plainly audible means any sound that can be detected by a person using his or her unaided hearing
faculties. As an example, if the sound source under investigation is a portable or personal vehicular
sound amplification or reproduction device, the enforcement officer need not determine the title of a
song, specific words, or the artist performing the song. The detection of the rhythmic bass component of
the music is sufficient to constitute a plainly audible sound.
CONSTRUCTION EQUIPMENT
1. Prohibition; definitions. Operating or permitting the operation of any tools or equipment used in
construction, drilling, or demolition work such as pile drivers, steam shovels, pneumatic
hammers, pumps, or other like equipment is prohibited:
a. Between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. the following day, such that the sound
therefrom creates a noise disturbance across and at a residential district boundary or within
a noise sensitive zone, except for emergency work of individuals, public service utilities, or
by special permission issued pursuant to subsection (c).
b. At any other time such that the sound level at or across a real property boundary exceeds a
reading of 0.79 weighted average dBA for the daily period of operation. Such sound levels
shall be measured with a sound level meter manufactured according to standards
prescribed by the American National Standards Institute.
2. Definitions
• Noise disturbance as used herein, shall mean any sound which (a) endangers or injures the
safety or health of humans or animals, or (b) annoys or disturbs a reasonable person of
normal sensitivities, or (c) endangers or injures personal or real property.
• Noise sensitive zone, as used herein, shall mean existing quiet zones, if any, and those
areas containing noise sensitive activities including but not limited to, operations of schools,
libraries open to the public, houses of worship, hospitals, and nursing homes.
• Residential districts, as used herein, shall mean any residential district as set forth in the
city's zoning ordinance, as amended, or as may be hereafter amended.
• Weighted average dBA, as used herein, means the 24-hour energy average of the sound
pressure level in decibels (dB), as measured on a sound level meter using the A-weighted
network; any readings taken during the period 11:00 p.m. to 5:00 a.m. the following day are
increased by ten dBA before averaging the other readings. The A-weighted network (dBA) is
recommended by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency as a means of describing
environmental noise because it most closely mimics the human ear by weighting the
frequency spectrum to give greater weight to the frequencies between 1,000 and 6,000
hertz (cycles per second).
3. Exception. The City of Auburn, public utilities, and individuals are hereby permitted to operate
and use of any of the above construction machinery during the aforesaid prohibited periods of
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 130-6
Offenses Relating to Public Peace
CHAPTER 130
time in the event that such operation or use is required to eliminate or reduce any dangerous or
hazardous condition which endangers life or property.
FINE
Offenses under this chapter shall be punishable by a fine of up to $100.00 per occurrence, which shall
be payable to the Law Enforcement Continuing Education Fund 225.
130.04 DISCHARGING DANGEROUS WEAPON
No person shall discharge any cannon, gun, fowling piece, or firearm of any description, except on his
premises so that no bullet or shot goes beyond the premises. No person shall fire or explode any squib,
torpedo, rocket, firecracker, fireball, mine, or other explosive or combustible material within the limits of the
city without license so to do. However, the provisions of this section shall not apply to the Fourth of July,
occasions of public rejoicing under competent and careful control, or assemblages of the state militia or
federal troops in charge of regular officers. No gun, revolver, or pistol shall be discharged within the city on
these days and under these provisions except to quell riots and disturbances and to maintain the public
peace.
130.05 THROWING STONES
No person shall throw or cast any stone or other missile, or throw any bullet, stone, or other heavy
substance from a slingshot, air gun, or other appliance, or at or upon any building, tree, or other property,
whether public or private, or on, from, or into any street, avenue, alley, lane, public place, or unenclosed
grounds within the corporate limits of the city, except upon one's own premises.
130.06 UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLY
No person shall upon the streets or sidewalks of the city by any unlicensed show, exhibition, exercise,
address, singing, shouting, or riotous behavior, call together an assembly of persons which impedes traffic
on a street or sidewalk and prevents their free use and passage or which disturbs the public peace and
interrupts the business of the citizens of the city. It shall be the duty of the City Marshal and his assistants or
deputies to notify these persons to discontinue such acts.
130.07 LOITERING AND DISTURBING PEACE
No person shall loiter about any church door or place of public gathering, or upon the sidewalks and streets
in front of and in the vicinity of any such services or gathering and engage in boisterous conduct or profane
language, impede the passage of persons passing to and fro on the street and sidewalks, or congregate
upon or within the vestibule or steps and entry ways of places of public gathering and perpetrate or provoke
any of the foregoing disturbances.
130.08 NOISY OPERATION OF MOTOR VEHICLES
No person shall operate or use a motor vehicle of a type subject to state registration on the public streets
and highways of this city at any time or under any condition of grade, load, or acceleration or deceleration,
or in a state of repair that results in an operation and manner which creates loud and unnecessary grating,
grinding, rattling, roaring, screeching, squealing, or other noise which would unduly disturb the peace and
quiet of the city regardless of whether this noise is emitted from the engine, exhaust system, or tires on the
roadway.
130.09 JUVENILE CURFEW
Definitions
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 130-7
Offenses Relating to Public Peace
CHAPTER 130
For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates
or requires a different meaning.
• CURFEW HOURS
a. It is a curfew violation for a child 15, 16, or 17 years of age to be in a public place:
i. Between 1 a.m. and 5 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday;
ii. After 11 p.m. on Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday; or
iii. Before 5 a.m. on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, or Friday.
b. It is a curfew violation for a child less than 15 years of age to be in a public place after 11
p.m. or before 5 a.m. on any day.
• DESIGNATED ADULT
A person who is:
a. Designated or given permission by a natural parent, adoptive parent, or step-parent, or
guardian of another person to supervise the parent's child or children under this section;
and
b. Is at least 18 years of age.
• EMERGENCY
An unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action.
The term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident, or any
situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.
• ESTABLISHMENT
Any privately owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is invited, including
but not limited to any place of amusement or entertainment.
• GUARDIAN
a. A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor; or
b. A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a court.
• MINOR
Any person under 18 years of age.
• OPERATOR
Any individual, firm, association, partnership, or corporation operating, managing, or conducting any
establishment. The term includes the members or partners of an association or partnership, the
officers of a corporation, members or managers of a limited liability company or other like kind
individuals.
• PARENT
A person who is:
a. A natural parent, adoptive parent, or step-parent of another person; or
b. At least 18 years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and
custody of a minor.
• PUBLIC PLACE
Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not
limited to, streets, highways, and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office
buildings, transport facilities, and shops.
• REMAIN
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 130-8
Offenses Relating to Public Peace
CHAPTER 130
a. Linger or stay; or
b. Fail to leave premises when requested to do so by a police officer or the owner, operator, or
other person in control of the premises.
• SERIOUS BODILY INJURY
Bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that causes death, serious permanent
disfigurement, or protracted loss of impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ.
Offenses
1. A minor commits an offense if he or she remains in any public place or on the premises of any
establishment within the city during curfew hours.
2. A parent, guardian or designated adult of a minor commits an offense if he or she knowingly
permits, or by insufficient control allows, the minor to remain in any public place or on the
premises of any establishment within the city during curfew hours.
Defenses
1. It is a defense to being cited under this section if the minor was:
a. Accompanied by the minor's parent, guardian or designated adult for supervision purposes;
b. On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent guardian or designated adult without any
detour or stop;
c. In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
d. Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home from an employment
activity, without any detour or stop;
e. Involved in an emergency involving or potentially involving serious bodily injury;
f. On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the resident of a next-door
neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the police department about the minor's
presence;
g. Attending an official school, religious, political or other recreational activity supervised by
adults and/or sponsored by the city, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes
responsibility for the minor, or going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop,
an official school, religious, political or other recreational activity supervised by adults and/or
sponsored by the city, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility
for the minor;
h. Exercising First Amendment rights in the form of attending religious events, political events,
vigils, lawful demonstrations and assembly, educational activities, neighborhood association
meetings or other activities of a like kind that fall within the ambit of the First Amendment to
the United States Constitution.
i. Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as the
free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the right of assembly, or
j. Married or had been married or has been legally emancipated in accordance with the
Indiana Code.
Enforcement
A police officer, before taking any legal action, may take steps necessary to question any individual who
appears to be under the age of 18 for the specific purpose of enforcing this section. Before taking any
enforcement action under this section, a police officer shall ask the apparent offender's age and reason
for being in the public place. The officer shall not issue a citation under this section unless the officer
reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that, based on any response and other
circumstances, no defense in division (C) above is present. An effort will be made on behalf of the
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 130-9
Offenses Relating to Public Peace
CHAPTER 130
Police Department to contact the parent, guardian or designated adult to inform them of the alleged
curfew violation under this section.
Penalties
1. A person who violates a provision of this section is in violation of a separate offense for each
day or part of a day during which the violation is committed, continued or permitted. Each
offense is punishable by a fine.
2. The fines shall be punishable by the following schedule:
a. First offense: $50
b. Second offense: $100
c. Third offense: $250
d. Fourth offense and each offense thereafter: $500
3. Any person cited under this section shall pay the fine within five days of receiving the same to
the Clerk-Treasurer of the city.
130.10 USE OF ENGINE COMPRESSION BRAKES PROHIBITED
No vehicle shall use engine compression brakes or an engine retarder system to stop or slow down
a vehicle if the system causes the vehicles motor to race in such a matter as to cause the exhaust
system to emit a loud, crackling, backfiring, or chattering noise unusual to its normal operation.
This practice being commonly known as Jake Braking.
The Auburn Fire Department and the Auburn Police Department shall be charged with enforcing the
provisions of this Section 130.02 (Fireworks Regulations). Any person who violates any of the
provisions of Section 130.02 (Fireworks Regulations) shall be fined in the amount of $100.00 per
occurrence.
This prohibition must be designated by appropriate signs placed at or near the city limits. (I.C. 9-20-
1-3(C)(2))
130.11 BANNING OF SYNTHETIC CANNABINOIDS COMMONLY KNOWN AS K-2 AND SPICE
SYNTHETIC CANNABINOID
It is hereby declared to be unlawful for any person, including a corporation or other entity, to use,
manufacture, possess, purchase, attempt to purchase, sell, publicly display for sale or attempt to sell,
give, or barter any one or more of the following chemicals (which are sometimes referred to as k-2,
spice, and are considered a form of synthetic cannabinoid) within the boudries of the City of Auburn.
1. 2-[(1r,3s)-3-HYDROXYCYCLOHEXYL]-5-(2-METHYLOCTAN-2-YL)PHENOL (also known as CP
47,497 AND ITS C6, C7, C8, and C9 homologues,)
2. (6aR,l0aR)-9-(hydroxymethyl)-6,6-dimethyl-3-(2-methyloclan-2-yl)-6a, 7,
3. Naphthalen-1-yl-(1-pentylindol-3yl)methanone {also known as 1 Pentyl-3-(1-naphthoyl)indole or
JWH-018},
4. Naphthalen-1-yl-(1-butylindol-3-yl)methanone {also known as 1-Butyl-3-(1-naphthyl)indole or
JWH-073}, or any derivative thereto.
This section may be enforced by the Auburn Police Department. Any substance reasonably
suspected to be described by Subsection (A) may be seized and held as evidence pending
adjudication of the alleged violation.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 130-10
Offenses Relating to Public Peace
CHAPTER 130
It is not an offense under this Section herein if the person was acting in the direction of an
authorized law enforcement agent to enforce or ensure compliance with this law prohibiting the sale
of the aforementioned substance.
This Section does not apply to any person who commits any act described in this Section pursuant
to the direction or prescription of a licensed physician or dentist authorized to direct or prescribe
such act. This Section likewise does not apply to the inhalation of anesthesia for a medical purpose
or dental purpose.
Any person found in violation of this Section will be subject to a civil fine of $500.00 for the first
offense, $1,000.00 for the second offense, and $2,500.00 for the third offense and any offense
thereafter.
Each day during which violation of Subsection (A) occurs shall constitute a separate offense.
The City Attorney shall have the authority to seek an injunction to compel compliance of any
business which refuses to or fails to comply with this Section.
If any provision of this Ordinance is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the remaining
provisions of the Ordinance which shall remain effective absent the invalid provision, and to this
end, the provisions of the Ordinance are declared to be severable.
That the City of Auburn, Indiana is directed to take all action necessary and proper for the
implementation of this Section of the Auburn City Code of Ordinances.
SUNSET PROVISION: This Ordinance shall expire on July 1, 2011, if no further action is taken on
these matters.
130.99 PENALTY
Any person who violates the terms of 130.01 shall be guilty of disorderly conduct, and, upon
conviction, shall be fined in any sum not exceeding $100.
Any person who violates any of the provisions of 130.02 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor
and be fined in any sum not exceeding $25.
Any person who violates any prohibitions of 130.03 shall, upon conviction, be fined in any sum not
less than $10 nor more than $100.
Any person who violates 130.04 through 103.07 shall, upon conviction, be fined in any sum not
exceeding $5.
Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any of the provisions of 130.08 shall, upon the first
offense, be fined not less than $5 nor more than $25. If this person, firm, or corporation commits
the same offense within 12 months and is convicted thereof, the person, firm, or corporation shall
be fined not less than $10 nor more than $100.
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Offenses Relating to
Property
CHAPTER 131
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 131-2
Offenses Relating to Property
CHAPTER 131
Table of Contents
131.01 SMOKING IN BED PROHIBITED IN TRANSIENT LODGINGS
131.02 DEPOSITING ASHES ON PUBLIC PROPERTY
131.03 TELEVISION AND RADIO INTERFERENCE
131.04 SETTING FIRES
131.05 FALSE FIRE ALARM; TAMPERING WITH ALARM BOXES
131.06 SETTING FIRES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY
131.07 OUTDOOR OPEN FIRES
131.99 PENALTY
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 131-3
Offenses Relating to Property
CHAPTER 131
131.01 SMOKING IN BED PROHIBITED IN TRANSIENT LODGINGS
No person shall smoke or be in possession of a lighted cigar, cigarette, or pipe, while in or upon a
bed in a hotel, rooming house, tourist room, tourist cabin, or other place available for transient
lodging.
The owner, manager, or other person in charge of any hotel, rooming house, tourist house, tourist
cabin, or other place available for transient lodging shall post a copy of this section in a
conspicuous place in all rooms generally used for sleeping by guests or tenants of these places.
131.02 DEPOSITING ASHES ON PUBLIC PROPERTY
No person shall throw, deposit, allow to be thrown or deposited, permit any person under his control to throw
or deposit, or allow to remain, any ashes or cinders in, into, or upon any street, lane, alley, sidewalk, gutter,
catch basin, crossing, common, public park, or water course within the city.
131.03 TELEVISION AND RADIO INTERFERENCE
No person shall knowingly or wantonly operate or cause to be operated any machine, device,
apparatus, or instrument of any kind within the corporate limits of the city which causes reasonably
preventable electrical interference with television or radio reception within the city limits. However,
X-ray pictures, examinations, or treatments may be made at any time if the machine or apparatus
used therefore are properly equipped to avoid all unnecessary or reasonably preventable
interference with radio and television reception and are not negligently operated.
This section shall not be construed to embrace or cover the regulation of any transmitting,
broadcasting, or receiving instrument, apparatus, or device used or useful in interstate commerce,
or the operation of any instrument, apparatus, or device licensed or authorized by or under the
provisions of any act of the Congress of the United States.
131.04 SETTING FIRES
No person shall burn or set fire to any material in any street or alley within 40 feet of any building within the
corporate limits of the city and abandon and not watch and maintain control over it until entirely consumed
and extinguished.
131.05 FALSE FIRE ALARM; TAMPERING WITH ALARM BOXES
No person shall within the city give or make a false alarm of fire, or intermeddle with, injure, or destroy wires
or appliances of the fire alarm boxes of the city, willfully, carelessly, or maliciously.
131.06 SETTING FIRES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY
No person shall kindle or maintain any bonfire or rubbish fire or authorize any such fire to be kindled
or maintained on any private land unless the location is not less than 50 feet from any structure and
adequate provision is made to prevent fire from spreading to within 50 feet of any structure, or the
fire is contained in an approved waste burner.
An "APPROVED WASTE BURNER" shall include a metal barrel, metal drum, or brick, cement, or
masonry block enclosure. The waste burner shall be fitted with a suitable cover or a screen spark
arrester with mesh not exceeding l/2 inch.
Outdoor waste burners shall not be located within 15 feet of any structure or building and shall be
positioned so that there is no direct exposure to buildings, fences, shrubbery, or other combustible
materials in the event of failure of the spark arrester. Outdoor waste burners which are rotted,
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 131-4
Offenses Relating to Property
CHAPTER 131
damaged, or warped so as to permit the passage of sparks larger than those which the spark
arrester or cover is designed to restrain shall not be considered approved waste burners.
No person, association, corporation, or any other entity shall burn any material between sunset and
sunrise.
131.07 OUTDOOR OPEN FIRES
Any outdoor open fire kindled or maintained in the city shall be located as follows:
1. No less than 50 feet from any structure with adequate provision being made to prevent such fire
from spreading to within 50 feet of any structure; and
2. Contained in an approved waste burner which shall include a metal barrel, metal drum, or brick
or masonry block enclosure fitted with a suitable cover or screen spark arrestor with mesh
opening not exceeding 1/2 inch.
Any outdoor open fire to be kindled or maintained in a manner other than specified in division (A)
above shall be done so only pursuant to a permit issued by the Chief of the Fire Department, or his
designee, whose criterion in issuing the permit shall be that the fire can be kindled and maintained
in a manner not hazardous to property or health.
The Chief of the Fire Department, or his designee, may prohibit any and all outdoor open fires when
atmospheric conditions or local circumstances make such fires hazardous or the smoke and fumes
therefrom detrimental to those suffering respiratory problems.
131.99 PENALTY
Any person who violates any provision of 131.01 shall be fined in a sum not exceeding $100.
Any person who violates any provision of 131.02 shall, upon conviction, be fined in any sum not
exceeding $25. Each day's violation shall constitute a separate offense.
Any person who violates any of the provisions of 131.03 shall, upon conviction, be punished by a
fine in any sum not exceeding $100. Each day during which the violation continues shall constitute
a separate offense.
Any person who violates any provision of 131.04 or 131.05 shall, upon conviction, be fined in any
sum not exceeding $5.
Any person who violates 131.07 shall, upon conviction, be fined in any sum not less than $25 nor
more than $500.
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Building Code
CHAPTER 151
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 151-2
Building Code
CHAPTER 151
Table of Contents
151.01 SHORT TITLE
151.02 PURPOSE AND SCOPE
151.03 AUTHORITY
151.04 CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
151.05 OTHER REGULATIONS AND CHANGES
151.06 DEFINITIONS
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
151.10 PERMITS REQUIRED AND EXEMPT
151.11 PRE-APPLICATION PLAN REVIEW
151.12 PERMIT APPLICATION, REVIEW AND APPROVAL
151.13 COMPLIANCE WITH STANDARDS
151.14 INSPECTIONS AND DEFICIENCIES
151.15 RIGHT OF ENTRY
151.16 APPROVAL TO OCCUPY
151.17 STOP WORK ORDER
151.18 VIOLATIONS
151.19 RIGHT OF APPEAL
151.20 REMEDIES AND CIVIL ACTION
151.99 PENALTY
151.22 SEVERABILITY
151.23 FEES
151.24 EFFECT OF ADOPTION ON PRIOR ORDINANCE
151.25 EFFECTIVE DATE
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 151-3
Building Code
CHAPTER 151
151.01 SHORT TITLE
This chapter and all ordinances supplemental or amendatory thereto shall be known as the Building Code of
the City of Auburn, Indiana.
151.02 PURPOSE AND SCOPE
Purpose
The purpose of this chapter is to establish minimum standards for the design, construction, installation
and inspection of structures and appurtenances thereto, within the jurisdiction of the City of Auburn, in
order to protect public health, safety and welfare. Pursuant to IC 22-13-2-6, this Building Ordinance shall
not apply to industrialized building systems or mobile structures certified under IC 22-15-4; however, the
provisions of this Building Ordinance and the rules promulgated by the Fire Prevention and Building
Safety Commission do apply to any construction related to an industrialized building system or mobile
structure not certified under IC 22-15-4. Pursuant to IC 22-13-2-9, this Building Ordinance is not
applicable to regulated amusement devices, regulated boilers, regulated pressure vessels, or regulated
lifting devices.
Scope
The regulations in this chapter apply to any work for which a site improvement permit is authorized to be
issued pursuant to the requirements in this chapter.
151.03 AUTHORITY
The Administrator of the Department of Building, Planning and Development is authorized and directed to
administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter. The Administrator is hereby authorized and directed to
administer and enforce the following:
All of the provisions of this Building Ordinance.
Variances granted in accordance with IC 22-13-2-11.
Orders issued under IC 22-12-7.
151.04 CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
Pursuant to IC 22-13-2-3(b), the rules of the Indiana Fire Prevention and Building Safety
Commission as set out in the following Articles of Title 675 of the Indiana Administrative Code are
hereby incorporated by reference in this code and shall include any later amendments to those
rules.
1. Article 13 – Building Codes
a. Fire and Building Safety Standards.
b. Indiana Building Code.
c. Appendix C of the Indiana Building Code (IBC)
2. Article 14 – Indiana Residential Code
3. Article 16 – Indiana Plumbing Code
4. Article 17 – Indiana Electrical Code
5. Article 18 – Indiana Mechanical Code
6. Article 19 – Indiana Energy Conservation Code
7. Article 20 – Indiana Swimming Pool Code
8. Article 22 – Indiana Fire Code
9. Article 24 – Migrant Day Care Nursery Fire Safety Code
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 151-4
Building Code
CHAPTER 151
10. Article 25 – Indiana Fuel Gas Code
Two (2) copies of the above building rules incorporated by reference are on file in the office of the Clerk
for the legislative body for public inspection as required by IC 36-1-5-4.
The Administrator and the Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission may grant a variance to
the fire safety laws and building laws adopted in this Building Ordinance. Pursuant to IC 22-13-2-
7(b), a variance granted by the Administrator is not effective until it has been approved by Fire
Prevention and Building Safety Commission.
LIFTING DEVICES LOCATED WITHIN A PRIVATE RESIDENCE
1. Pursuant to IC 22-12-1-22(b) (12), lifting devices, such as elevators and wheelchair lifts, located
within a private residence are not regulated lifting devices. Therefore, the following standards
applicable to lifting devices located within a private residence are incorporated by reference:
a. Part 5.3, Private Residence Elevators, ANSI/ASME A17.1-2000, Safety Code for Elevators
and Escalators published by the American Society of Mechanical Engineers, Three Park
Avenue, New York, New York, 10016.
b. Part 5.4, Private Residence Inclined Elevators, ANSI/ASME A17.1-2000, Safety Code for
Elevators and Escalators published by the American Society of Mechanical Engineers,
Three Park Avenue, New York, New York, 10016.
c. Section 5, Private Residence Vertical Platform Lifts, ASME A18.1a, 2001 (Addenda to
ASME 18.1-1999), Safety Standard for Platform and Stairway Chair Lifts, published by the
American Society of Mechanical Engineers, Three Park Avenue, New York, New York
10016.
d. Section 6, Private Residence Inclined Platform Lifts, ASME A18.1a, 2001 (Addenda to
ASME 18.1-1999), Safety Standard for Platform and Stairway Chair Lifts, published by the
American Society of Mechanical Engineers, Three Park Avenue, New York, New York
10016.
e. Section 7, Private Inclined Stairway Lifts, ASME A18.1a, 2001 (Addenda to ASME 18.1-
1999), Safety Standard for Platform and Stairway Chair Lifts, published by the American
Society of Mechanical Engineers, Three Park Avenue, New York, New York 10016.
Two (2) copies of the above lifting device standards incorporated by reference are on file in the office of
the Clerk for the legislative body for public inspection as required by IC 36-1-5-4.
151.05 OTHER REGULATIONS AND CHANGES
Other regulations
These regulations are established in addition to the requirements of any other local, state or federal
regulation pertaining to work covered by this chapter.
Changes
All references in this chapter to rules, regulations and codes shall be interpreted to mean the most
recently adopted version thereof, including any supplements, amendments or replacements.
151.06 DEFINITIONS
The following definitions shall apply throughout this chapter:
• ACCESSORY STRUCTURE
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 151-5
Building Code
CHAPTER 151
A detached structure with a separate means of egress and not more than three stories high housing a
use that is incidental to the principal use with which the structure is associated. Examples of accessory
structures include but are not limited to garages, carports, swimming pools, sheds, decks.
• ADMINISTRATOR
The Administrator of the Department of Building, Planning and Development of the city, or the
Administrator's designated representative.
• BALCONY, Exterior
An exterior floor projecting from and supported by a structure without additional independent supports.
• BUILDING
Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy.
• BUILDING PERMIT See "SITE IMPROVEMENT PERMIT."
• CITY
The employees, commissions and agents of the City of Auburn, Indiana.
• CITY BUILDING INSPECTOR
The person or persons appointed by the city to conduct inspections as necessary under the direction of
the Administrator, in order to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter. The term includes
“Building Inspector” and “Inspector.”
• CLASS 1 STRUCTURE, pursuant to IC 22-12-1-4 has the following definition:
1. "Class 1 structure" means any part of the following:
a. A building or structure that is intended to be or is occupied or otherwise used in any part by
any of the following:
i. The public.
ii. Three (3) or more tenants.
iii. One (1) or more persons who act as the employees of another.
2. A site improvement affecting access by persons with physical disabilities to a building or
structure described in subdivision (1).
3. Any class of buildings or structures that the commission determines by rules to affect a building
or structure described in subdivision (1), except buildings or structures described in subsections
(c) through (f).
4. Subsection (a) (1) includes a structure that contains three (3) or more condominium units (as
defined in IC 32-25-2-9) or other units that:
a. are intended to be or are used or leased by the owner of the unit; and
b. are not completely separated from each other by an unimproved space.
5. Subsection (a) (1) does not include a building or structure that:
a. is intended to be or is used only for an agricultural purpose on the land where it is located;
and
b. is not used for retail trade or is a stand used for retail sales of farm produce for eight (8) or
less consecutive months in a calendar year.
6. Subsection (a) (1) does not include a Class 2 structure.
7. Subsection (a) (1) does not include a vehicular bridge.
8. Subsection (a) (1) does not include a structure that is intended to be or is occupied solely to
provide periodic maintenance or repair of:
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 151-6
Building Code
CHAPTER 151
a. the structure; or
b. mechanical or electrical equipment located within and affixed to the structure.
9. Pursuant to IC 22-12-1-24, structure includes swimming pool.
• CLASS 2 STRUCTURE, pursuant to IC 22-12-1-5, has the following definition:
1. “Class 2 structure” means any part of the following:
a. A building or structure that is intended to contain or contains only one (1) dwelling unit or
two (2) dwelling units unless any part of the building or structure is regularly used as a
Class 1 structure.
b. An outbuilding for a structure described in subdivision (1), such as a garage, barn, or family
swimming pool, unless any part of the outbuilding is regularly used as a Class 1 structure.
2. Subsection (a) does not include a vehicular bridge.
3. Pursuant to IC 22-12-1-24, structure includes swimming pool.
• CONSTRUCTION, pursuant to IC 22-12-1-7, means any of the following:
1. Fabrication of any part of an industrialized building system or mobile structure for use at another
site.
2. Erection or assembly of any part of a Class 1 or Class 2 structure at the site where it will be
used.
3. Installation of any part of the permanent heating, ventilating, air conditioning, electrical,
plumbing, sanitary, emergency detection, emergency communication, or fire or explosion
suppression systems for a Class 1 or Class 2 structure at the site where it will be used.
4. Work undertaken to alter, remodel, rehabilitate, or add to any part of a Class 1 or Class 2
structure.
5. Work undertaken to relocate any part of a Class 1 or Class 2 structure, except a mobile
structure.
• CONSTRUCTION DESIGN RELEASE
Authorization of the State of Indiana issued pursuant to IC 22-15-3 to proceed with site improvements on
a Class 1 structure. The term includes “Release.”
• DECK
An exterior floor system supported on at least two opposing sides by an adjoining structure and/or posts,
piers, or other independent supports.
• DEPARTMENT
The Department of Building, Planning and Development of the City of Auburn, Indiana.
• DETACHED BUILDING
A building which has no wall or roof in common with another building.
• DWELLING
Any building which contains one or more dwelling units that are used, intended or designed to be built,
used, rented, leased, let or hired out to be occupied, or that are occupied, for living purposes.
• DWELLING UNIT
A single unit providing complete independent living facilities for one or more persons, including
permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
• ELECTRIC SERVICE
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 151-7
Building Code
CHAPTER 151
The connection of City of Auburn electric service to a structure, including but not limited to wires, meters,
conduit and related devices that extend from the city's electric distribution lines to the service disconnect
on the structure to be served.
• EXTERIOR AT-GRADE FLOOR SYSTEM
An exterior slab floor system made of concrete, asphalt, brick, stone or other hard surface material
supported directly by the ground beneath the slab, where the finished floor elevation is at-grade, and
that is open to the air on at least one (1) side. The term includes “Landing,” “Patio,” “Slab” and “Stoop.”
• FOUNDATION PERMIT
A limited-purpose site improvement permit issued prior to a full site improvement permit, approving only
the construction of the foundation for a structure as follows;
A foundation permit shall allow work to grade level only which may include slab on grade and
underground mechanical, electrical, and plumbing work, but does not allow work on more than one
(1) floor below grade level. As an exception, any continuous structural member, such as a pole, may
extend from its footing below grade to its intended height above grade.
• INDUSTRIALIZED BUILDING
pursuant to IC 22-12-1-14, means any part of a building or other structure that is in whole or in
substantial part fabricated in an off-site manufacturing facility for installation or assembly at the building
site as part of a Class 1 structure, a Class 2 structure, or another building or structure. However, the
term does not include a mobile structure or a system that is capable of inspection at the building site.
• JURISDICTION
Those lands within the incorporated city (Includes the corporation limits and any areas assigned),
excluding properly exempted by this chapter.
• LANDING See "EXTERIOR AT-GRADE FLOOR SYSTEM."
• MANUFACTURED HOME
Pursuant to IC 22-12-1-16 has the meaning set forth in 42 U.S.C. 5402 as it existed on January 1, 2003.
This definition is as follows:
“Manufactured home” means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the
traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or forty body feet or more in length, or, when
erected on site, is three hundred twenty or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent
chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when
connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and
electrical systems contained therein; except that such term shall include any structure which meets
all the requirements of this paragraph except the size requirements and with respect to which the
manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the Secretary of Housing and Urban
Development and complies with the standards established under this 42 U.S.C. 5401 et seq. and
except that such term shall not include any self-propelled recreational vehicle.
• MOBILE STRUCTURE, pursuant to IC 22-12-1-17, has the following definition:
1. "Mobile structure", means any part of a fabricated unit that is designed to be:
a. towed on its own chassis; and
b. connected to utilities for year-round occupancy or use as a Class 1 structure, a Class 2
structure, or another structure.
2. The term includes the following:
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 151-8
Building Code
CHAPTER 151
a. Two (2) or more components that can be retracted for towing purposes and subsequently
expanded for additional capacity.
b. Two (2) or more units that are separately towable but designed to be joined into one (1)
integral unit.
The term does not include “Recreational Vehicle.”
• “MODULAR HOME” See “INDUSTRIALIZED BUILDING”
• PATIO See "EXTERIOR AT-GRADE FLOOR SYSTEM."
• PERMANENT FOUNDATION
A structural support system for a building which:
1. Transfers loads imposed by the building to the earth;
2. Has a lower surface placed below the frost line as defined by 675 IAC 13 and 675 IAC 14.
• PERMANENT SWIMMING POOL
Any swimming pool that is constructed in the ground or in a building in such a manner that the pool
cannot be readily disassembled for storage or transport.
• PERMIT See "SITE IMPROVEMENT PERMIT."
PERSON
Pursuant to IC 22-12-1-18, means an individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership,
unincorporated association, or governmental entity.
• RECREATIONAL VEHICLE (RV)
A vehicle or portable structure with or without motive power, designed to be used for temporary sleeping
and human habitation, which is either:
1. A vehicle licensed for travel on roads and identified by the manufacturer as a travel trailer,
recreational vehicle or motor home; or
2. A structure designed to be mounted on or towed behind a vehicle for travel on roads.
• RELEASE See "CONSTRUCTION DESIGN RELEASE"
• SEAL OF ACCEPTANCE
A seal of certification which has been affixed to a structure, and which was:
1. Issued by the office of the State Building Commissioner pursuant to 675 IAC 15-1, certifying that
the construction of an industrialized building system or mobile structure is in compliance with
the design release to manufacture; or
2. Issued by the U. S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (H.U.D.), certifying that the
construction of a manufactured home is in compliance with the National Manufactured Housing
Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974.
• SITE IMPROVEMENT PERMIT
A permit issued by the department authorizing work on improved or unimproved property. The term
includes "Permit" and "Building Permit."
• SLAB See "EXTERIOR AT-GRADE FLOOR SYSTEM."
• STOOP See "EXTERIOR AT-GRADE FLOOR SYSTEM."
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 151-9
Building Code
CHAPTER 151
• STRUCTURAL CHANGE
Any change to the horizontal area, height, length or width of a structure, or change to the depth of a
structure below the surface of the ground, or change in the location or capacity of any load-bearing
member or component of a structure.
• TEMPORARY FOUNDATION
A structural support system for a building which:
1. Transfers loads imposed by the building to the earth;
2. Has a lower surface placed above the frost line as defined by 675 IAC 13 and 675 IAC 14.
• VEHICULAR BRIDGE
Pursuant to IC 22-12-1-26, means any bridge that is neither:
1. a pedestrian walkway; nor
2. a passageway for light vehicles; suspended between two (2) or more parts of a building or
between two (2) or more buildings.
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
151.10 PERMITS REQUIRED AND EXEMPT
Permit required
Subject to the exemptions in this section and any other terms and conditions in this chapter, a site
improvement permit shall be obtained by the owner of property before beginning work on any of the
following:
1. Class 1 and Class 2 structures, including accessory structures and appurtenances thereto.
2. Buildings used for agricultural purposes or for retail sales of farm produce, including accessory
structures and appurtenances thereto, and shall be in compliance with 151.04(A)(1)(c).
3. Work that involves structural change, installation of a permanent foundation, or connection of
temporary or permanent City of Auburn electric service.
Permit exempt
The following improvements or work are exempt from the requirement to obtain a site improvement
permit or to be inspected under the terms of this chapter:
1. Any work, regardless of cost, performed by or on behalf of the federal government or the State
of Indiana on property that they own (not leased property); however, a permit shall be required
for connection of temporary or permanent City of Auburn electric service, and for any work
performed by or on behalf of any political subdivision of the State of Indiana.
2. Any work, regardless of cost, in the right-of-way of a railroad or the right-of-way of a street
owned by a unit of government; however, a permit shall be required for connection of temporary
or permanent City of Auburn electric service.
3. Installation of a manufactured home or a carport, including foundations and any steps to exterior
entrance doors of the manufactured home, when the manufactured home or carport is to be
installed in an approved or legally non-conforming manufactured housing/mobile home park,
and where the installation satisfies all of the following conditions:
a. The land where the manufactured home is to be installed lies within the manufactured
housing/mobile home park (MH) zoning district; and
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 151-10
Building Code
CHAPTER 151
b. The structure will be a manufactured home as defined herein that qualifies as and will be
used only as a single dwelling unit; and
c. The structure is to be installed on a temporary foundation; and
d. The lot on which the structure is to be located will be rented to the owners or lessees of the
residential manufactured home that is to be placed on the lot; however, a permit shall be
required for connection of temporary or permanent City of Auburn electric service,
installation or construction of any other structures regulated by this chapter, and
modifications to the manufactured home. The installation or construction of said any other
structure, and modification to the manufactured home, shall comply with the requirements of
675 IAC 14 and any other current rules of the State of Indiana that apply to manufactured
homes located on privately owned (non-rental) lots, and shall comply with the regulations in
this chapter, regardless of whether or not it is located on a lot that is or will be rented or
owned by the owner or lessee of the structure.
4. Any of the following work, regardless of cost, that is not subject to the requirements of a
construction design release, or does not involve structural change or changes to electrical or
plumbing systems:
a. Interior and exterior finish work, including but not limited to painting, and installation, repair
or replacement of carpeting, flooring, cabinetry, roof decking, shingles, siding, gutters,
downspouts, insulation, windows and doors.
b. Installation of fences, non-load-bearing exterior wall systems, exterior at-grade floor
systems (landing, patio, slab, stoop), sidewalks, driveways and vehicle parking areas.
c. Installation, replacement or repair of mechanical systems, including but not limited to
heating systems, HVAC systems, furnaces, water heaters, water softeners, toilets, sinks
and showers.
d. Detached residential accessory buildings on temporary foundations that are single-story,
less than 120 sq. ft. in floor area, and less than 12 ft. in height at the highest point, are
exempt from permitting requirements.
Term of permit
All site improvement permits shall be valid for a period of one (1) year from the date of issue.
Permit renewal
The Administrator may renew a permit one (1) time for a term that is not longer than the term of the
original permit, upon a showing by the property owner that the work has not been completed in the time
allowed due to conditions not under the control of the property owner, including but not limited to
seasonal or other weather conditions, lack of building materials, or shortage of labor. The renewal permit
shall be issued only for work that was included in the original permit, and shall be subject to a permit
renewal fee.
151.11 PRE-APPLICATION PLAN REVIEW
Prior to filing an application for a permit, the property owner or the owner's authorized representative shall
submit the following documents and plans for review:
Class 1 structures
1. Site plan;
2. A copy of the application for the construction design release as filed with the State of Indiana;
3. A copy of the construction design release as received from the State of Indiana;
4. Construction plans as submitted to the State of Indiana for the construction design release; and
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 151-11
Building Code
CHAPTER 151
5. For industrialized buildings, a copy of the design release to manufacture if the structure is an
industrialized building system or a mobile structure, a copy of the seal of acceptance, and proof
of the occupancy classification.
Class 2 and all other structures
1. Site plan;
2. Material specifications;
3. Construction plans; and
4. For industrialized buildings, a copy of the design release to manufacture if the structure is an
industrialized building system or a mobile structure, a copy of the seal of acceptance, and proof
of the occupancy classification.
Review
The department will review the submitted information for conformance with the standards adopted in this
chapter, the conditions if any in a design release, and any special terms or conditions attached to the
project. Depending on the scope of the project and class of structure, the review process may take from
one (1) day to three (3) weeks to complete. Review comments will be provided to the owner in person,
or by facsimile or mail, as soon as reasonably possible following review, together with a determination
that the plans and/or other information must be amended and re-submitted for review, or a
recommendation to proceed with application for a permit.
151.12 PERMIT APPLICATION, REVIEW AND APPROVAL
Owner/applicant
The property owner or the owner's authorized representative shall be responsible for completing and
submitting the application for a site improvement permit.
Application form
The application for a permit shall be on forms furnished by the department. One application shall be
submitted for each individual address where work is to be done; however, one application may be
submitted for each multi-family residential building in which all work is to be accomplished in the same
manner in each dwelling unit in the building, and is to be accomplished by the same contractors and
sub-contractors. All information required on the application form shall be provided by the applicant.
Attachments
A complete set of the documents that were required for the pre-application review, including required
amendments, and any additional information required by the Administrator based on the circumstances
of a particular project shall be attached to each application.
Review
The Administrator shall review each application for completeness, for compliance with the terms of this
chapter, for compliance with any conditions attached to a construction design release or design release
to manufacture, and for compliance with any special terms or conditions attached to a project.
Approval or rejection
The application will be approved and a permit issued, or the application will be rejected and returned to
the owner with the reasons for rejection, within ten (10) days following the date of receipt of the
completed application and all required attachments by the department. If rejected and returned, it shall
be the responsibility of the owner to address the cause for rejection and submit a revised application for
further review.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 151-12
Building Code
CHAPTER 151
Building permit issuance
The Administrator shall issue a building permit to a person after the person has submitted a complete
application, including any applicable fee, provided that the proposed construction will conform to all
applicable building laws and will not violate any other applicable ordinances or laws.
Plans, materials and methods
The city shall not by its actions approve or certify the design, construction plans, materials proposed to
be used, or the proposed methods of construction.
151.13 COMPLIANCE WITH STANDARDS
It is the responsibility of the property owner to ensure that construction plans for a project comply with all
regulations. The property owner shall also be responsible for ensuring that the work is completed in
accordance with the requirements in this chapter, whether or not a permit is required or issued, and in
accordance with all other permits, regulations, guidelines and plans governing work on the project. The
property owner shall ensure that all work is performed in a professional manner, and according to the
standards adopted herein, the product-specific installation requirements, and the accepted standards and
practices of the various trades.
151.14 INSPECTIONS AND DEFICIENCIES
Inspection requests
The owner of property subject to a site improvement permit is responsible for requesting all inspections
of work. Twenty-four (24) hour notice is requested.
Unscheduled inspections
A city building inspector may periodically inspect work for which a site improvement permit has been
issued to determine compliance with the standards adopted by reference in this chapter, the plans, and
the terms of a construction design release or design release to manufacture.
Uninspected work
Work which cannot be inspected when an inspection is requested because the work is incomplete,
covered, inaccessible or otherwise not ready for inspection, is subject to a re-inspection fee.
Non-compliant work
Whenever a city building inspector determines that any work is not in compliance with the terms of the
site improvement permit, a construction design release, or the standards adopted by reference in this
chapter, the inspector will attempt to notify the property owner in person about the deficiency. Where inperson
communication is not possible or where a deficiency is not corrected within the allotted time as
determined by the inspector, the inspector shall notify the owner about the deficiency in writing. Cited
deficiencies shall be corrected by the owner and inspected not later than the required completion date of
the work authorized by the permit, or within ninety (90) days following written notice, whichever is longer.
For changes to the design of a project that is subject to a construction design release or design release
to manufacture, the owner shall be responsible for submitting an application for addenda or revision to
the release pursuant to state law, and the amended release shall be provided to the department for use
in the final inspection.
Inspections by Fire Department
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 151-13
Building Code
CHAPTER 151
The Administrator and the Fire Department shall work cooperatively to conduct inspections and
investigations to promote compliance with fire safety laws (The Fire Department has independent
authority to conduct inspections and take enforcement actions under IC 36-8-17).
Permit revocation
The Administrator may revoke a building permit when any of the following are applicable:
1. The application, plans or supporting documents contain a false statement or misrepresentation
as to a material fact.
2. The application, plans or supporting documents reflect a lack of compliance with building
standards and procedures.
3. There is failure to comply with the Building Ordinance.
151.15 RIGHT OF ENTRY
Upon presentation of proper credentials, the Administrator or any city building inspector may enter at
reasonable times any building, structure, or premises within the city's jurisdiction to perform any duty
required by this chapter.
151.16 APPROVAL TO OCCUPY
Certificate of occupancy
1. Where work on a structure is subject to the requirement to obtain a site improvement permit, or
where a permit has been issued, a certificate of occupancy shall be required prior to occupancy
or use of the structure for any of the following purposes:
a. A new building;
b. A new addition to a building;
c. Repair or refurbishment that includes structural change to any part of a building that was
damaged as the result of accidental or natural disaster, including but not limited to fire,
water, flood, tornado or wind damage;
d. A relocated building; or
e. A permanent swimming pool.
2. The Administrator shall approve all certificates of occupancy only after final inspection and
approval of the work by a city building inspector. The Administrator's approval shall be issued
within three (3) working days following the date of the inspector's final approval.
Conditional certificate of occupancy
1. A conditional certificate of occupancy may be issued for any of the structures that are eligible
for a certificate of occupancy as listed above, provided that all of the following conditions can be
satisfied:
a. A city building inspector has determined that a certificate of occupancy cannot be issued in
the reasonably near future for reasons not under the control of the property owner, including
but not limited to seasonal or other weather conditions, lack of building materials, or
shortage of labor;
b. The structure is otherwise determined by the Administrator, on the advice of the inspector,
to be habitable;
c. All of the following components and systems have been installed, and have been inspected
and approved: smoke alarms, fire safety equipment, electrical service and premise wiring,
potable water service, and sanitary sewer service; and
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 151-14
Building Code
CHAPTER 151
d. The inspector shall have established the length of time for which the conditional certificate
of occupancy is to be valid based on the inspector's estimated date of completion and final
inspection of the outstanding work, but in no event longer than one-hundred and eighty
(180) days.
2. A conditional certificate of occupancy may be renewed one (1) time, in the same manner and for
the same term as the initial conditional certificate was issued.
Deficiencies
Hidden defects and deficiencies are not approved by issuance of a certificate or a conditional certificate
of occupancy.
151.17 STOP WORK ORDER
The Administrator may issue an order requiring suspension of the pertinent construction (stop-work
order) in accordance with this section.
The stop work order shall:
1. Be in writing.
2. State with specificity the construction to which it is applicable and the reason for its issuance.
3. Be posted on the property in a conspicuous place.
4. If practicable, be given to:
a. The person doing the construction; and
b. To the owner of the property or the owner’s agent.
5. The stop-work order shall state the conditions under which construction may be resumed.
The Administrator may issue a stop-work order if:
1. Construction is proceeding in an unsafe manner, including, but not limited to, in violation of any
standard set forth in this Building Ordinance or any state law pertaining to safety during
construction.
2. Construction is occurring in violation of this Building Ordinance or in such a manner that if
construction is allowed to proceed, there is a reasonable probability that it will be substantially
difficult to correct the violation.
3. Construction for which a building permit is required is proceeding without a building permit
being in force.
The issuance of a stop-work order shall in no way limit the operation of penalties provided
elsewhere in this Building Ordinance.
151.18 VIOLATIONS
It shall be unlawful for any person whether as owner, lessee, sub-lessee, occupant, user or contractor of or
on property subject to this chapter, to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, improve, remove, convert,
demolish, equip, use, occupy, or maintain any building or structure, except as provided herein, in the city’s
jurisdiction, or to cause or permit the same to be done in violation of the provisions of this chapter.
151.19 RIGHT OF APPEAL
Appeals
Pursuant to IC 36-1-6-9, the City has established by ordinance to hear appeals of orders issued under
ordinances, then a person aggrieved by an order may petition for review with this administrative body in
accordance with said ordinance. Any appeal of a decision of the Administrator or the terms of this
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 151-15
Building Code
CHAPTER 151
chapter shall be made in writing to the city’s Board of Zoning Appeals, the provisions of and in the
manner prescribed in Chapter 150 of the Municipal Code of the City of Auburn, and the rules and
regulations governing the operation of the Board of Zoning Appeals.
Appeal to the Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission
1. A person aggrieved by an order issued under this Building Ordinance may appeal to the Fire
Prevention and Building Safety Commission, in accordance with IC 22-13-2-7.
2. The Commission may modify or reverse any order issued by the City that covers a subject
governed by IC 22-12, IC 22-13, IC 22-14, IC 22-15, a fire safety, or a building rule.
3. The Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission must review orders that concern a Class 2
Structure if the person aggrieved by the order petitions for review under IC 4-21.5-3-7 within
thirty (30) days after the issuance of the order.
4. The Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission may review all other orders issued under
this Building Ordinance.
5. The review of an order by the Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission does not
suspend the running of the time period under any statute in which a person must petition a court
for judicial review of the order.
151.20 REMEDIES AND CIVIL ACTION
Pursuant to IC 36-1-6-4, the city may bring actions in the Circuit or Superior Courts of DeKalb County for
mandatory and injunctive relief in the enforcement of and to secure compliance with any order or
orders made by the Administrator, or,
to restrain any person from violating a provision of this ordinance.
Any such action for mandatory or injunctive relief may be joined with an action to recover the penalties
provided for in this chapter.
151.99 PENALTY
Monetary Penalty
Any person violating any provision of this Building Ordinance may be subject to a fine in any sum not
exceeding two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500). The assessment of a monetary penalty shall in no
way limit the operation of the penalties provided elsewhere in this Building Ordinance.
151.22 SEVERABILITY
Should any provision (section, clause, phrase, word, or any other portion) of this ordinance be declared by a
court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid for any reason, the remaining provisions shall not be affected, if
and only if such remaining provisions can, without the invalid provision or provisions be given the effect
intended in adopting this ordinance. To this end, the provisions of this ordinance are severable.
151.23 FEES
The fee schedule is contained in a separate City of Auburn ordinance that is available and on file in the
offices of the City of Auburn, Clerk-Treasurer and Building, Planning and Development departments.
151.24 EFFECT OF ADOPTION ON PRIOR ORDINANCE
The expressed or implied repeal of amendment by this ordinance of any other ordinance or part of any other
ordinance does not affect any rights or liabilities accrued, penalties incurred, or proceedings begun prior to
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 151-16
Building Code
CHAPTER 151
the effective date of this ordinance. These rights, liabilities, and other proceedings are continued and
penalties shall be imposed and enforced under the repealed or amended ordinance as if this ordinance had
not been adopted.
151.25 EFFECTIVE DATE
This Building Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date on which both of the following
have occurred:
The City Council has adopted this ordinance.
The Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission of Indiana has approved of this ordinance as
required by IC 22-13-2-5.
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Registration of Plumbers
CHAPTER 153
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 153-2
Registration of Plumbers
CHAPTER 153
Table of Contents
153.01 DEFINITIONS
153.02 AUTHORITY
153.03 STANDARDS
153.04 REGISTRATION REQUIRED
153.05 SITE IMPROVEMENT PERMITS
153.06 RESPONSIBILITY FOR WORK
153.07 APPLICATION FOR AND ISSUANCE OF REGISTRATION
153.08 EXPIRATION OF REGISTRATION
153.09 APPEALS
153.99 PENALTY
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 153-3
Registration of Plumbers
CHAPTER 153
153.01 DEFINITIONS
The following definitions and abbreviations apply throughout this chapter unless the context clearly indicates
or requires a different meaning:
• ADMINISTRATOR
The administrator of the Department of Building, Planning and Development of the City of Auburn.
• BOARD
The Board of Public Works and Safety of the City of Auburn.
• CITY
The City of Auburn, Indiana.
• CLASS 1 STRUCTURE
Any structure defined as a Class 1 structure pursuant to IC 22-12-1-4, as from time to time amended.
• CLASS 2 STRUCTURE
Any structure defined as a Class 2 structure pursuant to IC 22-12-1-5, as from time to time amended.
The term includes “one-family dwelling,” “single-family dwelling,” “two-family dwelling” and “duplex
dwelling.”
• DEPARTMENT
The Department of Building, Planning and Development of the City of Auburn.
• DWELLING UNIT
The room or rooms that form a single residential unit, providing complete independent living facilities for
occupancy by one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking
and sanitation that comply with the requirements for a Class 2 structure.
• PLUMBING WORK
The installation, alteration or repair of plumbing system components, including but not limited to water
and wastewater system pipes, fixtures and related devices, in any Class 1 or Class 2 structure, or any
other structure regulated by Chapter 151 “Building Code” of the Municipal Code of the City of Auburn.
153.02 AUTHORITY
The administrator of the Department of Building, Planning and Development of the City of Auburn is
authorized and directed to administer the provisions of this chapter.
153.03 STANDARDS
The applicable provisions of IC 25-28.5-1-32 and 675 IAC 16, as from time to time amended, shall apply
throughout this chapter.
153.04 REGISTRATION REQUIRED
Any person who engages in plumbing work within the city shall be registered in accordance with the
requirements in this chapter.
Any person who performs plumbing work under any of the following conditions is exempt from the
requirement to be registered as a plumber with the City. Exemptions (1) to (9) of this section are
exemptions under IC 25-28.5-1-32, and any amendment to or repeal of a provision of IC 25-28.5-1-
32 shall immediately amend or repeal the same provision in this section.
1. Bridge, road and railroad exemption
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 153-4
Registration of Plumbers
CHAPTER 153
Contractors in work on bridges, roads, streets, highways, railroads, or utilities and services
incidental to the work.
2. Government exemption
An authorized employee of the United States, the state, or a political subdivision of the state if the
employee does not profess to be for hire and is acting within the scope of the employee's
employment.
3. Court appointed officer
An officer appointed by a court when the officer is acting within the scope of the officer's office as
defined by law or court order. When construction projects are not underway at the time of the
appointment of the officer by the court, and the nature of the officer's appointment requires that
plumbing must be done, the officer must employ or contract with a registered plumbing contractor or
journeyman plumber.
4. Public utility exemption
Public utilities with respect to construction, maintenance, and development work performed by their
own forces and incidental to their business.
5. Owner-occupant exemption
The owner occupant of a dwelling of eight or less residential units when the owner occupant is
installing, altering, or repairing the plumbing system of the residential units.
6. Federal land and federal law exemption
Construction, alteration, improvement, or repair of a plumbing system, located on a site, the title of
which is in the name of the United States of America, or to construction, alteration, improvement, or
repair on a project where federal law supersedes this article.
7. Employee maintenance exemption
An individual who is employed or acts as a maintenance person at the individual's place of
employment.
8. Farmstead exemption
Farmsteads, except for buildings built on the farmstead for the purpose of public or commercial use.
9. Utility contractor exemption
A sewer contractor, sewage disposal contractor, or an excavation contractor or utility contractor who
generally engages in the business of installing, altering, or repairing sewers, private or public
sewage disposal systems, and water distribution or drainage lines outside the foundation walls of a
building.
10. Building trades exemption
High school building trades students while working on a building trades project on which a registered
plumber is also employed, and only when the registered plumber is present during the performance
of any plumbing work.
153.05 SITE IMPROVEMENT PERMITS
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 153-5
Registration of Plumbers
CHAPTER 153
The following persons shall be authorized to obtain a site improvement permit for the specified plumbing
work:
A person who is registered as a plumber in accordance with this chapter may obtain a site
improvement permit for plumbing work on any Class 1, Class 2 or related structure in the city.
The owner-occupant of a dwelling unit performing work under the owner-occupant exemption in this
chapter may obtain a site improvement permit for the plumbing work authorized on the dwelling
unit(s).
A person performing work under the employee maintenance exemption in this chapter may obtain a
site improvement permit for the plumbing work authorized on any building in which they are the
maintenance person.
A person performing work under the farmstead exemption in this chapter may obtain a site
improvement permit for the plumbing work authorized on the exempt buildings.
153.06 RESPONSIBILITY FOR WORK
The individual who obtains a site improvement permit for plumbing work shall be responsible for ensuring
that all work authorized by that permit is completed in compliance with all city and other regulations that
apply to the work.
153.07 APPLICATION FOR AND ISSUANCE OF REGISTRATION
Application
Each applicant for registration as a plumber shall complete and file the following with the city’s
Department of Building, Planning and Development:
1. An application for registration in the form provided by the Department; and
2. A copy of the applicant's current and valid plumber contractor license.
Issuance
A registration shall be issued after:
1. The application form and the state plumber contractor license have been reviewed and
approved by the administrator of the Department; and
2. A registration fee of $20 has been paid the city for each initial registration and each renewal
registration.
153.08 EXPIRATION OF REGISTRATION
Each registration shall be valid for a period of time that is the shorter of:
The calendar year in which the registration was issued; or
The termination of the state plumber contractor license.
153.09 APPEALS
Administrative appeal
An appeal of any of the terms of this chapter or any decision of the Administrator shall be made in
writing to the city's Board of Public Works and Safety.
Decision of the board
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 153-6
Registration of Plumbers
CHAPTER 153
The decision of the Board on any appeal shall be final, subject to review by certiorari.
Cessation of work
No person whose plumbing registration has been revoked may perform plumbing work in the city, and
no work may be performed under a permit issued to that person, until either:
1. The city’s Board of Public Works and Safety has authorized the person is again registered as a
plumber in accordance with the terms of this chapter; or
2. An appeal has been denied by the Board but overturned by a court of competent jurisdiction,
and the Board does not appeal the court's decision.
153.99 PENALTY
Fine
Any person who performs plumbing work in violation of any of the terms of this chapter shall be fined
$25 per violation. Each day that a violation continues is a separate offense.
Revocation of registration
The registration of a plumber shall be revoked for the performance of plumbing work that does not
comply with the requirements of either Chapter 151 “Building Code” or any other adopted standards of
the city.
Renewal of revoked registration
A person whose registration has been revoked under terms of this chapter may renew their registration
only after completing the following requirements:
1. An application has been made in writing to the city’s Board of Public Works and Safety
requesting reinstatement as a registered plumber, including evidence that the reason(s) for
which the registration was revoked has been resolved;
2. The Board has approved renewal of the registration; and
3. All requirements in this chapter for renewal of a registration have been completed, whether or
not the person has already been registered with the city as a plumber in the current calendar
year.
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Fire Prevention Code;
Smoke Detectors
CHAPTER 154
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 154-2
Fire Prevention Code; Smoke Detectors
CHAPTER 154
Table of Contents
GENERAL PROVISIONS
154.01 TITLE
154.02 PURPOSE
154.03 SCOPE
154.04 ADOPTION OF FIRE PRVENTION CODES BY REFERENCE
154.05 ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY
154.06 INSPECTIONS AND PENALTIES
154.07 RIGHT OF ENTRY
154.08 INVESTIGATION OF FIRES
154.09 FIRE RECORDS AND FIRE REPORTS
154.10 VIOLATIONS AND ORDERS OF CORRECTION
154.11 ESTABLISHMENT OF LIMITS OF DISTRICTS IN WHICH STORAGE OF FLAMMABLE OR
COMBUSTIBLE LIQUIDS IN OUTSIDE, ABOVE GROUND TANKS IS TO BE PROHIBITED
154.12 ESTABLISHMENT OF LIMITS IN WHICH STORAGE OF LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GASES IS
RESTRICTED
154.13 ESTABLISHED OF LIMITS OF DISTRICTS IN WHICH STORAGE OF EXPLOSIVES AND BLASTING
AGENTS IS TO BE PROHIBITED
154.14 OUTSIDE BURNING
154.15 FIRE HYDRANTS
154.16 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY
154.17 RIGHT TO APPEAL
154.18 REMEDIES
SMOKE DETECTORS
154.30 DEFINITIONS
154.31 BASIC REQUIREMENTS
154.32 INSTALLATION; LOCATION
154.33 MAINTENANCE
154.34 DUTY OF PROPERTY OWNER, MANAGER, OR RENTAL AGENT
154.35 ENFORCEMENT
154.99 SMOKE DETECTOR - PENALTY
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 154-3
Fire Prevention Code; Smoke Detectors
CHAPTER 154
GENERAL PROVISIONS
154.01 TITLE
This ordinance and all ordinances supplemental or amendatory hereto, shall be known as the "Fire
Prevention Code of the City of Auburn, Indiana", may be cited as such, and will be referred to herein as 'this
Code.' To the extent allowable by law this code shall apply to all areas within the legal jurisdiction of the
Auburn Fire Department.
154.02 PURPOSE
The intent of this code is to prescribe maintenance and operation regulations consistent with nationally
recognized good practice for the safeguarding, to a reasonable degree, of life and property from the hazards
of fire and explosion arising from the storage, handling and use of hazardous substances, materials and
devices, and from conditions hazardous to life or property in the use or occupancy of buildings or premises.
154.03 SCOPE
The provisions of this code shall apply to existing conditions as well as to conditions arising after
the adoption thereof. Buildings, Systems, Uses, Special Occupancy Uses, Special Processes,
Special Equipment, and Special Subjects legally in existence at the adoption of this code shall be
permitted to continue so long as they are maintained in a condition that is equivalent to the quality
and fire resistive characteristics that existed when the building was constructed, altered, added to or
repaired.
Nothing in this code shall be interpreted or applied to abrogate, nullify or abolish any law, ordinance
or code adopted by the City of Auburn, DeKalb County, Indiana, governing the construction,
alteration, addition, repair, removal, demolition, use, location, occupancy, and maintenance of
buildings specifically provided herein. When any provision of this code is found to be in conflict with
any building, zoning, safety, health or other applicable law, ordinance or code of the City of Auburn,
DeKalb County, Indiana, existing on the effective date of this code or hereafter adopted, the
provision which establishes the higher standard for the promotion and protection of the safety and
welfare of the public shall prevail.
The planning, design and construction of new buildings and structures to provide egress facilities,
fire protection, and built-in fire protection equipment shall be controlled by the International Fire
Code, with Indiana amendments, and building rules of the State of Indiana Fire and Building
Services Department and any alterations, additions or changes in buildings required by the
provisions of this code which are within the scope of the said building rules, shall be made in
accordance therewith.
Buildings built under and in full compliance with the building and fire safety laws and rules in force
at the time of construction or alteration thereof, and that have been properly maintained and used
for such use as originally permitted, shall be exempt from the requirements of this code pertaining
to any of the following matters:
1. Fire protection of structural elements.
2. Exits required, except as provided for existing buildings under this code.
3. Isolation of hazardous operations and mixed uses: provided however, that the Fire Chief and/or
Fire Marshal and/or Auburn Fire Department, DeKalb County, Indiana, require the installation of
fire safety devices or systems (fire extinguishers, fire alarms, fire detection devices, or similar
systems, etc.) where they are necessary to provide safety to life. In lieu of requiring the
installation of safety devices or systems or when necessary to secure safety in addition thereto,
the Fire Chief and/or Fire Marshal and/or Auburn Fire Department, DeKalb County, Indiana,
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 154-4
Fire Prevention Code; Smoke Detectors
CHAPTER 154
shall prescribe limitations on the handling and storage of materials or substances or upon
operations that are liable to cause fire, contribute to the spread of fire, or endanger life or
property. Any orders issued by the Fire Chief and/or Fire Marshal and/or Auburn Fire
Department, DeKalb County, Indiana, to obtain compliance with this subsection shall be
governed by the provisions of IC 36-8-17-10.
154.04 ADOPTION OF FIRE PRVENTION CODES BY REFERENCE
The following rules and standards are rules of the Indiana Fire and Building Services Department
and City of Auburn, DeKalb County, Indiana, and shall be used in the enforcement of this code for
the purpose of fire prevention:
1. All rules of the Indiana Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission as set out in Articles
13, 18, 22, 25, and Title 675 of Indiana Administrative Code are hereby incorporated in this Fire
Prevention Code and shall include later amendments to that article as the same are published in
the Indiana Register on the Indiana Administrative Code with effective dates as fixed therein.
2. Those certain documents, being standards, and fire codes, published by the National Fire
Protection Association (NFPA), are hereby adopted by reference, and as amended annually,
and made a part of this rule.
Within the standards adopted in this section the term “authority having jurisdiction” shall mean the
Fire Department, Fire Chief and/or Fire Marshal and/or Building, Planning and Development
Department of the City of Auburn, DeKalb County, Indiana. Wherever reference is made to NFPA
101, Life Safety Code, within the standards adopted in this section, such reference is deleted and a
reference is made to the Building Code, City of Auburn, DeKalb County, Indiana, and the Indiana
Building Code (675 IAC 13-2.4-1) and shall be substituted therefore.
The American Petroleum Institute (API), Bulletin, 1220 L. Street Northwest Washington D.C.,
20005, and as listed in this section is hereby adopted by reference subject to the listed deletion and
made a part of this rule.
Recommended Practice for Abandonment or Removal of Used Underground Storage Tanks, API
Bulletin. The following standards shall be used with regard to underground storage tanks: When
the tank is to be removed from the premises, the contaminated water and soil shall be removed and
disposed of in accordance with Indiana Department of Environmental Management (IDEM)
regulations.
Copies of adopted fire safety rules, regulations, codes, and standards are on file as required by law,
in the offices of the Fire Marshal, City of Auburn Fire Department, DeKalb County, Indiana, and the
Clerk-Treasurer of the City of Auburn, DeKalb County, Indiana.
In addition, portable fire extinguishers shall be installed in the following locations:
1. In new and existing Group A, B, E, F, H, I M, R-1, R-2, R-4 and S occupancies.
154.05 ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY
This code shall be enforced by the Division of Fire Prevention in the Auburn Fire Department of the
City of Auburn, DeKalb County, Indiana, which is hereby reestablished, and which shall be operated
under the direct supervision of the City of Auburn Fire Chief and/or Fire Marshal, DeKalb County,
Indiana.
The Fire Chief and/or Fire Marshal of the City of Auburn Fire Department DeKalb County, Indiana,
may detail such members of the City of Auburn Fire Department, DeKalb County, Indiana, as
inspectors as shall from time to time be necessary.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 154-5
Fire Prevention Code; Smoke Detectors
CHAPTER 154
It shall be the duty and responsibility of the Fire Chief and/or Fire Marshal and/or Auburn Fire
Department, DeKalb County, Indiana, or such officer or authorized designee, who is an ex-officio
assistant to the State of Indiana Fire Marshal under IC 36-8-17-5 (a), to enforce the provisions of
this code.
Only the Fire Chief and/or Fire Marshal may issue monetary citation tickets, after reasonable means
to gain compliance have failed and/or with proper justifications.
It is the intent of the Auburn Fire Department to achieve compliance by traditional means of
inspection, violation notification, granting reasonable time to comply and re-inspection. A monetary
fine citation ticket may be issued only after all reasonable means to gain compliance have failed or,
with proper justification, at the discretion of the Fire Marshal and/or Fire Chief. Citations shall be
used only where a specific section of the appropriate code or ordinance has occurred and
documentation establishing prior efforts to gain compliance is in evidence.
EXCEPTION: Citations may be issued for violations which present imminent life hazards including, but not
limited to exits locked or blocked by obstructions, failure to maintain fire protection life safety systems,
improper storage and use of flammable and combustible liquids, failure to obey lawful orders of the Fire
Chief and/or Fire Marshal.
154.06 INSPECTIONS AND PENALTIES
Class 1 Structures Inspection:
The inspection of Class 1 Structures shall be completed by the Fire Marshal of the City of Auburn Fire
Department. At the time the inspection occurs, the Fire Marshal will evaluate the premises for violation of
the applicable rules of the Indiana Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission, this Ordinance and
other documents as adopted by the IFPBSC. At the completion of the inspection, the Fire Marshall will
review the results with the occupant and leave a copy of the inspection report with the occupant. If
violations are found, a correction will occur thereafter to determine if the violation(s) has / have been
corrected, if the previously cited violations are found to be corrected, no other action shall be necessary. If
violations are found to still exist after this first re-inspection, then a copy of the inspection report will be let
with the occupant and the results reviewed with the occupant, the occupant shall then forward to the owner.
A second re-inspection will occur approximately 15 days after to determine if the violation (s) has or have
been corrected. If the previously cited violations are corrected at this re-inspection, then no further action
shall be required. If previously cited violations are found a fee as per this ordinance shall be assessed and
ta third re-inspection will occur approximately five (5) days after to determine if the violations have been
corrected. If previously cited violations are still not corrected, a fee shall be assessed for each re-inspection
and those re-inspections will occur every 5 days until the violations are corrected. If at any time the Fire
Marshall completes an inspection and finds an immediate fire or life safety hazard, the violation shall be
corrected immediately. In the event the violation cannot be corrected immediately, a FIRE/LIFE Safety
ORDER will be issued and the violation must be corrected by the date ion the ORDER. Failure to correct
the violation by the date on the ORDER will result in a dee and may cause further legal action to be taken
against the violator. Please note that fees of this ordinance are in addition to those fees/fines that may be
levied by the State of Indian or other entities over the City of Auburn, Indiana.
1. Fire and Life Safety inspections shall be conducted by the Fire Marshal in existing Class 1
structures per Indiana Code Section 36-8-17-8. Upon the discovery of a violation of the Indiana
Building Code, Indiana Fire Code, Indiana Mechanical Code, Indiana Fuel Gas Code, this Fire
Prevention Code, or any other Fire Safety Code of the jurisdiction, a re-inspection may be
necessary to confirm compliance with a Notice of Violation or an order issued by the Fire Chief
and /or Fire Marshal. A fee for re-inspections may be charged as indicated below:
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 154-6
Fire Prevention Code; Smoke Detectors
CHAPTER 154
First re-inspection:
(Approx. 30 days)
No charge
Second re-inspection:
(Approx. 15 days)
No charge
Third re-inspection:
(Approx. 5 days)
$100.00
All subsequent re-inspections:
(Approx. 5 days)
$250.00
2. The fees assessed by this Fire Prevention Ordinance are in addition to those fines or fees that
may be levied by the State of Indiana and any other jurisdiction.
3. All payments are due within thirty (30) days from the date of the assessment of the fee.
Violators who fail to make payment prior to the payment due date shall be assessed an
additional twenty-five dollar ($25.00) late fee for each outstanding fee and shall be subject to
litigation for failure to pay an Ordinance violation fee.
154.07 RIGHT OF ENTRY
Whenever necessary for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this code, or whenever the Fire Chief
and/or Fire Marshal and/or Auburn Fire Department, DeKalb County, Indiana, or their authorized designee,
has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any structure or upon any premises, any condition which
makes such structure or premises unsafe, the Fire Chief and/or Fire Marshal and/or Auburn Fire
Department, DeKalb County, Indiana, or their authorized designee, shall be permitted to enter such structure
or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the Fire Chief
and/or Fire Marshal and/or Auburn Fire Department, DeKalb County, Indiana, by this code; provided that if
such structure or premises be occupied, the Fire Chief and/or Fire Marshal and/or Auburn Fire Department,
DeKalb County, Indiana, or their authorized designee, shall first present proper identification credentials and
request entry. If such entry is refused the Fire Chief and/or Fire Marshal and/or Auburn Fire Department,
DeKalb County, Indiana, shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry.
154.08 INVESTIGATION OF FIRES
The Fire Chief and/or Fire Marshal and/or Auburn Fire Department, DeKalb County, Indiana, shall
investigate, or cause to be investigated, every fire or explosion occurring within the City of Auburn, DeKalb
County, Indiana, and any fire protection contractual areas; which involves the loss of life or serious injury, or
causes destruction or damage to property of which they are made aware. Such investigation shall be
initiated immediately upon the occurrence of such fire or explosion; and if it appears that such an occurrence
is of a suspicious nature, the Fire Chief and/or Fire Marshal and/or Auburn Fire Department, DeKalb County,
Indiana, shall take charge immediately of the physical evidence, and in order to preserve any physical
evidence relating to the origin of such fire or explosion, take means to prevent access by any person or
persons to such buildings, structures, or premises until such evidence has been properly processed.
154.09 FIRE RECORDS AND FIRE REPORTS
The Fire Chief and/or Fire Marshal and/or Auburn Fire Department, DeKalb County, Indiana, shall
keep a record of all fires and facts concerning the same, including investigation findings and
statistics and information as to the cause, origin, and the extent of such fires and the damage
caused thereby.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 154-7
Fire Prevention Code; Smoke Detectors
CHAPTER 154
The Fire Chief and/or Fire Marshal and/or Auburn Fire Department, DeKalb County, Indiana, shall
submit a report of each fire occurring within the City of Auburn, DeKalb County, Indiana, and any
fire protection contractual areas, to the Office of the State Fire Marshal State of Indiana, in
accordance with IC 36-8-17-7, and in such form as prescribed by that office.
154.10 VIOLATIONS AND ORDERS OF CORRECTION
Whenever the Fire Chief and/or Fire Marshal and/or Auburn Fire Department, DeKalb County,
Indiana, or their authorized designee, observes an apparent or actual violation of a provision of this
code or other ordinances, under the Fire Chief’s or Fire Marshal's jurisdiction, the Fire Chief and/or
Fire Marshal and/or Auburn Fire Department DeKalb County, Indiana, shall prepare a written notice
of violation and order describing the condition or conditions deemed unsafe and specifying a
reasonable time for the required repairs or improvements to be made to correct such violations.
The written notice of violation of this code shall be served upon the owner, a duly authorized agent
or upon the occupant or other person responsible for the conditions under violation. Such notice of
violations shall be served either by delivering a copy of same to such person or persons by ordinary
mail to the last known post office address delivered in person or by delivering it to and leaving it in
the possession of any person in charge of the premises, or in the case such person is not found
upon the premises, by affixing a copy thereof, in a conspicuous place at the entrance door or
avenue of access; and such procedure shall be deemed the equivalent of personal notice.
If the notice of violation and order is not complied with, within the time specified by the Fire Chief
and/or Fire Marshal and/or Auburn Fire Department DeKalb County, Indiana, and if no review of
such order has been initiated under IC 36-8-17-10, the Fire Chief and/or Fire Marshal and/or
Auburn Fire Department DeKalb County, Indiana shall request the legal counsel of the City of
Auburn to institute the appropriate legal proceedings to restrain, correct or abate such violation or to
require removal or termination of the unlawful use of the buildings or structures in violation of the
provisions of this code, or of any order or direction made pursuant thereto.
When the Fire Chief and/or Fire Marshal and/or Auburn Fire Department DeKalb County, Indiana
determines there is actual and potential danger to the occupants or those in the proximity of any
buildings, structures, or premises because of unsafe structural conditions or inadequacy of any
means of egress, the presence of explosives, explosive fumes or vapors, or the presence of toxic
fumes, gases, or materials, the Fire Chief and/or Fire Marshal and/or Auburn Fire Department
DeKalb County, Indiana, may issue an emergency order for the immediate evacuation of said
buildings, structures, or premises. All of the occupants so notified shall immediately leave the
buildings, structures, or premises and persons shall not enter or re-enter until authorized to do so
by the Fire Chief and/or Fire Marshal and/or Auburn Fire Department, DeKalb County, Indiana. Any
person who shall refuse to leave, or interferes with the operations of the fire department or the
evacuation of other occupants, or continues any operation after having been given an evacuation
order; except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe
condition; shall be deemed in violation of this code.
154.11 ESTABLISHMENT OF LIMITS OF DISTRICTS IN WHICH STORAGE OF FLAMMABLE OR
COMBUSTIBLE LIQUIDS IN OUTSIDE, ABOVE GROUND TANKS IS TO BE PROHIBITED
The limits referred to in Chapter 34 under the International Fire Code, with Indiana updates, in
which the storage of Class 1 and Class 2 liquids in aboveground tanks, outside of buildings is
prohibited, are hereby established as follows: Zoning Districts R1, R2, R3 TR, M1,M2,MH,DC, AND
C1; except by permit in PR, AG, AC, ER,IS, C2, I1, I2, and HI as defined by Auburn City Code.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 154-8
Fire Prevention Code; Smoke Detectors
CHAPTER 154
The limits referred to in Chapter 34, 35 and 36, in which new bulk plants for flammable and
combustible liquids are prohibited, are hereby established as follows: Zoning Districts R1, R2, R3,
TR M1, M2, MH, DC, and C1; except by permit in PR, AG, AC, ER, IS, C2, I1, I2 and HI as defined
by Auburn City Code.
154.12 ESTABLISHMENT OF LIMITS IN WHICH STORAGE OF LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GASES IS
RESTRICTED
Liquefied petroleum gas is restricted, and hereby band as follows: Zoning Districts R1, R2, R3, TR, M1, M2,
MH, DC, and C1; except by permit in PR, AG, AC, ER, IS, C2, I1, I2, and HI as defined by Auburn City
Code.
154.13 ESTABLISHED OF LIMITS OF DISTRICTS IN WHICH STORAGE OF EXPLOSIVES AND BLASTING
AGENTS IS TO BE PROHIBITED
Storage of explosives and blasting agents are prohibited, as follows: Zoning Districts PR, ER, R1, R2, R3,
TR, M1, M2, MH, IS, DC, C1, C2, and I1 as defined by Auburn City Code.
154.14 OUTSIDE BURNING
Within the City limits of Auburn there shall be no outdoor burning allowed for the purposes of disposing of
the following:
1. trash, garbage, rubbish;
2. yard waste;
3. tree limbs, brush, sticks, grass;
4. construction materials;
5. debris; and
6. any other waste product that can be disposed of through
7. recycling, regular trash removal, compost, and / or regional landfill deposit.
All ceremonial, recreational bonfires, and campfires or similar activities requires the following guidelines:
• Recreational fires must be 15 feet away from any structure.
• Recreational fires shall not exceed 4 feet in diameter.
• Fire ring or pit shall be constructed of concrete, brick, stone, or other non-combustible material.
• The bottom of the ring or pit may be sand or earth.
• Recreational fire shall be attended at all times.
• Only “clean” wood or charcoal may be burned.
• The fire shall be extinguished at the end of the activity.
• Fire extinguishing equipment such as buckets, shovels or garden hoses shall be readily
available for use at recreational fires.
• No burning shall be conducted during unfavorable weather conditions such as high winds, high
humidity, dry conditions, high temperature, etc.
• All fires shall be extinguished if they create hazard, nuisance, pollution problem or threat to
public health or property
• All fires shall comply with all other state and local regulations and ordinances.
It shall be prohibited within the City of Auburn, Indiana for any individual or resident to operate a detached
device or standalone structure for the purpose of burning and/or providing heat or other energy to a
residential structure and/or garage or outbuilding within the City of Auburn, Indiana.
154.15 FIRE HYDRANTS
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 154-9
Fire Prevention Code; Smoke Detectors
CHAPTER 154
Within the City limits of Auburn there shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet of unobstructed access to the hose
ports of each fire hydrant.
154.16 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY
All Certificates of Occupancy issued by the City of Auburn Building Commissioner, DeKalb County, Indiana,
with the exception of One (1) and Two (2) Family dwellings, shall contain the signatures of the Fire Chief and
the Fire Marshall, City of Auburn Fire Department DeKalb County, Indiana.
154.17 RIGHT TO APPEAL
All persons shall have the right to appeal the decision of the Fire Chief and/or Fire Marshal and/or Auburn
Fire Department DeKalb County, Indiana, first through the Board of Public Works and Safety of the City of
Auburn, and then to the Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission of Indiana in accordance with the
provisions of I.C. 4-21.5-3 as applicable.
154.18 REMEDIES
The attorney for the City of Auburn, DeKalb County, Indiana, upon receipt of a written notice from the Fire
Chief and/or Fire Marshal and/or Auburn Fire Department, DeKalb County, Indiana, that after having issued
a lawful notice and order to abate a violation or violations of this code, and after a reasonable time for
compliance has expired, shall bring action in the Circuit or Superior Courts of DeKalb County, Indiana, for
mandatory and injunctive relief in the enforcement of and to secure compliance with any order or orders
made, by the Fire Chief and/or Fire Marshal and/or Auburn Fire Department, DeKalb County, Indiana, and
any such action for mandatory or injunctive relief may be joined with an action to recover the penalties
provided for in this ordinance.
SMOKE DETECTORS
154.30 DEFINITIONS
For the purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply:
• ALARM SIGNAL
An audible signal indicating the detection of visible or invisible particles or products of combustion other
than heat.
• AUTHORITY HAVING JURISDICTION
The City Fire Department shall have enforcement responsibility for this subchapter.
• FAMILY LIVING UNIT
That structure, area, room, or combination of rooms in which a family (or individual) lives. This is meant
to cover living areas only and not common usage areas in multi-family buildings such as corridors,
lobbies, basements, or the like.
• LABELED
Equipment or materials to which has been attached a label, symbol or other identifying mark of an
organization acceptable to the authority having jurisdiction.
• LISTED
Equipment or materials included in a list published by an organization acceptable to the authority having
jurisdiction and which product meets appropriate standards or has been tested and found suitable for
use in a specified manner.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 154-10
Fire Prevention Code; Smoke Detectors
CHAPTER 154
• NFPA72
Standard 72 of the National Fire Protection Association, which is located in Batterymarch Park, Quincy,
MD 02269.
• RENTAL AGENT
Any person, partnership or corporation, who rents, subleases, lets or otherwise grants for a
consideration the right to occupy premises not owned by the occupant. This term shall not be construed
to mean a real estate agent who is employed for the sole purpose of selling residential units.
• SHALL
Indicates a mandatory requirement.
• SLEEPING AREAS
The area or areas of the family living unit in which the bedrooms (or sleeping rooms) separated by other
use areas, such as kitchens or living rooms (but not bathrooms), shall be considered sleeping areas.
• SMOKE DETECTOR
A device which detects visible or invisible particles or products of combustion other than heat, as
approved by Underwriter's Laboratories, Inc. or Factory Mutual. The smoke detector shall be equipped
with a test button, and it shall produce an alarm signal upon detection of any visible or invisible particles
or products of combustion. It may be either battery powered with a minimum 9-volt or it may be
powered by a 110-volt alternating current.
154.31 BASIC REQUIREMENTS
All family living units within the corporate limits of the city shall be equipped with a minimum of one
functional, properly located, labeled and listed, smoke detector, or its equivalent or better, as described in
the NFPA72.
154.32 INSTALLATION; LOCATION
A minimum of one smoke detector, or its equivalent or better as described in the NFPA72, shall be
installed in each family living unit within the corporate limits of the city.
All smoke detectors must be installed according to the manufacturer's instructions and subject to
the approval of the authority having jurisdiction.
The smoke detector shall be installed to protect the sleeping areas and shall be located outside of
the bedrooms but in the immediate vicinity of the sleeping areas, within 15 feet of all rooms used for
sleeping areas.
The smoke detector shall be installed on or near the ceiling, not less than six inches from any wall,
or on a wall not less than six inches nor more than 12 inches from the ceiling, and its installation
shall be subject to approval by the authority having jurisdiction. No detector shall be recessed into
the ceiling.
All smoke detectors shall be accessible for servicing and testing.
If a smoke detector is A.C. powered, it must be directly attached to a junction box not controlled by
any switch other than the main power supply. The installation of A.C powered detectors shall
conform to all electrical standards adopted by the city. A smoke detector required under this
subchapter shall be installed according to the directions and specifications of the manufacturer, but
if in conflict with any county electrical standard, the county electrical standard shall take
precedence.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 154-11
Fire Prevention Code; Smoke Detectors
CHAPTER 154
154.33 MAINTENANCE
It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with or remove any smoke detector, except when it is necessary
for maintenance or inspection purposes. Any smoke detector removed for repair or replacement shall be reinstalled
or replaced so that it is operable and in place during normal sleeping hours.
Rented residential dwelling units
Each smoke detector may be tested in accordance with manufacturer's recommendations, but shall be
tested at six-month intervals in every individual residential dwelling unit, and maintained as necessary,
to ensure it is in operable condition. At any change of tenancy, smoke detectors shall be tested and be
in operable condition before the unit is re-occupied.
Owner-occupied dwelling units
Each smoke detector may be tested in accordance with manufacturer's recommendations, but shall be
tested at six-month intervals, and maintained as necessary, to ensure it is in operable condition.
154.34 DUTY OF PROPERTY OWNER, MANAGER, OR RENTAL AGENT
Every owner, or the manager or rental agent of such owner of any such residential dwelling unit shall be
responsible for the installation of all smoke detectors. It is the responsibility of the tenant to maintain all
such smoke detectors provided by the owner in good working order until said tenant vacates the premises
unless said smoke detector requires an AC power supply, then the responsibility for maintaining such smoke
detector shall be the responsibility of the owner, manager or rental agent of the property.
154.35 ENFORCEMENT
The City Fire Department and/or the City Fire Marshal shall be responsible for monitoring compliance with
the terms of this subchapter. They shall have the authority to levy a fine not to exceed $25 for each violation
per day and for petitioning the Board of Public Works and Safety for fines in excess of $25 for each violation.
154.99 SMOKE DETECTOR - PENALTY
If any person, firm, or corporation shall violate any of the provisions of 154.01 through 154.16, or
shall do any act prohibited therein, or shall fail to perform any duty lawfully enjoined, within the time
prescribed by the Fire Chief, Fire Marshal and/or Auburn Fire Department, or shall fail, neglect or
refuse to obey any lawful order given by the Fire Chief, Fire Marshal and/or Auburn Fire Department
in connection with the provisions of said sections, for each such violation, failure, or refusal, that
person, firm, or corporation shall be fined a forfeiture pursuant to the Indiana Fire Prevention Code.
1. Each day of such unlawful activity as is prohibited by division (A)(1) of this section shall
constitute a separate offense.
2. Each such citation shall be appealable to the Board of Works and Safety prior to any other
appeal allowed by law. Such appeal shall be requested in writing within 10 days of the citation.
The Board of Public Works and Safety, after hearing, may affirm, modify or dismiss the citation.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of 154.30 through 154.35 or who shall fail to
comply with an order as affirmed or modified by the authority having jurisdiction shall be subject to
fines as follows:
1. A fine imposed by the City Fire Department for a violation shall not exceed $25 for each
violation per day.
2. The City Fire Department can petition the Board of Public Works and Safety for imposition of
fines in excess of $25 for each violation per day but not to exceed $100 for each violation per
day.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 154-12
Fire Prevention Code; Smoke Detectors
CHAPTER 154
3. The Board of Public Works and Safety will conduct a hearing on any petition filed for fines in
excess of $25 for each violation.
a. Said hearing shall be conducted no less than 20 days after notification of the petition to the
offending party.
b. The hearing shall set forth the allegations and provide the offender with an opportunity to be
heard, present evidence and cross-examine witnesses.
c. The decision of the Board of Public Works and Safety shall be final.
d. The city shall have authority, through the Clerk-Treasurer, to collect assessed fines through
the use of liens on the real estate of the offender.
(2017-03 Fire Prevention Code PASSED 5/1/2017)
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Licensing of Electricians
CHAPTER 155
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 155-2
Licensing of Electricians
CHAPTER 155
Table of Contents
155.01 DEFINITIONS
155.02 LICENSE REQUIRED
155.03 SITE IMPROVEMENT PERMITS
155.04 RESPONSIBILITY FOR WORK
155.05 LICENSES
155.06 ISSUANCE AND EXPIRATION OF LICENSES
155.07 TESTING STANDARDS
155.08 APPLICATION AND PROOF OF EXPERIENCE
155.09 FEES
155.10 PENALTIES
155.11 APPEALS
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 155-3
Licensing of Electricians
CHAPTER 155
155.01 DEFINITIONS
The following definitions apply throughout this chapter:
• CLASS 1 STRUCTURE
Any structure defined as a "CLASS 1 STRUCTURE" pursuant to I.C. 22-12-1-4.
• CLASS 2 STRUCTURE
Any structure defined as a "CLASS 2 STRUCTURE" pursuant to I.C. 22-12-1-5. The term includes
"one-family dwelling," "single-family dwelling," "two-family dwelling" and "duplex."
• DWELLING UNIT
The room or rooms that form a single residential unit, providing complete independent living facilities for
one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
• ELECTRICAL WORK
The installation, alteration or repair of electrical system components, including but not limited to wiring,
conduit, switches, electric service panels, outlets and related devices, in or on any Class 1, Class 2 or
other structure regulated by Chapter 151 of this code.
155.02 LICENSE REQUIRED
License required
Any person who engages in electrical work in the city shall possess an electrician's license that was
issued to that person by the city's Department of Building, Planning and Development for the type of
structure on which the electrical work is to be performed, in accordance with the requirements in this
chapter.
Owner-occupant exemption
Any person who performs electrical work within or on the dwelling unit that they own in whole or in part
and occupy as their primary residence, shall be exempt from the requirement to obtain a license under
the terms of this chapter. Where the owner-occupant's building also contains additional dwelling units,
or contains non-residential uses, this exemption shall apply only to components of the electrical system
that serve only the owner-occupied dwelling unit, and that are within or on the interior and exterior of the
owner-occupied dwelling unit, and shall not extend to any other electrical component of the same
building, nor to any shared electrical components of the same building, nor to any other interior or
exterior part of the same building.
Building trades exemption
High school building trades students shall be exempt from the requirement to obtain a license under the
terms of this chapter while working on a building trades project.
Maintenance exemption
Any person who is employed as a maintenance person at a manufacturing facility, and who performs
electrical work in order to maintain the production, manufacturing and assembly equipment necessary to
maintain productivity in the facility where that person is employed, shall be exempt from the requirement
to obtain a license under the terms of this chapter.
155.03 SITE IMPROVEMENT PERMITS
The owner-occupant of a dwelling unit who qualifies as being license-exempt under the terms of
155.02(B) in this chapter shall be authorized to obtain a site improvement permit to perform
electrical work authorized in that section.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 155-4
Licensing of Electricians
CHAPTER 155
A person who holds a license as a master electrician shall be authorized to obtain site improvement
permits to perform electrical work on any Class 1, Class 2, or related structures.
A person who holds a license as a master residential electrician shall be authorized to obtain site
improvement permits to perform electrical work on any Class 2 or related structures, but not on
Class 1 or related structures.
A person who holds a license as an electrical contractor shall be authorized to obtain site
improvement permits to perform electrical work on any Class 1, Class 2 or related structures,
subject to the following restrictions:
1. When the electrical contractor has a master electrician assigned to supervise the electrical
work, a permit may be obtained for any class of structure.
2. When the electrical contractor has a master residential electrician assigned to supervise the
electrical work, a permit may be obtained only for Class 2 or related structures, but not Class 1
or related structures.
This provision shall be valid only through December 31, 2001.
Permits not authorized
A site improvement permit to perform electrical work shall not be issued to a person holding a license as
a journeyman electrician, journeyman residential electrician or apprentice electrician.
155.04 RESPONSIBILITY FOR WORK
The electrical contractor, master electrician, master residential electrician, or owner-occupant of a dwelling
who obtains a site improvement permit for electrical work, shall be responsible for ensuring that all electrical
work authorized by the permit is completed in compliance with all regulations and permits that apply to the
work.
155.05 LICENSES
Classes of license
The following classes of licenses shall be issued by the city subject to satisfactory completion of the
requirements in this chapter for each class:
1. Master electrician
A license issued to a person who has correctly answered at least 70% of the questions on the
examination for master electrician, and who has not less than four years of equivalent full-time
experience performing electrical work on any combination of Class 1 and Class 2 structures.
2. Journeyman electrician
A license issued to a person who has correctly answered at least 70% of the questions on the
examination for journeyman electrician, and who has not less than two years of equivalent full-time
experience performing electrical work on any combination of Class 1 and Class 2 structures.
3. Master residential electrician
A license issued to a person who has correctly answered at least 70% of the questions on the
examination for master residential electrician, and has who has not less than two years of equivalent
full-time experience performing electrical work on Class 2 structures.
4. Journeyman residential electrician
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 155-5
Licensing of Electricians
CHAPTER 155
A license issued to a person who has correctly answered at least 70% of the questions on the
examination for journeyman residential electrician, and has who has not less than two years of
equivalent full-time experience performing electrical work on Class 2 structures.
5. Apprentice electrician
A license issued to a person for the purpose of performing electrical work under the supervision of
any person licensed in accordance with the requirements in this chapter, except another apprentice
electrician.
Reciprocal license
A reciprocal electrician's license will be issued to an applicant for any class of license in this chapter
except apprentice electrician, subject to the applicant satisfying both of the following requirements:
1. Having completed the work experience required in this chapter for the class of license to be
issued; and
2. Having passed an electrician's certification examination administered by a state agency in any
of the 50 states (but not by a political subdivision of a state), which resulted in the issuance of a
license by that state that is equivalent to the class of license authorized in this chapter for which
the applicant is applying, based on evidence of electrical work having been performed on
structures that are equivalent to Class 1 and/or Class 2 structures.
155.06 ISSUANCE AND EXPIRATION OF LICENSES
Issuance of license
Each license will be issued by the Department of Building, Planning and Development within three
working days after receipt of all of the following:
1. Completion of the city's license application form, including the required minimum number of
years of experience;
2. Official notification of a score on the required test that satisfies the testing requirements in this
chapter; and
3. Payment of required fees.
Expiration of license
Each license shall be valid for one year from the date on which the license was issued.
155.07 TESTING STANDARDS
Examinations
An applicant's score on:
1. Previous, current or future versions of the following tests administered by Experior
Assessments, LLC, of Gainesville, Florida, or their successor; or
2. Tests that are equivalent in scope and content to the following Experior Assessments, LLC,
tests; or
3. Previous versions of the following Experior Assessments, LLC, tests that were previously
administered by Block & Associates, will be used to determine eligibility for issuance of a
license in the specified class:
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 155-6
Licensing of Electricians
CHAPTER 155
Class of License Experior Assessments, LLC, Test
Master electrician Experior Assessments, LLC, test no. 201
Journeyman electrician Experior Assessments, LLC, test no. 202
Master residential electrician Experior Assessments, LLC, test no. 203
Journeyman residential electrician Experior Assessments, LLC, test no. 214
155.08 APPLICATION AND PROOF OF EXPERIENCE
Application
The application for an electrician's license shall be in the form provided by the city. The applicant shall
complete, sign and date the application, and submit it to the city's Department of Building, Planning and
Development.
Experience
Proof of experience in electrical work shall be provided by the applicant on the application form,
including the names of previous employers, dates and duration of employment, and types of structures
on which the electrical work was performed, e.g., Class 1 (commercial, industrial or multi-family
residential), or Class 2 (one and two-family residential).
155.09 FEES
Testing fees
A testing fee shall be paid directly to the testing agency in accordance with their policies. The city does
not assess fees for testing.
Licensing fees
A license fee shall be paid to the city prior to issuance of each license, and annually thereafter for each
license that is re-issued, based on the following schedule:
License Type Fee
Master Electrician $50
Master Residential Electrician $50
Journeyman Electrician $25
Journeyman Residential Electrician $25
Apprentice Electrician $15
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 155-7
Licensing of Electricians
CHAPTER 155
Reciprocal Same fee as for the class of license to be issued
155.10 PENALTIES
Fine
Any person who performs electrical work in violation of any of the terms of this chapter shall be fined
$25 per violation. Each day that a violation continues is a separate offense.
Revocation of license
The license of an electrician shall be revoked for the performance of electrical work that does not comply
with the requirements of Chapter 151 of this code, and any other adopted requirements of the city. A
new license will be issued to a person whose license was revoked under the terms of this chapter only
after that person has satisfactorily completed all of the following requirements:
1. Taken and passed in accordance with the requirements of this chapter, the most recent version
of the test for the class of electrician's license for which they are applying, regardless of whether
or when they may have previously taken and passed the same test; and
2. Completed all requirements in this chapter for issuance of a license.
155.11 APPEALS
An appeal of any of the terms of this ordinance shall be made in writing to the city's Board of Public Works
and Safety.
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Economic Revitalization
Areas
CHAPTER 157
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 157-2
Economic Revitalization Areas
CHAPTER 157
Table of Contents
157.01 APPLICATIONS REQUESTING ECONOMIC REVITALIZATION AREA
DESIGNATION TO BE SUBMITTED TO COMMITTEE
157.02 MEMBERSHIP OF COMMITTEE
157.03 APPLICATION FEE
157.04 CERTAIN INFORMATION REQUIRED
157.05 INVESTIGATION; APPROVAL
157.06 APPLICABILITY OF REGULATIONS
157.07 EXPIRATION OF ECONOMIC REVITALIZATION AREA STATUS
157.08 COMPLIANCE WITH STATE LAW
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 157-3
Economic Revitalization Areas
CHAPTER 157
157.01 APPLICATIONS REQUESTING ECONOMIC REVITALIZATION AREA
DESIGNATION TO BE SUBMITTED TO COMMITTEE
The City Council Committee on Tax Phase-In is designed as the agency of the city which shall receive all
applications from persons, firms, organizations, or corporations requesting designation of an economic
revitalization area.
157.02 MEMBERSHIP OF COMMITTEE
The Committee shall be composed of three members, all of whom shall be members of the Common
Council. The Mayor and the Common Council shall each select one member, and those two members shall
select a third. Upon failure to agree, the Common Council shall select the third member. Members shall
serve the remainder of the calendar year of their appointment or until their successor thereafter qualifies.
Subsequent members shall be selected at the first regular meeting of the Common Council of each year.
157.03 APPLICATION FEE
An applicant for Economic Revitalization Area designation shall pay to the Clerk-Treasurer a nonrefundable
fee of $200 per application. If the city is the applicant, there is no fee.
A taxpayer within an Economic Revitalization Area applying for real property or personal property
deductions shall pay to the Clerk-Treasurer a non-refundable fee of $100 per application.
157.04 CERTAIN INFORMATION REQUIRED
The Committee shall require all applicants applying for designation of real estate as an economic
revitalization area to provide the following information in making application for such designation. The
application shall be for one substantially contiguous area within an unbroken boundary. The Committee
shall consider the following items in making their recommendation to the City Council.
Description of real estate.
Proposed use of real estate.
Type of designation requested (real or personal property).
Proposed design and cost of buildings and equipment, if improvements are proposed.
Proposed operation and number of jobs to be created.
Proposed development of the real estate if improvements or buildings are not immediately
contemplated.
The effects of the proposed uses upon the environment.
Financial viability of the individual or business entity requesting the designation as can be generally
determined by routine income statement and balance sheets and yearly reports.
Length of abatement requested, if applicable.
Other items as the Committee shall deem necessary.
157.05 INVESTIGATION; APPROVAL
The Committee, after receiving an application requesting economic revitalization area designation, shall
investigate the applicant to determine the best interests of the city, and shall thereafter make written
recommendations to the Common Council as to the desirability or non-desirability of designating the area
described as an economic revitalization area. The Common Council of the city shall make final approval of
all requests for designation as an economic revitalization area and shall pass an ordinance regarding same.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 157-4
Economic Revitalization Areas
CHAPTER 157
157.06 APPLICABILITY OF REGULATIONS
This chapter shall not apply to designations made prior to the adoption of this chapter.
157.07 EXPIRATION OF ECONOMIC REVITALIZATION AREA STATUS
Where an area has been designated as an economic revitalization area, the status shall expire ten years
after the date of designation. However, the expiration shall not affect any persons, firms, organizations, or
corporations who have applied for and received tax abatement status, in accordance with the law.
157.08 COMPLIANCE WITH STATE LAW
This chapter shall not give any person, firm, organization, or corporation any rights as to tax abatement
status, as would be a longer period of time, or greater than is provided by law in the state.
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Minimum Housing Code
CHAPTER 158
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 158-2
Minimum Housing Code
CHAPTER 158
Table of Contents
158.01 DEFINITIONS
158.02 INSPECTION OF DWELLING, DWELLING UNITS, ROOMING UNITS AND PREMISES
158.03 ENFORCEMENT; SERVICE OF NOTICES AND ORDERS; HEARINGS
158.04 MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR BASIC EQUIPMENT AND FACILITIES
158.05 MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR LIGHT, VENTILATION AND HEATING
158.06 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS RELATING TO THE SAFE AND SANITARY MAINTENANCE OF PARTS
OF DWELLING AND DWELLING UNITS
158.07 MINIMUM SPACE, USE AND LOCATION REQUIREMENTS
158.08 RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNERS AND OCCUPANTS
158.09 ROOMING HOUSES
158.10 DESIGNATION OF UNFIT DWELLINGS AND LEGAL PROCEDURE OF CONDEMNATION.
158.11 CONFLICT OF ORDINANCES; EFFECT OF PARTIAL INVALIDITY
158.99 PENALTY
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 158-3
Minimum Housing Code
CHAPTER 158
158.01 DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
• BASEMENT
That portion of a building located partly underground or grade level, but having less than 50% of its
clear floor-to-ceiling height below that average grade of the adjoining ground.
• CELLAR
That portion of a building located partly or wholly underground, and having 50% or more of its clear
floor-to-ceiling height below the average grade of adjoining ground.
• DWELLING
Any building which is wholly or partly used or intended for use as a residence by human occupants,
including but not limited to uses of living, sleeping, cooking, and eating, provided that a temporary
housing unit as hereinafter defined shall not be regarded as a dwelling.
• DWELLING UNIT
Any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling and forming a single habitable unit with
facilities which are used or intended for use as a residence by human occupants, including but not
limited to uses of living, cooking and eating.
• ENFORCEMENT AGENCY
The Building Commissioner/Inspector of the city or his legally designated agent.
• EXTERMINATION
The control and elimination of insects, rodents, or other pests and vermin by eliminating their
harboring places; by removing or making inaccessible materials that may serve as food; by
poisoning, spraying, fumigating, trapping, or by any other recognized and legal pest and vermin
elimination methods approved by the enforcement agency.
• GARBAGE
Shall include, but not limited to, the animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food, all matter that is subject to decay and rot, and any
other matter than can act as a breeding area for pests, vermin, disease, odor and to which animals
can be attracted.
• HABITABLE ROOM
A room or enclosed floor space used or intended for use as a residence for human occupants,
including but not limited to, uses of living, sleeping, cooking and eating; excluding bath rooms, water
closet compartments, laundries, pantries, foyers, or communicating corridors, closets and storage
spaces.
• INFESTATION
The presence, within or around a dwelling of any insects, vermin, rodents or other pests.
• MULTIPLE DWELLING
Any dwelling containing more than two dwelling units.
• OCCUPANT
Any person who occupies a dwelling unit or room unit for purposes of residence.
• OPERATOR
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 158-4
Minimum Housing Code
CHAPTER 158
Any person who has charge, care, or control of a building, or part thereof, in which dwelling units or
room units are let.
• OWNER
Any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others: shall have legal or equitable title to any real
estate on which a dwelling or dwelling unit exists; and/or shall have charge, care or control of any
dwelling or dwelling unit.
• PERSON
Shall include, but not be limited to, any individual, firm, corporation, association or partnership.
• PLUMBING
Shall mean and include, but not be limited to, any and all of the following installed or connected
facilities and equipment: gas pipes, gas-burning equipment, water pipes, garbage disposal units,
waste pipes, water closets, sinks, dishwashers, lavatories, bathtubs, shower baths, clothes-washing
machines, catch basins, drains, vents and any other similar fixtures, together with all connections to
water, sewer or gas lines.
• PREMISES
Dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit or any other habitat encompassed within the literal and
conceptual reading of this chapter.
• ROOMING HOUSE
Any dwelling, or that part of any dwelling containing one or more rooming units, in which space is let
by the owner, or operator for occupancy by another person or persons who are not husband or wife,
son or daughter, mother or father, or sister or brother of the owner or operator.
• ROOMING UNIT
Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit or intended to form such a unit, but not
containing specific areas for cooking or eating.
• RUBBISH
Combustible and non-combustible waste materials, except garbage; and the term shall include, but
not be limited to, wood, coal, coke and other combustible material; paper, rags, cartons, boxes,
excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass and
dust.
• SUPPLIED
Paid for, furnished or provided by or under the control of the owner or operator.
• TEMPORARY HOUSING
Any tent, trailer or other structure used or intended for use as a human shelter which is subject to
transportation and intended for same and which is not permanently attached to the ground, to
another structure or to any utilities system on the same premises for more than 30 consecutive
days. A structure designed for extended human habitation and intended for same is not temporary
by non-use of the structure for permanent habitation.
Interpretation of certain words
Whenever the words "DWELLING", "DWELLING UNIT", "ROOMING HOUSE", "ROOMING UNIT", or
"PREMISES" are used in this chapter, they shall be construed as through following by the words "or any
part thereof".
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 158-5
Minimum Housing Code
CHAPTER 158
158.02 INSPECTION OF DWELLING, DWELLING UNITS, ROOMING UNITS AND PREMISES
The enforcement agency is hereby authorized and directed to make inspections to determine the
condition of dwellings, dwelling units, rooming units, and premises located within the city, in order
that it may perform its duty of safeguarding the health and safety of the occupants of dwellings and
of the general public. For the purpose of making such inspections, the enforcement agency is
hereby authorized to enter, examine and survey all dwellings, dwelling units, rooming units and
premises when one of the following requirements have been met and satisfied:
1. Where probable cause has been shown by affidavit that conditions are non-conforming or that
are detrimental to the occupants, and where the affidavit has been presented to the Superior or
Circuit Court Judge and a warrant issued directing and authorizing the inspection of the property
concerned.
2. Where an official determination has been made by the Board of Public Works and Safety of the
city or the enforcement agency and has been made a matter of public record that a blanket
inspection of all premises subject to this chapter is necessary, and where notice of this
inspection has been published once per week for two consecutive weeks in a newspaper of
general circulation in the city, such publication being not completed less than five days before
the commencement of such inspection, such inspections may then be accordingly made;
provided that the area to be so inspected shall not be less than 1/64 of a square mile, at ground
level; further provided that no enforcement shall be lawful as the result of such inspections,
unless 25% of all dwelling units in such area shall have been so inspected.
3. Whereas official determination by the enforcement agency has been made a matter of written
public record that a routine spot inspection of all premises subject to this chapter is necessary,
and where notice of this inspection has been published once per week for two consecutive
weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, such publication being completed not
less than five days before the commencement of such inspection, such inspections may then be
accordingly made; provided that the area to be so inspected shall be not less than 1/5 of a
square mile, at ground level; and further provided that no further enforcement as a result of
such routine spot inspections shall be lawful unless five or more premises have been so
inspected.
4. The enforcement agency may inspect an individual premise by a specific written request from
the owner and/or occupant of the premise when such written request is submitted to the Board
of Public Works and Safety at least one week prior to the requested inspection and it is
demonstrated that the occupant, if not the owner, has notified the owner of the request prior to
submission to the Board of Public Works and Safety or at the same time. Such inspection shall
be conducted following notification to the owner of the inspection. The owner may object to the
inspection at a regularly scheduled Board of Public Works and Safety meeting. The Board of
Public Works and Safety shall determine whether an inspection will be authorized.
No inspection shall be made pursuant to divisions (A)(2) or (3) hereinafter one year from the last
newspaper publication of this chapter.
All inspections provided herein shall be made not earlier than 8:00 a.m. and completed not later
than 4:00 p.m. Eastern Standard Time unless there shall be prior written agreement with the
occupant of the premises. Inspections shall be made only by regularly employed representatives of
the enforcement agency who shall carry credentials showing thereon representation of the
enforcement agency, which credentials shall be signed by the senior administrative officer of the
enforcement agency and counter-signed and sealed by the Clerk-Treasurer.
Failure to comply with the provisions of this section shall invalidate the findings or affect of
inspections voluntarily allowed by the owner of the premises or his agent.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 158-6
Minimum Housing Code
CHAPTER 158
158.03 ENFORCEMENT; SERVICE OF NOTICES AND ORDERS; HEARINGS
Whenever the enforcement agency determines that there are reasonable grounds to believe that
there has been a violation of any provision of this chapter or of any rule or regulation adopted
pursuant thereto, it shall give notice of such alleged violation to the person or persons responsible
therefore, as hereinafter provided. Such notice shall:
1. Be put in writing;
2. Include a statement of the reasons why it is being issued;
3. Allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act it requires but no less than 30 days;
4. Be served upon the owner or his agent by reading, by delivery of a copy thereof, and by posting
of such notice within three feet of the U.S. mailbox affixed to the structure or upon any door
facing an abutting public street. A return by the representative of the enforcement agency shall
be made showing such reading, delivery and posting; or the failure to make such reading or
delivery if such be the case; provided, that posting shall always be required. In the event that
the owner or his agent cannot be found, the mailing of a copy of such notice by registered mail,
return receipt requested, showing delivery or a tender of such notice shall be deemed
equivalent to actual reading and delivery. In the event that the name and address of the owner
or his agent cannot be determined by the enforcement agency, then, after the making of an
affidavit by a representative of the enforcement agency stating that a diligent effort has been
made to determine the name and address of such owner, notice published once each week for
three consecutive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the city shall be deemed
equivalent notice to the actual reading and delivery of such notice; provided that such published
notice shall state the address of the structure involved and shall further state all of the facts and
requirements enumerated by the notice itself. The removal, by any person other than the owner
of the structure involved, or his agent, of any notice required to be posted pursuant to the
provisions of this section shall be unlawful and punishable as hereinafter provided.
5. Such notice may contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will effect compliance with
the provisions of this chapter and with rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto.
Any person affected by any notice which has been issued in connection with the enforcement of any
provision of this chapter, or of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, may request and
shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the Board of Public Works and Safety; provided that
such person shall file in the office of the enforcement agency a written petition requesting such
hearing and setting forth a brief statement of the grounds therefore within ten days after the day the
notice was served. Upon receipt of such petition, the enforcement agency shall set a time and place
for such hearing and shall give the petitioner written notice thereof. At such hearing the petitioner
shall be given an opportunity to be heard and to show why such notice should be modified or
withdrawn. The hearing shall be commenced not later than 10 days after the day on which the
petition was filed; provided that upon application of the petitioner the Board of Public Works and
Safety may postpone the date of the hearing for a reasonable time beyond such ten-day period, if in
its judgment the petitioner has submitted a good and sufficient reason for such postponement.
After such hearing, the Board of Public Works and Safety shall sustain, modify or withdraw the
notice, depending upon its findings as to whether the provisions of this chapter and of the rules and
regulations adopted pursuant thereto have been complied with. If the Board of Public Works and
Safety sustains or modifies such notice, it shall be deemed to be an order. Any notice served
pursuant to division (A) of this chapter shall automatically become an order if a written petition for a
hearing is not filed in the office of the enforcement agency within ten days after such notice is
served. After a hearing in the case of any notice suspending any permit required by this chapter or
by rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, when such notice has been sustained by the Board
of Public Works and Safety, the permit shall be deemed to have been revoked. Any such permit
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 158-7
Minimum Housing Code
CHAPTER 158
which has been suspended by a notice shall be deemed to be automatically revoked if a petition for
a hearing is not filed in the office of the enforcement agency within ten days after such notice is
required.
The proceedings at such hearing, including the findings and decision of the Board of Public Works
and Safety, shall be summarized, reduced to writing, and entered as a matter of public record in the
office of the Clerk-Treasurer. Such record shall also include a copy of every notice or order issued
in connection with the matter. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Board of Public Works
and Safety may seek relief therefrom in any court of competent jurisdiction, as provided by the laws
of the State of Indiana.
Whenever the enforcement agency finds that an emergency exists which requires immediate action
to protect the public health or safety, it may, without notice or hearing, issue an order reciting the
existence of such an emergency and requiring that such action be taken as it deems necessary to
meet the emergency. Notwithstanding the other provisions of this chapter, such order shall be
effective immediately. Any person to whom such order is directed shall comply therewith
immediately, but upon petition to the enforcement agency shall be afforded a hearing as soon as
possible. After such hearing, depending upon its findings whether the provisions of this chapter and
of the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto have been complied with, the enforcement
agency shall continue such order in effect, or modify it, or revoke it.
158.04 MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR BASIC EQUIPMENT AND FACILITIES
No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit, for
the purpose of living, sleeping, cooking, or eating therein, which does not comply with the following
requirements:
Every dwelling unit shall contain a kitchen sink in good working condition and connected to a water
and sewer system approved by the Board of Public Works and Safety.
Every dwelling unit shall contain a room which affords privacy to a person within said room and
which is equipped with a flush water closet and a lavatory basin in good working condition and
connected to a water and sewer system approved by the Board of Public Works and Safety.
Every dwelling unit shall contain, within a room which affords privacy to a person within said room,
a bathtub or shower in good working condition and connected to a water and sewer system
approved by the Board of Public Works and Safety.
Every kitchen sink, lavatory basin and bathtub or shower required under the provisions of divisions
(A), (B), or (C) of this section shall be connected with both hot and cold water lines.
Every dwelling unit shall be supplied with rubbish storage facilities, type and location of which are
approved by the Building Department of the city.
Every dwelling unit shall have garbage disposal facilities or garbage storage containers, type and
location of which are approved by the Building Department of the city.
Every dwelling shall have supplied water heating facilities which are installed, are maintained in
safe and good working condition, are connected with those hot water lines required under the
provisions of division (D) of this section, and are capable of heating water to such a temperature as
to permit water to be drawn at every required kitchen sink, lavatory basin, bathtub or shower at a
temperature of not less than 120°°F. Such supplied water heating facilities shall be capable of
meeting the requirements of this division (G) when the dwelling or dwelling unit heating facilities
required under the provisions of division (E) of 158.05 are not in operation.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 158-8
Minimum Housing Code
CHAPTER 158
Every dwelling unit shall have safe, unobstructed means of egress leading to safe and open space
at ground level, as required by the laws of this state and city.
158.05 MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR LIGHT, VENTILATION AND HEATING
No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit, for
the purpose of living therein, which does not comply with the following requirement:
Every habitable room shall have at least one window or skylight facing directly to the outdoors. The
minimum total window area, measured between stops, for every habitable room shall be no less
than 5% of the floor area of such room. Whenever walls or other portions of structures face a
window of any such room and such light-obstruction structures are located less than three feet from
the window and extend to a level above that of the ceiling of the room, such a window shall not be
deemed to face directly to the outdoors and shall not be included as contributing to the required
minimum total window area. Whenever the only window in a room is a skylight-type window in the
top of such room, the total window area of such skylight shall be equal to at least 15% of the total
floor area of such room.
Every habitable room shall have at least one window or skylight which can be easily opened, or
such other device as will ventilate the room. The total of openable window area in every habitable
room shall be equal to at least 45% of the minimum window area size of minimum skylight-type
window size, as required in division (A) of this section, except where there is supplied some other
device affording ventilation and approved by the Building Department of the city. All windows must
be equipped with screens to prevent entry of insects and vermin.
Every bathroom, kitchen and water closet compartment shall comply with the light and ventilation
requirements for habitable rooms contained in divisions (A) and (B) of this section, except that no
window or skylight shall be required in ventilated bathrooms, kitchens and water closet
compartments equipped with a ventilation system which is in good operating condition and
approved by the Building Department of the city.
Where there is electric service available from power lines which are not more than 300 feet away
from a dwelling, every habitable room of such dwelling shall contain at least two separate floor or
wall-type electric convenience outlets, or one such convenience outlet and one supplied ceiling-type
electric light fixture; and every water closet compartment, bathroom, laundry room, furnace room
and public hall shall contain at least one supplied ceiling or wall-type electric light fixture. Every
such outlet shall be installed, shall be maintained in good and safe working condition, and shall be
connected to the source of electric power in a safe manner.
Every dwelling shall have heating facilities which are properly installed, which are maintained in
safe and good working condition, and which are capable of safely and adequately heating all
habitable rooms, bathrooms and water closet compartments in every dwelling unit located therein to
a temperature of at least 70°° F., at a distance of three feet above the floor level and at an outdoor
temperature of 10°°F. below zero. No habitable room, dwelling or dwelling unit shall contain any
flame producing device or appliance for the purpose of providing the required heat in such space or
spaces unless such device or appliance shall be provided with permanent, proper and safe means
for the supplying of combustion air and for the venting to the outdoors of all products of combustion.
Every public hall and stairway in every multiple dwelling containing five or more dwelling units shall
be lighted at all times. Every public hall and stairway in structures devoted solely to dwelling
occupancy and containing not more than four dwelling units may be supplied with conveniently
located light switches, controlling a lighting system which may be turned on when needed, instead
of full-time lighting.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 158-9
Minimum Housing Code
CHAPTER 158
During that portion of each year when the enforcement agency deems it necessary for protection
against mosquitos, flies and other insects, every door opening directly from a dwelling unit to
outdoors space shall have supplied screens and a self-closing device; and every window or other
device with openings to outdoor space, used or intended to be used for ventilation, shall be likewise
supplied with screens.
Every basement or cellar window used or intended for use as ventilation and any other opening
shall be supplied with screens or some other appropriate covering to prevent the entry of rodents
and other vermin.
158.06 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS RELATING TO THE SAFE AND SANITARY MAINTENANCE OF PARTS OF
DWELLING AND DWELLING UNITS
No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy, any dwelling or dwelling unit, for
the purpose of living therein, which does not comply with the following requirements:
Every foundation, floor, wall, ceiling and roof shall be weather tight, water tight and rodent proof. All
exterior walls and wall components shall be maintained so as to prevent deterioration due to the
elements and destructive insects. Such maintenance shall consist of painting, installation or repair
of walls, copings, and flashing, waterproofing of joints and waterproof coatings, and shall be kept in
sound condition and good repair.
Every window, exterior door and basement hatchway shall be water tight, weather tight and rodent
proof; and shall be kept in sound working condition and good repair.
Every stairway, porch and appurtenance thereto shall be so constructed as to be safe to use and
capable of supporting the load that normal use may cause to be placed thereon; and shall be kept
in sound condition and good repair.
Every plumbing device and/or fixture including water pipes shall be properly installed and
maintained in good sanitary working condition.
Every water closet compartment floor surface and bathroom surface shall be so constructed and
maintained so as to be impervious to water and so as to permit such floor to be easily kept in a
clean and sanitary condition.
Every supplied facility, place of equipment, or utility which is required under this chapter shall be so
constructed or installed that it will function safely and effectively, and shall be maintained in working
condition.
No owner, operator or occupant shall cause any service, facility, equipment or utility which if
required under this chapter to be removed from or shut off from or disconnected from any occupied
dwelling while such is under his control.
No dwelling unit shall be let by any person which is not clean and sanitary and fit for human
occupancy.
158.07 MINIMUM SPACE, USE AND LOCATION REQUIREMENTS
No person shall let to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit for the purpose of living therein,
which does not comply with the following requirements:
Every dwelling unit shall contain at least 150 square feet of floor space for the first occupant thereof
and at least 100 square feet of additional space for each additional occupant thereof; floor space is
to be calculated on the basis of total habitable room area not including bathrooms or water closet
compartments.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 158-10
Minimum Housing Code
CHAPTER 158
In every dwelling unit of two or more rooms, every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one
occupant shall contain at least 70 square feet of floor space, and every room occupied for sleeping
purposes by more than one occupant shall contain at least 50 square feet of floor space for each
occupant thereof.
No dwelling unit containing two or more sleeping rooms shall be so arranged that access to a
bathroom or water closet compartment area can only be through another sleeping room.
Only those areas in any room which have a ceiling height of at least seven feet shall be considered
for calculation of acceptable floor space or deemed to be habitable areas.
No cellar space shall be deemed habitable if that area is the only area for habitability.
No basement shall be deemed habitable unless it meets the minimum requirements for habitability
as set forth in this chapter for areas determined to be designated as habitable areas.
158.08 RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNERS AND OCCUPANTS
Every owner of a dwelling containing two or more dwelling units shall be responsible for maintaining
in a clean and sanitary condition the shared or public areas of the dwelling and premises thereof.
Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall keep in a clean and sanitary condition that part of the
building which he occupies and controls.
Every occupant shall dispose of all rubbish and garbage in a clean and sanitary manner and in
compliance with other ordinances of the city.
158.09 ROOMING HOUSES
No person shall operate a rooming house or shall occupy or let to another for occupancy a rooming unit in
any rooming house except that it shall comply with the provisions of this chapter and:
The owner or operator of said rooming house shall apply to the enforcement agency for a permit to
so operate a rooming house.
A permit to operate a rooming house shall be issued unless the enforcement agency determines
that the areas so designated for rooming are not in compliance with this chapter for habitable living
areas.
A copy of the permit shall be displayed in a conspicuous place within each room of the rooming
house which use is intended for rooming purposes.
Any person denied a permit by the enforcement agency shall have the right to petition the Board of
Public Works and Safety for a review of the permit denial under the provisions of 158.03.
Any person who has been issued a permit but found to be not in compliance with this chapter shall
be given 30 days notice of permit revocation. If the conditions are not corrected within the 30-day
period, the permit shall be revoked subject to a hearing before the Board of Public Works and
Safety as provided in 158.03.
Any petition to the Board of Public Works and Safety shall be served no later than ten days before
any regularly scheduled meeting.
At least one flush water closet, lavatory basin and bathtub or shower, connected to a water and
sewer system approved by the Board of Public Works and Safety and in good working condition,
shall be supplied for each eight persons, or fraction thereof, residing within a rooming house,
including members of the operator's family wherever they share the use of said facilities; provided
that in a rooming house where rooms are let only to males, flush urinals may be substituted for not
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 158-11
Minimum Housing Code
CHAPTER 158
more than one-half of the required water closets. All such facilities shall be so located within the
dwelling as to be accessible from a common hall or passageway to all persons sharing such
facilities. Every lavatory basin and bathtub or shower shall be supplied with hot water at all times.
No such facilities shall be located in a basement except by express written permission of the
enforcement agency.
Every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one person shall contain at least 70 square feet of
floor space, and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one person shall contain
at least 50 square feet of floor space for each occupant thereof.
Every rooming unit shall have safe, unobstructed means of egress leading to safe open spaces at
ground level, as required by the laws of the state.
The operator of every rooming house shall be responsible for the safe and sanitary maintenance of
all walls, floors and ceilings, and for maintenance of a safe and sanitary condition in every other
part of the rooming house; and he shall be further responsible for the safe and sanitary
maintenance of the entire premises where the entire structure or building is leased or occupied by
the operator.
Every provision of this chapter which applies to rooming houses shall also apply to motels, motor
lodges and hotels, except to the extent that any such provision may be found in conflict with the
laws of this state or with the lawful regulations of any state board or agency.
158.10 DESIGNATION OF UNFIT DWELLINGS AND LEGAL PROCEDURE OF CONDEMNATION.
The designation of dwellings or dwelling units as unfit for human habitation and the procedure for the
condemnation and placarding of such unfit dwellings or dwelling units shall be carried out in compliance with
the following requirements:
Any dwelling or dwelling unit which shall be found to have any of the following defects shall be
condemned as unfit for human habitation and shall be so designated and placarded by the
enforcement agency:
1. One which is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, unsanitary, unsafe or vermin-infested that it
creates a serious hazard to the health or safety of the occupants or of the public.
2. One which lacks illumination, ventilation or sanitation facilities adequate to protect the health or
safety of the occupants or of the public.
3. One which because of its general condition or location is unsanitary, or otherwise dangerous, to
the health or safety of the occupants or the public.
No dwelling or dwelling unit which has been condemned and placarded as unfit for human
habitation shall again be used for human habitation until written approval is secured from the
enforcement agency and such placard is removed by the enforcement agency.
No person shall remove or deface a condemnation placard on any building so designated with a
placard as denoting unfitness for human habitation except as provided for in division (B) above.
Any person affected by the condemnation and placarding procedure may petition the Board of
Public Works and Safety for a hearing in compliance with 158.03.
158.11 CONFLICT OF ORDINANCES; EFFECT OF PARTIAL INVALIDITY
In any case where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with a provision of any
zoning, building, fire, safety or health ordinance or code of the city existing on the effective date of
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 158-12
Minimum Housing Code
CHAPTER 158
this chapter, the provision which establishes the higher standard for the promotion and protection of
the health and safety of the public shall prevail.
If any section, sub-section, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this chapter should be
declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such decision shall not affect the remaining portions of
this chapter, which shall remain in full force and effect; and to this end the provisions of this chapter
are hereby declared severable.
158.99 PENALTY
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter, or any provision of any rule or regulation adopted
by the enforcement agency pursuant to the authority granted by this chapter, shall upon conviction be
punished by a fine of not less than $25 or more than $100, and each day's failure to comply with such
provision shall constitute a separate violation.
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Dangerous Buildings
CHAPTER 159
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 159-2
Dangerous Buildings
CHAPTER 159
Table of Contents
GENERAL PROVISIONS
159.001 TITLE
159.002 PURPOSE AND SCOPE
159.003 ALTERATIONS, ADDITIONS AND REPAIRS
159.004 DEFINITIONS
ENFORCEMENT
159.020 ADMINISTRATION
159.021 INSPECTIONS
159.022 RIGHT OF ENTRY
159.023 INSPECTION OF WORK
159.024 BOARD OF APPEALS
NOTICES AND ORDERS OF BUILDING OFFICIAL
159.035 COMMENCEMENT OF PROCEEDINGS
159.036 NOTICE AND ORDER
159.037 SERVICE OF NOTICE AND ORDER
159.038 METHOD OF SERVICE
159.039 PROOF OF SERVICE
159.040 RECORDATION OF NOTICE AND ORDER
159.041 REPAIR, VACATION AND DEMOLITION
159.042 NOTICE TO VACATE
APPEAL
159.050 FORM OF APPEAL
159.051 PROCESSING OF APPEAL
159.052 SCHEDULING AND NOTICING APPEAL FOR HEARING
159.053 EFFECT OF FAILURE TO APPEAL
159.054 SCOPE OF HEARING ON APPEAL
159.055 STAYING OF ORDER UNDER APPEAL
PROCEDURES FOR CONDUCT OF HEARING APPEALS SECTION
159.065 HEARING EXAMINERS
159.066 RECORD
159.067 REPORTING
159.068 CONTINUANCES
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 159-3
Dangerous Buildings
CHAPTER 159
159.069 OATHS; CERTIFICATION
159.070 REASONABLE DISPATCH
159.071 FORM OF NOTICE OF HEARING
SUBPOENAS
159.080 FILING OF AFFIDAVIT
159.081 CASES REFERRED TO EXAMINER
CONDUCT OF HEARING
159.090 RULES
159.091 ORAL EVIDENCE
159.092 HEARSAY EVIDENCE
159.093 ADMISSIBILITY OF EVIDENCE
159.094 EXCLUSION OF EVIDENCE
159.095 RIGHTS OF PARTIES
OFFICIAL NOTICE
159.105 WHAT MAY BE NOTICED
159.106 PARTIES TO BE NOTIFIED
159.107 OPPORTUNITIES TO REFUTE
159.108 INSPECTION OF THE PREMISES
METHOD AND FORM OF DECISION
159.120 HEARING BEFORE BOARD ITSELF
159.121 HEARING BEFORE THE EXAMINER
159.122 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT BY BOARD; NOTICE
159.123 EXCEPTIONS TO REPORT
159.124 DISPOSITION BY THE BOARD
159.125 PROPOSED DECISION NOT ADOPTED.
159.126 FORM OF DECISION
159.127 EFFECTIVE DATE OF DECISION
ENFORCEMENT OF ORDER OF BUILDING OFFICIAL OR BOARD OF APPEALS
159.140 COMPLIANCE
159.141 EXTENSION OF TIME TO PERFORM WORK
159.142 INTERFERENCE WITH REPAIR OR DEMOLITION WORK PROHIBITED
159.150 PROCEDURE
159.151 COSTS
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 159-4
Dangerous Buildings
CHAPTER 159
REPAIR AND DEMOLITION FUND
159.160 GENERAL
159.161 MAINTENANCE OF FUND
RECOVERY OF COST OF REPAIR OR DEMOLITION
159.170 ACCOUNT OF EXPENSE; FILING OF REPORT
159.171 NOTICE OF HEARING
159.172 PROTESTS AND OBJECTIONS
159.173 HEARING OF PROTESTS
159.174 PERSONAL OBLIGATION OR SPECIAL ASSESSMENT
159.175 CONTEST
159.176 AUTHORITY FOR INSTALLMENT PAYMENT OF ASSESSMENTS WITH INTEREST
159.177 LIEN OF ASSESSMENT
159.178 REPORT TO ASSESSOR AND TAX COLLECTOR: ADDITION OF ASSESSMENT TO TAX BILL
159.179 FILING COPY REPORT WITH COUNTY AUDITOR
159.180 COLLECTION OF ASSESSMENT: PENALTIES FOR FORECLOSURE
159.181 REPAYMENT OF REPAIR AND DEMOLITION FUND
159.999 PENALTY
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 159-5
Dangerous Buildings
CHAPTER 159
GENERAL PROVISIONS
159.001 TITLE
This chapter shall be known as the Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, may be cited as such,
and will be referred to herein as "this code."
159.002 PURPOSE AND SCOPE
Purpose
1. It is the purpose of this code to provide a just, equitable and practicable method, to be
cumulative with and in addition to any other remedy provided by the Building Code, Housing
Code or otherwise available by law, whereby buildings or structures which from any cause may
endanger the life, limb, health, morals, property, safety or welfare of the general public or their
occupants, may be required to be repaired, vacated or demolished.
2. The purpose of this code is not to create or otherwise establish or designate any particular class
or group of persons who will or should be especially protected or benefited by the terms of this
code.
Scope
The provisions of this code shall apply to all dangerous buildings, as herein defined, which are now in
existence or which may hereafter become dangerous in this jurisdiction.
159.003 ALTERATIONS, ADDITIONS AND REPAIRS
All buildings or structures which are required to be repaired under the provisions of this code shall be subject
to the provisions of the City of Auburn Building Code.
159.004 DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this code, certain terms, phrases, words and their derivatives shall be construed as
specified in either this chapter or as specified in the Building Code or the Housing Code. Where terms are
not defined, they shall have their ordinary accepted meanings within the context with which they are used.
Webster's Third New International Dictionary of the English Language, Unabridged, copyright 1986, shall be
construed as providing ordinary accepted meanings. Words used in the singular include the plural and
plural the singular. Words used in the masculine gender include the feminine and the feminine gender the
masculine.
• BUILDING CODE
The Uniform Building Code promulgated by the International Conference of Building Officials as from
time to time amended, as adopted by this jurisdiction.
• DANGEROUS BUILDING
For the purpose of this chapter any building or structure which has any or all of the conditions or defects
hereinafter described shall be deemed to be a dangerous building, provided that such conditions or
defects exist to the extent that the life, health, property or safety of the public or its occupants are
endangered:
1. Whenever any door, aisle, passageway, stairway, or other means of exit is not of sufficient
width or size or is not so arranged as to provide safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire
or panic.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 159-6
Dangerous Buildings
CHAPTER 159
2. Whenever the walking surface of any aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of exit is so
warped, worn, loose, torn or otherwise unsafe as to not provide safe and adequate means of
exit in case of fire or panic.
3. Whenever the stress in any materials, member or portion thereof, due to all dead and live loads,
is more than one and one half times the working stress or stresses allowed in the Building Code
for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location.
4. Whenever any portion thereof has been damaged by fire, earthquake, wind, flood or by any
other cause, to such an extent that the structural strength or stability thereof is materially less
than it was before such catastrophe and is less than the minimum requirements of the Building
Code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location.
5. Whenever any portion or member or appurtenance thereof is likely to fail, or to become
detached or dislodged, or to collapse and thereby injure persons or damage property.
6. Whenever any portion of a building, or any member, appurtenance or ornamentation on the
exterior thereof is not of sufficient strength or stability, or is not so anchored, attached or
fastened in place so as to be capable of resisting a wind pressure of one half of that specified in
the Building Code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location without exceeding
the working stresses permitted in the Building Code for such buildings.
7. Whenever any portion thereof has wracked, warped, buckled or settled to such an extent that
walls or other structural portions have materially less resistance to winds or earthquakes than is
required in the case of similar new construction.
8. Whenever the building or structure, or any portion thereof, because of dilapidation, deterioration
or decay; faulty construction; the removal, movement or instability of any portion of the ground
necessary for the purpose of supporting such building; the deterioration, decay or inadequacy of
its foundation; or any other cause, is likely to partially or completely collapse.
9. Whenever, for any reason, the building or structure, or any portion thereof, is manifestly unsafe
for the purpose for which it is being used.
10. Whenever the exterior walls or other vertical structural members list, lean or buckle to such an
extent that a plumb line passing through the center of gravity does not fall inside the middle one
third of the base.
11. Whenever the building or structure, exclusive of the foundation, shows 33% or more damage or
deterioration of its supporting member or members, or 50% damage or deterioration of its nonsupporting
members, enclosing or outside walls or coverings.
12. Whenever the building or structure has been so damaged by fire, wind, earthquake or flood or
has become so dilapidated or deteriorated as to become an attractive nuisance to children; a
harbor for criminals; or as to enable persons to resort thereto for the purpose of committing a
felony or misdemeanor under the laws of the State of Indiana or the United States.
13. Whenever any building or structure has been constructed, exists or is maintained in violation of
any specific requirement or prohibition applicable to such building or structure provided by the
building regulations of this jurisdiction, as specified in the Building Code or Housing Code, or of
any law or ordinance of this state or jurisdiction relating to the condition, location or structure of
buildings.
14. Whenever any building or structure which, whether or not erected in accordance with all
applicable laws and ordinances, has in any non-supporting part, member or portion less than
50%, or in any supporting part, member or portion less than 66% of the strength; fire-resisting
qualities or characteristics; or weather-resisting qualities or characteristics required by law in
the case of a newly constructed building of like area, height and occupancy in the same
location.
15. Whenever a building or structure, used or intended to be used for dwelling purposes, because
of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, decay, damage, faulty construction or arrangement,
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 159-7
Dangerous Buildings
CHAPTER 159
inadequate light, air or sanitation facilities, or otherwise, is determined by the health officer to be
unsanitary, unfit for human habitation or in such a condition that is likely to cause sickness or
disease.
16. Whenever any building or structure, because of obsolescence, dilapidated condition,
deterioration, damage, inadequate exits, lack of sufficient fire-resistive construction, faulty
electric wiring, gas connections or heating apparatus, or other cause, is determined by the
building official to be a fire hazard.
17. Whenever any building or structure is in such a condition as to constitute a public nuisance
known to the common law or in equity jurisprudence.
18. Whenever any portion of a building or structure remains on a site after the demolition or
destruction of the building or structure or whenever any building or structure is abandoned for a
period in excess of six months so as to constitute such building or portion thereof an attractive
nuisance or hazard to the public.
• HOUSING CODE
The Uniform Housing Code promulgated by the International Conference of Building Officials as from
time to time amended and hereby made a reference document to assist the implementation of this code.
ENFORCEMENT
159.020 ADMINISTRATION
The Building Official is hereby authorized to enforce the provisions of this code. The building official shall
have the power to render interpretations of this code and to adopt and enforce rules and supplemental
regulations in order to clarify the application of its provisions. Such interpretations, rules and regulations
shall be in conformity with the intent and purpose of this code.
159.021 INSPECTIONS
The City and/or State Fire Marshal, City Fire Chief, and the Building Official, and or their designees are
hereby authorized to make such inspections and take such actions as may be required to enforce the
provisions of this code.
159.022 RIGHT OF ENTRY
When it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce the provisions of this code, or when the building
official or the building official's authorized representative has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in
a building or upon a premises a condition which is contrary to or in violation of this code which makes the
building or premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the building official may enter the building or
premises at reasonable times to inspect or to perform the duties imposed buy this code, provided that if such
building or premises be occupied that credentials be presented to the occupant and entry requested. If such
building or premises be unoccupied, the building official shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the
owner or other persons having charge or control of the building or premises and request entry. If entry is
refused, the building official shall have recourse to the remedies provided by law to secure entry.
"Authorized representative" shall include the officers named in 159.021 and their authorized inspection
personnel.
159.023 INSPECTION OF WORK
All buildings or structures within the scope of this code and all construction or work for which a permit is
required shall be subject to inspection by the building official in accordance with and in the manner provided
by this code and the City Building Code.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 159-8
Dangerous Buildings
CHAPTER 159
159.024 BOARD OF APPEALS
The Board of Public Works and Safety shall act as the Board of Appeals. All decisions and findings
shall be rendered in writing to the appellant, with a copy to the building official. Appeals to the
Board shall be processed in accordance with the provisions contained in' 159.050 through ‘
159.055. Copies of all rules or regulations adopted by the Board shall be delivered to the building
official, who shall make them freely accessible to the public.
Limitations of Authority
The Board of Appeals shall have no authority relative to interpretation of the administrative
provisions of this code nor shall the Board be empowered to waive requirements of this code.
NOTICES AND ORDERS OF BUILDING OFFICIAL
159.035 COMMENCEMENT OF PROCEEDINGS
When the building official has inspected or caused to be inspected any building and has found and
determined that such building is a dangerous building, the building official shall commence proceedings to
cause the repair, vacation or demolition of the building.
159.036 NOTICE AND ORDER
The building official shall issue a notice and order directed to the record owner of the building. The notice
and order shall contain:
The street address and a legal description sufficient for identification of the premises upon which
the building is located.
A statement that the building official has found the building to be dangerous with a brief and concise
description of the conditions found to render the building dangerous under the provisions of
159.003.
A statement of the action required to be taken as determined by the building official.
1. If the building official has determined that the building or structure must be repaired, the order
shall require that all required permits be secured therefore and the work physically commenced
within such time (not to exceed 60 days from the date of the order) and completed within such
time as the building official shall determine is reasonable under all of the circumstances.
2. If the building official has determined that the building or structure must be vacated, the order
shall require that the building or structure shall be vacated within a time certain from the date of
the order as determined by the building official to be reasonable.
3. If the building official has determined that the building or structure must be demolished, the
order shall require that the building be vacated within such time as the building official shall
determine is reasonable (not to exceed 60 days from the date of the order); that all required
permits be secured therefore within 60 days from the date of the order; and that the demolition
be completed within such time as the building official shall determine is reasonable.
Statements advising that if any required repair or demolition work (without vacation also being
required) is not commenced within the time specified, the building official will order the building
vacated and posted to prevent further occupancy until the work is completed, and may proceed to
cause the work to be done and charge the costs thereof against the property or its owner.
Statements advising that any person having any record title or legal interest in the building may
appeal from the notice and order or any action of the building official to the Board of Appeals,
provided the appeal is made in writing as provided in this code and filed with the building official
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 159-9
Dangerous Buildings
CHAPTER 159
within 30 days from the date of service of such notice and order; and that failure to appeal will
constitute a waiver of all right to an administrative hearing and determination of the matter.
159.037 SERVICE OF NOTICE AND ORDER
The notice and order and any amended or supplemental notice and order, shall be served upon the record
owner and posted on the property; and one copy thereof shall be served on each of the following if known to
the building official or disclosed from official public records; the holder of any mortgage or deed of trust or
other lien or encumbrance of record; the owner or holder of any lease of record; and the holder of any other
estate or legal interest of record in or to the building or the land on which it is located. The failure of the
building official to serve any person required herein to be served shall not invalidate any proceedings
hereunder as to any other person duly served or relieve any such person from any duty or obligation
imposed by the provisions of this section.
159.038 METHOD OF SERVICE
Service of the notice and order shall be made upon all persons entitled thereto either personally or by
mailing a copy of such notice and order by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, to each
such person at their address as it appears on the last equalized assessment roll of the county or as known
to the building official. If no address of any such person so appears or is known to the building official, then
a copy of the notice and order shall be so mailed, addressed to such person, at the address of the building
involved in the proceedings. The failure of any such person to receive such notice shall not affect the
validity of any proceedings taken under this section. Service by certified mail in the manner herein provided
shall be effective on the date of mailing.
159.039 PROOF OF SERVICE
Proof of service of the notice and order shall be certified to at the time of service by a written declaration
under penalty of perjury executed by the persons effecting service, declaring the time, date and manner in
which service was made. The declaration, together with any receipt card returned in acknowledgment of
receipt by certified mail, shall be affixed to the copy of the notice and order retained by the building official.
159.040 RECORDATION OF NOTICE AND ORDER
If compliance is not had with the order within the time specified therein, and no appeal has been properly
and timely filed, the building official shall file in the office of the county recorder a certificate describing the
property and certifying that the building is a dangerous building, and that the owner has been notified.
Whenever the corrections ordered shall thereafter have been completed or the building demolished so that it
no longer exists as a dangerous building on the property described in the certificate, the building official shall
file a new certificate with the county recorder certifying that the building has been demolished or all required
corrections have been made so that the building is no longer dangerous, whichever is appropriate.
159.041 REPAIR, VACATION AND DEMOLITION
The following standards shall be followed by the building official (and by the Board of Appeals if an appeal is
taken) in ordering the repair, vacation or demolition of any dangerous building or structure.
Any building declared a dangerous building under this code shall be made to comply with one of the
following:
1. The building shall be repaired in accordance with the current building code or other current code
applicable to the type of substandard conditions requiring repair; or
2. The building shall be demolished at the option of the building owner; or
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 159-10
Dangerous Buildings
CHAPTER 159
3. If the building does not constitute an immediate danger to the life, limb, property or safety of the
public it may be vacated, secured and maintained against entry.
If the building or structure is in such condition as to make it immediately dangerous to the life, limb,
property or safety of the public or its occupants, it shall be ordered to be vacated.
159.042 NOTICE TO VACATE
Posting
Every notice to vacate shall, in addition to being served as provided in 159.037, shall be posted at or
upon each exit of the building and shall be in substantially the following form:
DO NOT ENTER
UNSAFE TO OCCUPY
It is a violation of the AUBURN CITY CODE
to occupy this building, or to remove or deface
This notice.
Building Official
City of Auburn
Compliance
Whenever such notice is posted, the building official shall include a notification thereof in the notice and
order issued under ' 159.036 reciting the emergency and specifying the conditions which necessitate
the posting. No person shall remain in or enter any building which has been so posted, except that entry
may be made to repair, demolish or remove such building under permit. No person shall remove or
deface any such notice after it is posted until the required repairs, demolition, or removal have been
completed, and a certificate of occupancy issued pursuant to the provisions of the Building Code.
APPEAL
159.050 FORM OF APPEAL
Any person entitled to service under 159.037 may appeal from any notice and order or any action of
the building official under this code by filing at the office of the building official a written appeal
containing:
1. A heading in the words: "Before the Board of Appeals of the City of Auburn".
2. A caption reading: "Appeal of ," giving the names of all appellants participating in the
appeal.
3. A brief statement setting forth the legal interest of each of the appellants in the building or the
land involved in the notice and order.
4. A brief statement in ordinary and concise language of the specific order or action protested,
together with any material facts claimed to support the contentions of the appellant.
5. A brief statement in ordinary and concise language of the relief sought and the reasons why it is
claimed the protested order or action should be reversed, modified or otherwise set aside.
6. The signatures of all parties named as appellants and their official mailing addresses.
7. The verification (by declaration under penalty of perjury) of at least one appellant as to the truth
of the matters stated in the appeal.
The appeal shall be filed within 30 days from the date of the service of such order or action of the
building official; provided, however, that if the building or structure is in such condition as to make it
immediately dangerous to the life, limb, property or safety of the public or adjacent property and is
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 159-11
Dangerous Buildings
CHAPTER 159
ordered vacated and is posted in accordance with ' 159.042, such appeal shall be filed within 10
days from the date of the service of the notice and order of the building official.
159.051 PROCESSING OF APPEAL
Upon receipt of any appeal filed pursuant to this section, the building official shall present it at the next
regular or special meeting of the Board of Appeals.
159.052 SCHEDULING AND NOTICING APPEAL FOR HEARING
As soon as practicable after receiving the written appeal, the Board of Appeals shall fix a date, time and
place for the hearing of the appeal by the Board. Such date shall not be less than 10 days nor more than 60
days from the date the appeal was filed with the building official. Written notice of the time and place of the
hearing shall be given at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing to each appellant by the secretary of
the Board, either by causing a copy of such notice to be delivered to the appellant personally or by mailing a
copy thereof, postage prepaid, addressed to the appellant at the address shown on the appeal.
159.053 EFFECT OF FAILURE TO APPEAL
Failure of any person to file an appeal in accordance with the provisions of 159.050 through 159.052 shall
constitute a waiver of the right to an administrative hearing and adjudication of the notice and order or any
portion thereof.
159.054 SCOPE OF HEARING ON APPEAL
Only those matters or issues specifically raised by the appellant shall be considered in the hearing of the
appeal.
159.055 STAYING OF ORDER UNDER APPEAL
Except for vacation orders made pursuant to ' 159.042, enforcement of any notice and order of the building
official issued under this code shall be stayed during the pendency of an appeal therefrom which is properly
and timely filed.
PROCEDURES FOR CONDUCT OF HEARING APPEALS SECTION
159.065 HEARING EXAMINERS
The Board may appoint one or more hearing examiners or designate one or more of its members to serve as
hearing examiners to conduct the hearings. The examiner hearing the case shall exercise all powers
relating to the conduct of hearings until it is submitted to the Board for decision.
159.066 RECORD
A record of the entire proceedings shall be made by tape recording or by any other means of permanent
recording determined to be appropriate by the Board.
159.067 REPORTING
The proceedings at the hearing shall also be reported by an audio recording if requested by any party
thereto. A transcript of the proceedings shall be made available to all parties upon request and upon
payment of the fee prescribed therefore. Such fees may be established by the Board, but shall in no event
be greater than the cost involved.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 159-12
Dangerous Buildings
CHAPTER 159
159.068 CONTINUANCES
The Board may grant continuances for good cause shown; however, when a hearing examiner has been
assigned to such hearing, no continuances may be granted except by the examiner for good cause shown
so long as the matter remains before the examiner.
159.069 OATHS; CERTIFICATION
In any proceedings under this chapter, the Board, any Board member, or the hearing examiner has the
power to administer oaths and affirmations and to certify to official acts.
159.070 REASONABLE DISPATCH
The Board and its representatives shall proceed with reasonable dispatch to conclude any matter before it.
Due regard shall be shown for the convenience and necessity of any parties or their representatives.
159.071 FORM OF NOTICE OF HEARING
The notice to appellant shall be substantially in the following form, but may include other information:
"You are hereby notified that a hearing will be held before (the Board of Appeals or name of hearing
examiner) at on the day of 19 , at the hour , upon the notice and order served upon you. You
may be present at the hearing. You may be, but need not be, represented by counsel. You may present
any relevant evidence and will be given full opportunity to cross-examine all witnesses testifying against you.
You may request the issuance of subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and production of
books, documents or other things by filing an affidavit therefore with (Board of Appeals or name of hearing
examiner)."
SUBPOENAS
159.080 FILING OF AFFIDAVIT
The Board or examiner may obtain the issuance and service of a subpoena for the attendance of witnesses
or the production of other evidence at a hearing upon the request of a member of the Board or upon the
written demand of any party. The issuance and service of such subpoena shall be obtained upon the filing
of an affidavit therefore which states the name and address of the proposed witness; specifies the exact
things sought to be produced and the materiality thereof in detail to the issues involved; and states that the
witness has the desired things in possession or under control. A subpoena need not be issued when the
affidavit is defective in any particular.
159.081 CASES REFERRED TO EXAMINER
In cases where a hearing is referred to an examiner, all subpoenas shall be obtained through the examiner.
CONDUCT OF HEARING
159.090 RULES
Hearings need not be conducted according to the technical rules relating to evidence and witnesses.
159.091 ORAL EVIDENCE
Oral evidence shall be taken only on oath or affirmation.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 159-13
Dangerous Buildings
CHAPTER 159
159.092 HEARSAY EVIDENCE
Hearsay evidence may be used for the purpose of supplementing or explaining any direct evidence, but
shall not be sufficient in itself to support a finding unless it would be admissible over objection in civil actions
in courts of competent jurisdiction in this state.
159.093 ADMISSIBILITY OF EVIDENCE
Any relevant evidence shall be admitted if it is the type of evidence on which responsible persons are
accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs, regardless of the existence of any common law or
statutory rule which might make improper the admission of such evidence over objection in civil actions in
courts of competent jurisdiction in this state.
159.094 EXCLUSION OF EVIDENCE
Irrelevant and unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded.
159.095 RIGHTS OF PARTIES
Each party shall have these rights, among others:
To call and examine witnesses on any matter relevant to the issues of the hearing;
To introduce documentary and physical evidence;
To cross-examine imposing witnesses on any matter relevant to the issues of the hearing;
To impeach any witness regardless of which party first called the witness to testify;
To rebut the evidence;
To be represented by anyone who is lawfully permitted to do so.
OFFICIAL NOTICE
159.105 WHAT MAY BE NOTICED
In reaching a decision, official notice may be taken, either before or after submission of the case for
decision, of any fact which may be judicially noticed by the courts of this state or of official records of the
Board of departments and ordinances of the city or rules and regulations of the Board.
159.106 PARTIES TO BE NOTIFIED
Parties present at the hearing shall be informed of the matters to be noticed, and these matters shall be
noted in the record, referred to therein, or appended thereto.
159.107 OPPORTUNITIES TO REFUTE
Parties present at the hearing shall be given a reasonable opportunity, on request, to refute the officially
noticed matters by evidence or by written or oral presentation of authority, the manner of such refutation to
be determined by the Board or hearing examiner.
159.108 INSPECTION OF THE PREMISES
The Board or the hearing examiner may inspect any building or premises involved in the appeal during the
course of the hearing, provided that notice of such inspection shall be given to the parties before the
inspection is made; the parties are given an opportunity to be present during the inspection; and the Board
or the hearing examiner shall state for the record upon completion of the inspection the material facts
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 159-14
Dangerous Buildings
CHAPTER 159
observed and the conclusions drawn therefrom. Each party then shall have a right to rebut or explain the
matters so stated by the Board or hearing examiner.
METHOD AND FORM OF DECISION
159.120 HEARING BEFORE BOARD ITSELF
When a contested case is heard before the Board itself, a member thereof who did not hear the evidence or
has not read the entire record of the proceedings shall not vote on or take part in the decision.
159.121 HEARING BEFORE THE EXAMINER
If a contested case is heard by a hearing examiner alone, the examiner shall within a reasonable time (not to
exceed 90 days from the date the hearing is closed) submit a written report to the Board. Such report shall
contain a brief summary of the evidence considered and state the examiner's findings, conclusions and
recommendations. The report also shall contain a proposed decision in such form that it may be adopted by
the board as its decision in the case. All examiner's reports filed with the Board shall be matters of public
record. A copy of each such report and proposed decision shall be mailed to each party on the date they
are filed with the Board.
159.122 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT BY BOARD; NOTICE
The Board shall fix the time, date and place to consider the examiner's report and proposed decision.
Notice thereof shall be mailed to each interested party not less than five days prior to the date fixed, unless it
is otherwise stipulated by all of the parties.
159.123 EXCEPTIONS TO REPORT
Not later than two days before the date set to consider the report, any party may file written exceptions to
any part or all of the examiner's report and may attach thereto a proposed decision together with written
argument in support of such decision. By leave of the Board, any party may present oral argument to the
Board.
159.124 DISPOSITION BY THE BOARD
The Board may adopt or reject the proposed decision in its entirety, or may modify the proposed decision.
159.125 PROPOSED DECISION NOT ADOPTED.
If the proposed decision is not adopted as provided in ' 159.124, the Board may decide the case upon the
entire record before it, with or without taking additional evidence, or may refer the case to the same or
another hearing examiner to take additional evidence. If the case is reassigned to a hearing examiner, the
examiner shall prepare a report and proposed decision as provided in 159.121 after any additional evidence
is submitted. Consideration of such proposed decision by the Board shall comply with the provisions of this
section.
159.126 FORM OF DECISION
The decision shall be in writing and shall contain findings of fact, a determination of the issues presented,
and the requirements to be complied with. A copy of the decision shall be delivered to the appellant
personally or sent by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested.
159.127 EFFECTIVE DATE OF DECISION
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 159-15
Dangerous Buildings
CHAPTER 159
The effective date of the decision shall be as stated therein.
ENFORCEMENT OF ORDER OF BUILDING OFFICIAL OR BOARD OF APPEALS
159.140 COMPLIANCE
General
After any order of the building official or the Board of Appeals made pursuant to this code shall have
become final, no person to whom any such order is directed shall fail, neglect or refuse to obey any such
order. Any such person who fails to comply with any such order within 30 days is in violation of this
Code and subject to a fine of $100 a day.
Failure to Obey Order
If, after any order of the building official or Board of Appeals made pursuant to this code has become
final, the person to who such order is directed shall fail, neglect or refuse to obey such order, the
building official may cause such person to be prosecuted under division (A) of this section or institute
any appropriate action to abate such building as a public nuisance.
Failure to Commence Work
Whenever the required repair or demolition is not commenced within 30 days after any final notice and
order issued under this code becomes effective:
1. The building official shall cause the building described in such notice and order to be vacated by
posting at each entrance thereto a notice reading:
DANGEROUS BUILDING
DO NOT OCCUPY
It is a violation of the AUBURN CITY CODE
to occupy this building, or to remove or
deface this notice
Building Official
City of Auburn
2. No person shall occupy any building which has been posted as specified in this subsection. No
person shall remove or deface any such notice so posted until the repairs, demolition or
removal ordered by the building official have been completed and a certificate of occupancy
issued pursuant to the provisions of the Building Code.
3. The building official may, in addition to any other remedy herein provided, cause the building to
be repaired to the extent necessary to correct the conditions which render the building
dangerous as set forth in the notice and order; or, if the notice and order required demolition, to
cause the building to be sold and demolished or demolished and the materials, rubble and
debris therefrom removed and the lot cleaned. Any such repair or demolition work shall be
accomplished and the cost thereof paid and recovered in the manner hereinafter provided in
this code. Any surplus realized from the sale of any such building, or from the demolition
thereof, over and above the cost of demolition and of cleaning the lot, shall be paid over to the
person or persons lawfully entitled thereto.
159.141 EXTENSION OF TIME TO PERFORM WORK
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 159-16
Dangerous Buildings
CHAPTER 159
Upon receipt of an application from the person required to conform to the order and by agreement of such
person to comply with the order if allowed additional time, the building official may grant an extension of
time, not to exceed an additional 120 days, within which to complete said repair, rehabilitation or demolition,
if the building official determines that such an extension of time will not create or perpetuate a situation
imminently dangerous to life or property. The building official's authority to extend time is limited to the
physical repair, rehabilitation or demolition of the premises and will not in any way affect the time to appeal
the notice and order.
159.142 INTERFERENCE WITH REPAIR OR DEMOLITION WORK PROHIBITED
No person shall obstruct, impede or interfere with any officer, employee, contractor or authorized
representative of this jurisdiction or with any person who owns or holds any estate or interest in any building
which has been ordered repaired, vacated or demolished under the provisions of this code; or with any
person to whom such building has been lawfully sold pursuant to the provisions of this code, whenever such
officer, employee, contractor or authorized representative of this jurisdiction, person having an interest or
estate in such building or structure, or purchaser is engaged in the work of repairing, vacating, and repairing,
or demolishing any such building, pursuant to the provisions of this code, or in performing any necessary act
preliminary to or incidental to such work or authorized or directed pursuant to this code.
159.150 PROCEDURE
When any work of repair or demolition is to be done pursuant to ' 159.140(C)(3), the building official shall
request approval therefore from the Board of Public Works and Safety and the work shall be accomplished
by personnel of this jurisdiction or by private contract under the direction of said official. Plans and
specifications therefore may be prepared by said official or the official may employ such architectural and
engineering assistance on a contract basis as deemed reasonably necessary. If any part of the work is to
be accomplished by private contract, standard public works contractual procedures shall be followed.
159.151 COSTS
The cost of such work shall be paid from the repair and demolition fund, and may be made a special
assessment against the property involved, or may be made a personal obligation of the property owner,
whichever the Common Council shall determine is appropriate.
REPAIR AND DEMOLITION FUND
159.160 GENERAL
The Common Council shall establish a special revolving fund to be designated as the Repair and Demolition
Fund. Payments shall be made out of said fund upon proper claim procedure to defray the costs and
expenses which may be incurred by this jurisdiction in doing or causing to be done the necessary work of
repair or demolition of dangerous buildings.
159.161 MAINTENANCE OF FUND
The Common Council may at any time transfer to the Repair and Demolition Fund, out of any money in the
general fund of this jurisdiction, such sums as it may deem necessary in order to expedite the performance
of the work of repair or demolition, and any sum so transferred shall be deemed a loan to the Repair and
Demolition Fund and shall be repaid out of the proceeds of the collections hereinafter provided for. All funds
collected under the proceedings hereinafter provided for shall be paid to the treasurer of this jurisdiction who
shall credit the same to the Repair and Demolition Fund.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 159-17
Dangerous Buildings
CHAPTER 159
RECOVERY OF COST OF REPAIR OR DEMOLITION
159.170 ACCOUNT OF EXPENSE; FILING OF REPORT
The building official shall keep an itemized account of the expense incurred by the city in the repair or
demolition of any building done pursuant to the provisions of 159.140(C)(3). Upon the completion of the
work of repair or demolition, said building official shall prepare and file with the Clerk-Treasurer a report
specifying the work done, the itemized and total cost of the work, a description of the real property upon
which the building or structure is or was located, and the names and addresses of the persons entitled to
notice pursuant to 159.037.
159.171 NOTICE OF HEARING
Upon receipt of said report, the Clerk-Treasurer shall present it to the Common Council for consideration.
The Common Council shall fix a time, date, and place for hearing said report and any protests or objections
thereto. The Clerk-Treasurer shall cause notice of said hearing to be posted upon the property involved,
published once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, and served by certified mail, postage
prepaid, addressed to the owner of the property as the owner's name and address appears on the last
equalized assessment roll of the county, if such so appears, or as known to the Clerk-Treasurer. Such
notice shall be given at least ten days prior to the date set for the hearing and shall specify the day, hour and
place when the Common Council will hear and pass upon the building official's report, together with any
objections or protests which may be filed as hereinafter provided by any person interested in or affected by
the proposed charge.
159.172 PROTESTS AND OBJECTIONS
Any person interested in or affected by the proposed charge may file written protests or objections with the
Clerk-Treasurer of the city at any time prior to the time set for the hearing on the report of the building
official. Each such protest or objection must contain a description of the property in which the signer thereof
is interested and the grounds of such protest or objection. The Clerk-Treasurer shall endorse on every such
protest or objection the date of receipt. The Clerk-Treasurer shall present such protests or objections to the
Common Council at the time set for the hearing, and no other protests or objections shall be considered.
159.173 HEARING OF PROTESTS
Upon the day and hour fixed for the hearing, the Common Council shall hear and pass upon the report of the
building official together with any such objections or protests. The Common Council may make such
revision, correction or modification in the report or the charge as it may deem just; and when the Common
Council is satisfied with the correctness of the charge, the report (as submitted or as revised, corrected or
modified) together with the charge, shall be confirmed or rejected. The decision of the Common Council on
the report and the charge, and on all protests or objections, shall be final and conclusive.
159.174 PERSONAL OBLIGATION OR SPECIAL ASSESSMENT
General
The Common Council may thereupon order that said charge shall be made a personal obligation of the
property owner or assess said charge against the property involved.
Personal Obligation
If the Common Council orders that the charge shall be a personal obligation of the property owner, it
shall direct the attorney for the city to collect the same on behalf of the city by use of all appropriate legal
remedies.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 159-18
Dangerous Buildings
CHAPTER 159
Special Assessment
If the Common Council orders that the charge shall be assessed against the property, it shall confirm the
assessment, cause the same to be recorded on the assessment roll, and thereafter said assessment
shall constitute a special assessment against and a lien upon the property.
159.175 CONTEST
The validity of any assessment made under the provisions of this chapter shall not be contested in any
action or proceeding unless the same is commenced within 30 days after the assessment is placed upon the
assessment roll as provided herein. Any appeal from a final judgment in such action or proceeding must be
perfected within 30 days after the entry of such judgement.
159.176 AUTHORITY FOR INSTALLMENT PAYMENT OF ASSESSMENTS WITH INTEREST
The Common Council, in its discretion, may determine that assessments in amounts of $500 or more shall
be payable in not to exceed five equal annual installments. The Common Council's determination to allow
payment of such assessments in installments, the number of installments, whether they shall bear interest,
and the rate thereof shall be by a resolution adopted prior to the confirmation of the assessment.
159.177 LIEN OF ASSESSMENT
Priority
Immediately upon its being placed on the assessment roll the assessment shall be deemed to be
complete, the several amounts assessed shall be payable, and the assessments shall be liens against
the lots or parcels of land assessed, respectively. The lien shall be paramount to all other liens except
for state, county and property taxes with which it shall be upon a parity. The lien shall continue until the
assessment and all interest due and payable thereon are paid.
Interest
All such assessments remaining unpaid after 30 days from the date of recording on the assessment roll
shall become delinquent and shall bear interest at the rate of l% per annum above prime rate from and
after said date. Said prime rate to be the Federal Prime Rate as quoted in the Wall Street Journal.
159.178 REPORT TO ASSESSOR AND TAX COLLECTOR: ADDITION OF ASSESSMENT TO TAX BILL
After confirmation of the report, certified copies of the assessment shall be given to the county auditor, who
shall add the amount of the assessment to the next regular tax bill levied against the parcel for municipal
purposes.
159.179 FILING COPY REPORT WITH COUNTY AUDITOR
A certified copy of the assessment shall be filed with the county auditor on or before August 10. The
descriptions of the parcels reported shall be those used for the same parcels on the county assessor's map
books for the current year.
159.180 COLLECTION OF ASSESSMENT: PENALTIES FOR FORECLOSURE
The amount of the assessment shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as
ordinary property taxes are collected; and shall be subject to the same penalties and procedure and
sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary property taxes. All laws applicable to the levy,
collection and enforcement of property taxes shall be applicable to such assessment.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 159-19
Dangerous Buildings
CHAPTER 159
If the Common Council has determined that the assessment shall be paid in installments, each
installment and any interest thereon shall be collected in the same manner as ordinary property
taxes in successive years. If any installment is delinquent, the amount thereof is subject to the
same penalties and procedure for sale as provided for ordinary property taxes.
159.181 REPAYMENT OF REPAIR AND DEMOLITION FUND
All money recovered by payment of the charge or assessment or from the sale of the property at any sale
shall be paid to the Clerk-Treasurer, who shall credit the same to the Repair and Demolition Fund.
159.999 PENALTY
Any person who refuses without lawful excuse to attend any hearing or to produce material evidence which
the person possesses or controls as required by any subpoena served upon such person as provided for
herein shall be in violation of this code and subject to a fine of $500.
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Rules Related to the Illicit
Discharge and Connection to
Storm water Drains Within the
City of Auburn, Indiana.
CHAPTER 160
Rules Related to the Illicit Discharge and Connection to
Storm water Drains Within the City of Auburn, Indiana.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 160-2
CHAPTER 160
Table of Contents
160.001 PURPOSE/INTENT
160.002 DEFINITIONS
160.003 APPLICABILITY
160.004 RESPONSIBILITY FOR ADMINISTRATION
160.005 SEVERABILITY
160.006 ULTIMATE RESPONSIBILITY
160.007 DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS
160.008 SUSPENSION OF MS4 ACCESS
160.009 INDUSTRIAL OR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY DISCHARGES
160.010 MONITORING OF DISCHARGES
160.011 REQUIREMENT TO PREVENT, CONTROL, AND REDUCE STORM WATER POLLUTANTS BY THE
USE OF BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES
160.012 WATERCOURSE PROTECTION
160.013 NOTIFICATION OF SPILLS
160.014 ENFORCEMENT
160.015 APPEAL OF NOTICE OF VIOLATION
160.016 ENFORCEMENT MEASURES AFTER APPEAL
160.017 COST OF ABATEMENT OF THE VIOLATION
160.018 INJUNCTIVE RELIEF
160.019 COMPENSATORY ACTION
160.020 VIOLATIONS DEEMED A PUBLIC NUISANCE
160.021 PROSECUTION
160.022 REMEDIES NOT EXCLUSIVE
Rules Related to the Illicit Discharge and Connection to
Storm water Drains Within the City of Auburn, Indiana.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 160-3
CHAPTER 160
160.001 PURPOSE/INTENT
The purpose of this ordinance is to provide for the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the
City of Auburn through the regulation of non-storm water discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer
(MS4) conveyance system to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal and state law. This
ordinance establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the MS4 conveyance
system in order to comply with requirements of the Indiana Department of Environmental Management’s
(IDEM) National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) general permit process. The objectives
of this ordinance are:
To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) by
stormwater discharges by any use
To prohibit Illicit Connections and Discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system
To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance and monitoring procedures
necessary to ensure compliance with this ordinance
160.002 DEFINITIONS
For the purposes of this ordinance, the following shall mean:
• Best Management Practices (BMPs)
Means structural or nonstructural practices, or a combination of practices, designed to act as effective,
practicable means of minimizing the impacts of development and human activities on water quality.
Traditional structural BMPs, including extended detention dry ponds, wet ponds, infiltration trenches,
and sand filtration systems are now common elements of most new development projects. Structural
BMPs rely heavily on gravitational settling and/or the infiltration of soluble nutrients through a porous
medium for pollutant removal. Nonstructural BMPs, which may be used independently or in conjunction
with structural BMPs, rely on a much wider breadth of mechanisms to prevent or control non point
source pollution (NPS). Nonstructural BMPs range from programs that increase public awareness to
prevent pollution, to the implementation of control-oriented techniques (such as bioretention and storm
water wetlands) that utilize vegetation to enhance pollutant removal and restore the infiltrative capacity
of the landscape.
• City of Auburn
means employees or designees of the City of Auburn designated to enforce and administer this
ordinance. This shall also include the Indiana Department of Environmental Management, the DeKalb
County Office of the Soil and Water District, the United States Environmental Protection agency and any
of their agents and or successors in interest.
• Clean Water Act
Means the federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), any subsequent amendments
thereto, and all rules and regulations promulgated pursuant to said Act.
• Construction Activity
Means activities subject to NPDES Construction Permits. These include construction projects resulting
in land disturbance of 1 acre or more as defined in the Indiana Annotated Code (IAC) by 327 IAC 15-5-
1:12. Construction activities encompassing less than one acre but part of a larger development greater
then one acre will also require NPDES permits. Such activities include but are not limited to clearing
and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition.
• Hazardous Materials
Means any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which because of its
quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly
Rules Related to the Illicit Discharge and Connection to
Storm water Drains Within the City of Auburn, Indiana.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 160-4
CHAPTER 160
contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property, or the
environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.
• Illegal Discharge
Means any direct or indirect non-storm water discharge to the MS4, except as exempted in Section
160.007 of this ordinance.
• Illicit Connections
• Means an illicit connection is defined as either of the following:
Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illegal discharge to
enter the storm drain system including but not limited to any conveyances which allow any non-storm
water discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system
and any connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said
drain or connection had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by the City of Auburn or, any
drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to the storm drain system
which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by the City of
Auburn.
• Industrial Activity
Means activities subject to NPDES Industrial Permits as defined in 327 IAC 15-6-1:12 (Rule 6).
• Maximum Extent Practicable (MEP)
Means the statutory standard that establishes the level of pollutant reductions that operators of
regulated MS4s must achieve. The CWA requires that NPDES permits for discharges from MS4s “shall
require controls to reduce the discharge of pollutants to the maximum extent practicable, including
management practices, control techniques and system design and engineering methods.” This standard
applies to all MS4s regulated under the Phase I and Phase II (Rule 13) storm water rules. Compliance
with the conditions of Rule 13 and the series of steps associated with implementation of the required
minimum control measures will satisfy the MEP standard. Compliances with the six minimum control
measures requires the development and implementation of BMPs. Implementation of the BMPs
includes not only the actions necessary to initiate and continue the use of specific control measures, but
also the enforcement actions, as applicable, to ensure that the implementation of the control measures
occurs.
• Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4)
Means a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm drains), which are owned or
operated by a state, city, county, tribe, district, association, or other public body or a designated and
approved management agency under Section 208 of the Clean Water Act that discharges into waters of
the United States (40 CFR 122.26(b)(8).
• National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Storm Water Discharge Permit
Means a permit issued by the Indiana Department of Environmental Management (IDEM) that
authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable to
an individual, a group, or on a general area-wide basis.
• Non-Storm Water Discharge
means any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of storm water.
• Notice of Intent (NOI)
Means a written notification indicating a person’s intention to comply with the terms of a specified
general permit rule in lieu of applying for an individual NPDES permit and includes information as
required under 327 IAC 15-3 and the applicable general permit rule.
Rules Related to the Illicit Discharge and Connection to
Storm water Drains Within the City of Auburn, Indiana.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 160-5
CHAPTER 160
• Person
means any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm, corporation or other entity recognized
by law and acting as either the owner or as the owner's agent.
• Permit Holder
means any person, partnership, corporation, or landowner who holds, or has
• Pollutant
Means anything that causes or contributes to pollution discharged into waterways. Pollutants may
include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; nonhazardous
liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or
abandoned objects, and accumulations, so that the same may cause or contribute to pollution;
floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal
coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that
result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind. Also, but
not limited to dredged spoil; incinerator residue, filter backwash; sewage; garbage; sludge; munitions;
chemical wastes; solid wastes; toxic wastes; hazardous substances; biological materials; radioactive
materials (except those regulated under the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended; 42 U.S.C. 011, et
seq., heat, wrecked or discarded equipment; rock; sand; cellar dirt; and other industrial, municipal, and
agricultural waste; discharged into water.
• Premises
Means any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including
adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
• Receiving Waters
Means rivers, streams, lakes, or any body of water into which storm water is discharged.
• Storm Drainage System
Means any publicly-owned or regulated drainage system within the jurisdiction of the permit holder by
which storm water is collected and/or conveyed, including but not limited to any roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and
detention basins, natural and human-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage
structures.
• Storm Water
Means any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural
precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation.
• Storm Water Conveyance System
Means all storm sewer pipes, ditches, catch basins, and other structures including retention and
detention facilities.
• Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan
Means a document which describes the Best Management Practices and activities to be implemented
by a person or business to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the actions to
eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to storm water, storm water conveyance systems, and/or
receiving waters to the maximum extent practicable.
• Wastewater
Means any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated storm water, discharged from a facility.
• Waters of the United States
Rules Related to the Illicit Discharge and Connection to
Storm water Drains Within the City of Auburn, Indiana.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 160-6
CHAPTER 160
Means a term used in federal regulations that defines all water bodies regulated as waters of the U.S. It
includes:
1. all waters that may be susceptible to use in interstate or foreign commerce;
2. all interstate waters, including interstate wetlands;
3. all other waters, such as intrastate lakes, rivers, streams (including intermittent streams), mud
flats, sand flats, wetlands, sloughs, prairie potholes, wet meadows, playa lakes, or natural
ponds, the use degradation, or destruction of which could affect interstate or foreign commerce
including any such waters;
4. all impoundments of waters otherwise defined as waters of the United States;
5. tributaries of waters identified in this section;
6. the territorial seas; and
7. wetlands adjacent to waters.
• Watercourse
means A conduit through which water flows, a natural body of running water flowing on or under the
earth or a natural or artificial channel through which water flows.
160.003 APPLICABILITY
This ordinance shall apply to all landowners, permit holders, developers, other entities in possession, or
other persons acting without the consent of a landowner which effects any real estate located within the City
of Auburn which either:
Directly discharges into a street drain located within the City;
Directly discharges into Cedar Creek, Rueben Lockwood Drain, Cliff Metcalf Ditch, William Carner
Drain, Walter Smith Ditch, John Diehl Regulated Drain, William Spangler Drain, Auburn Industrial
Park Drain, and Peckhart Ditch; or
Is included in the MS4 jurisdiction as defined in the Notice of Intent.
160.004 RESPONSIBILITY FOR ADMINISTRATION
The City of Auburn shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this ordinance within its
jurisdiction. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the City of Auburn may be delegated in writing by
the City of Auburn to persons or entities acting in the beneficial interest of or in the employ of the City of
Auburn, such as the Indiana Department of Environmental Management, the United States Environmental
agency or any of their agents, assignees and or successors in interest therein.
160.005 SEVERABILITY
The provisions of this ordinance are hereby declared to be severable. If any provision, clause, sentence, or
paragraph of this Ordinance or the application thereof to any person, establishment, or circumstances shall
be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or application of this Ordinance.
160.006 ULTIMATE RESPONSIBILITY
The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this ordinance are intended to comply with the
NPDES permit issued to the City of Auburn. However, nothing herein shall be construed to ensure that
there will be no contamination, pollution, nor unauthorized discharge of pollutants into waters of the State.
160.007 DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS
Prohibition of Illegal Discharges
Rules Related to the Illicit Discharge and Connection to
Storm water Drains Within the City of Auburn, Indiana.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 160-7
CHAPTER 160
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the municipal storm drain system or watercourses
any materials, including but not limited to pollutants or waters containing any pollutants that cause or
contribute to a violation of applicable water quality standards, other than storm water.
The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illegal discharge to the storm drain system is prohibited
except as described as follows:
The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions established by this ordinance:
water line flushing or other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted
stream flows, rising ground water, ground water infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped
ground water, foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering systems),
crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs, non-commercial washing of vehicles,
natural riparian habitat or wet-land flows, swimming pools (if dechlorinated - typically less than one
PPM chlorine), fire fighting activities, and any other water source not containing Pollutants.
Discharges specified in writing by the City of Auburn as being necessary to protect public health
and safety, nonthreatening to the public health and safety, or resulting in a discharge that would be
contrary to the purpose of this ordinance.
Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but requires a verbal notification to the City of Auburn prior to
the time of the test.
The prohibition shall not apply to any non-storm water discharge permitted under an NPDES permit,
waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of
the Federal Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with
all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and
provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the storm drain system.
Prohibition of Illicit Connections
The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections to the storm drain
system is prohibited.
This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past,
regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or
prevailing at the time of connection.
A person is considered to be in violation of this ordinance if the person connects a line conveying
sewage to the MS4, or allows such a connection to continue.
160.008 SUSPENSION OF MS4 ACCESS
Suspension due to Illicit Discharges in Emergency Situations
The City of Auburn may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge access to a person when such
suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge, which presents or may present imminent
and substantial danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the MS4 or waters of
the State. If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency, the City of Auburn
may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the MS4 or waters of the
State, or to minimize danger to persons.
Suspension due to the Detection of Illicit Discharge
Any person discharging to the MS4 in violation of this ordinance may have their MS4 access terminated if
such termination would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The City of Auburn will notify a violator of the
Rules Related to the Illicit Discharge and Connection to
Storm water Drains Within the City of Auburn, Indiana.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 160-8
CHAPTER 160
proposed termination of its MS4 access. The violator may petition the City of Auburn for a reconsideration
and hearing.
A person commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access to premises terminated pursuant to this
Section, without the prior approval of the City of Auburn.
160.009 INDUSTRIAL OR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY DISCHARGES
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES storm water discharge permit shall
comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form
acceptable to the City of Auburn prior to the allowing of discharges to the MS4.
160.010 MONITORING OF DISCHARGES
Applicability
This section applies to all facilities that have storm water discharges associated with industrial
activity, including construction activity.
Access to Facilities
1. The City of Auburn shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities subject to regulation under
this ordinance as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this ordinance. If a
discharger has security measures in force, which require proper identification and clearance
before entry into its premises, the discharger shall make the necessary arrangements to allow
access to representatives of the City of Auburn.
2. Facility operators shall allow the City of Auburn ready access to all parts of the premises for the
purposes of inspection, sampling, examination and copying of records that must be kept under
the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge storm water, and the performance of any
additional duties as defined by state and federal law.
3. The City of Auburn shall have the right to set up on any permitted facility such devices as are
necessary in the opinion of the City of Auburn to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the
facility's storm water discharge.
4. The City of Auburn has the right to require the discharger to install monitoring equipment as
necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in
a safe and proper operating condition by the discharger at its own expense. All devices used to
measure stormwater flow and quality shall be calibrated at a minimum in accordance with
manufacturer’s specifications to ensure their accuracy.
5. Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected
and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the permit holder at the written or oral request of
the City of Auburn and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne
by the permit holder.
6. Unreasonable delays in allowing the City of Auburn access to a permitted facility is a violation of
a storm water discharge permit and of this ordinance. A person who is the operator of a facility
with a NPDES permit to discharge storm water associated with industrial activity commits an
offense if the person denies the City of Auburn reasonable access to the permitted facility for
the purpose of conducting any activity authorized or required by this ordinance.
7. If the City of Auburn has been refused access to any part of the premises from which storm
water is discharged, and he/she is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there
may be a violation of this ordinance, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a
routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this ordinance or
any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, and welfare of the
Rules Related to the Illicit Discharge and Connection to
Storm water Drains Within the City of Auburn, Indiana.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 160-9
CHAPTER 160
community, then the City of Auburn may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of
competent jurisdiction.
160.011 REQUIREMENT TO PREVENT, CONTROL, AND REDUCE STORM WATER POLLUTANTS BY THE USE
OF BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES
The City of Auburn will adopt requirements identifying Best Management Practices (BMPs) for any activity,
operation, or facility, which may cause or contribute to pollution or contamination of storm water, the storm
drain system, or waters of the State. The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment shall
provide, at their own expense, reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or
other wastes into the municipal storm drain system or watercourses through the use of these structural and
non-structural BMPs. Further, any person responsible for a property or premise, which is, or may be, the
source of an illicit discharge, may be required to implement, at said person's expense, additional structural
and non-structural BMPs to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer
system (MS4). Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES permit authorizing the discharge
of storm water associated with industrial activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliance with
the provisions of this section. These BMPs shall be part of a stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP)
as necessary for compliance with requirements of the NPDES permit.
160.012 WATERCOURSE PROTECTION
Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such person's lessee, shall keep and
maintain that part of the watercourse within the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and
other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water through the
watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain existing privately owned structures within or
adjacent to a watercourse, so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical
integrity of the watercourse.
160.013 NOTIFICATION OF SPILLS
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility or operation, or
responsible for emergency response for a facility or operation has information of any known or suspected
release of materials which are resulting or may result in illicit discharges or pollutants discharging into storm
water, the storm drainage system, or waters of the State said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure
the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event of such a release of hazardous
materials said person shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence via
emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of non-hazardous materials, said person shall notify
the City of Auburn in person or by phone or facsimile no later than the next business day. Notifications in
person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the City of Auburn within
three business days of the phone notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a
commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an onsite
written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be
retained for at least three years.
160.014 ENFORCEMENT
Notice of Violation
Whenever the City of Auburn finds that a person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a
requirement of this Ordinance, the City of Auburn or its agency and or assignees may order compliance
by written notice of violation to the responsible person. Such notice may require the violator to cure or
mitigate the violation by requiring the responsible person to perform any or all of the following without
limitation:
Rules Related to the Illicit Discharge and Connection to
Storm water Drains Within the City of Auburn, Indiana.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 160-10
CHAPTER 160
1. The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
2. The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
3. That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist;
4. The abatement or remediation of storm water pollution or contamination hazards and the
restoration of any affected property; and
5. Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs; and
6. The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.
If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is required, the notice shall set forth a
deadline within which such remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall further
advise that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore within the established deadline, the work will
be done by a designated governmental agency or a contractor and the expense thereof shall be charged
to the violator.
160.015 APPEAL OF NOTICE OF VIOLATION
Any person receiving a Notice of Violation may appeal the determination to the City of Auburn. The notice of
appeal must be received within 7 days from the date of the Notice of Violation. Hearing on the appeal before
the appropriate authority or his/her designee shall take place within 15 days from the date of receipt of the
notice of appeal. In the event the landowner disagrees with the determination of the City of Auburn, the
landowner may appeal a decision of the City of Auburn to the City of Auburn Common Council. The
decision of the municipal authority or their designee shall be final.
160.016 ENFORCEMENT MEASURES AFTER APPEAL
If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the Notice of Violation, or, in
the event of an appeal, within 15 days of the decision of the municipal authority upholding the decision of the
City of Auburn, then representatives of the City of Auburn shall enter upon the subject private property and
are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It
shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow
the government agency or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth
above.
160.017 COST OF ABATEMENT OF THE VIOLATION
Within 15 days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property will be notified of the cost of
abatement, including administrative costs. The property owner may file a written protest objecting to the
amount of the assessment within 10 days. If the amount due is not paid within a timely manner as
determined by the decision of the municipal authority or by the expiration of the time in which to file an
appeal, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on
the property for the amount of the assessment.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the city by reason of such
violation. The liability shall be paid in not more than 12 equal payments. Interest at the rate of eight percent
per annum shall be assessed on the balance beginning on the 1st day following discovery of the violation.
160.018 INJUNCTIVE RELIEF
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of
this Ordinance. If a person has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this ordinance, the City of
Auburn or designee may petition for a preliminary or permanent injunction restraining the person from
activities which would create further violations or compelling the person to perform abatement or remediation
of the violation.
Rules Related to the Illicit Discharge and Connection to
Storm water Drains Within the City of Auburn, Indiana.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 160-11
CHAPTER 160
160.019 COMPENSATORY ACTION
In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties, and remedies authorized by this Ordinance, the City of
Auburn or designee may impose upon a violator alternative compensatory actions, such as storm drain
stenciling, attendance at compliance workshops, creek cleanup, etc.
160.020 VIOLATIONS DEEMED A PUBLIC NUISANCE
In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist
in violation of any of the provisions of this Ordinance is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is
declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at the violator's expense,
and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken.
160.021 PROSECUTION
Any person that has violated or continues to violate this ordinance shall be liable to the fullest extent of the
law, and shall be subject to all available penalty as defined by 327 I.A.C. 15-4 et seq of not less than Five
Hundred Dollars ($500.00) nor more than Two Thousand Five Hundred Dollars ($2,500.00) dollars per
violation per day. The City of Auburn may recover all attorneys’ fees court costs and other expenses
associated with enforcement of this ordinance, including sampling and monitoring expenses. Violators may
be subject to additional penalties as set forth and outlined in 327 IAC 15 et al.
160.022 REMEDIES NOT EXCLUSIVE
The remedies listed in this ordinance are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable
federal, state or local law and it is within the discretion of the City of Auburn to seek cumulative remedies.
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
Storm Water Runoff Control
CHAPTER
161
161.001 INTRODUCTION/ PURPOSE
161.002 DEFINITIONS
161.003 APPLICABILITY
161.004 PROJECT SITE OWNER RESPONSIBILITIES
161.005 INDIVIDUAL LOT OWNER OR OPERATOR RESPONSIBILITIES
161.006 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR STORM WATER POLLUTION PREVENTION
161.007 NOTICE OF INTENT
161.008 STORM WATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN
161.008 STORM WATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN
161.009 SELF-MONITORING REQUIREMENTS
161.010 INSPECTION AND VIOLATIONS
161.011 PROJECT TERMINATION
161.012 DURATION OF PERMIT
161.013 ENFORCEMENT
161.014 SEPARABILITY
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
Storm Water Runoff Control
CHAPTER
161
161.001 INTRODUCTION/ PURPOSE
During the construction process, soil is highly vulnerable to erosion by wind and water. Eroded soil
endangers water resources by reducing water quality and causing the siltation of aquatic habitat for fish and
other desirable species. Eroded soil also necessitates repair of sewers and ditches and the dredging of
lakes. In addition, clearing and grading during construction cause the loss of native vegetation necessary
for terrestrial and aquatic habitat.
As a result, the purpose of this local regulation is to safeguard persons, protect property, and prevent
damage to the environment and the City of Auburn. This ordinance will also promote the public welfare by
guiding, regulating, and controlling the design, construction, use, and maintenance of any development or
other activity that disturbs or breaks the topsoil or results in the movement of earth on land in the City of
Auburn.
161.002 DEFINITIONS
? Agricultural Conservation Practices
Means practices that are constructed on agricultural land for the purposes of controlling soil erosion and
sedimentation. These practices include grass waterways, sediment basins, terraces, and grade
stabilization structures.
? Agricultural Land Disturbing Activity
Means tillage, planting, cultivation, or harvesting operations for the production of agricultural or nursery
vegetative crops. The term also includes pasture renovation and establishment, the construction of
agricultural conservation practices, and the installation and maintenance of agricultural drainage tile.
For purposes of this ordinance, the term does not include land disturbing activities for the construction of
agricultural related facilities, such as:
1. Barns
2. Buildings to house livestock
3. Roads associated with infrastructure
4. Agricultural waste lagoons and facilities
5. Lakes and ponds
6. Wetlands
7. Other infrastructure
? Best Management Practices (BMPs)
Means structural or nonstructural practices, or a combination of practices, designed to act as effective,
practicable means of minimizing the impacts of development and human activities on water quality.
Traditional structural BMPs, including extended detention dry ponds, wet ponds, infiltration trenches,
and sand filtration systems are now common elements of most new development projects. Structural
BMPs rely heavily on gravitational settling and/or the infiltration of soluble nutrients though a porous
medium for pollutant removal. Nonstructural BMPs, which may be used independently or in conjunction
with structural BMPs, rely on a much wider breadth of mechanisms to prevent or control non point
source pollution (NPS). Nonstructural BMPs range from programs that increase public awareness to
prevent pollution, to the implementation of control-oriented techniques (such as bioretention and storm
water wetlands) that utilize vegetation to enhance pollutant removal and restore the infiltrative capacity
of the landscape.
? Certified Contractor
Means a person who has received training related to the Indiana Department of Environmental
Management Rule 5 and Rule 13 procedures to inspect and maintain erosion and sediment control
practices.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
Storm Water Runoff Control
CHAPTER
161
? City of Auburn
Means employees or designees of the City of Auburn designated to enforce and administer this
ordinance.
? Clearing
Means any activity that removes the vegetative surface cover.
? Construction Activity
Means land disturbing activities and land disturbing activities associated with the construction of
infrastructure and structures. This term does not include routine ditch or road maintenance or minor
landscaping projects.
? Construction Plan
Means a representation of a project site and all activities associated with the project. The plan includes
the location of the project site, buildings and other infrastructure, grading activities, schedules for
implementation, and other pertinent information related to the project site. A storm water pollution
prevention plan is a part of the construction plan.
? Construction site access
Means a stabilized stone surface at all points of ingress or egress to a project site for the purpose of
capturing and detaining sediment carried by tires of vehicles or other equipment entering or exiting the
project site.
? Contractor or Subcontractor
Means an individual or company hired by the project site or individual lot owner, their agent, or the
individual lot operator to perform services on the project site.
? Developer
Means:
1. Any person financially responsible for construction activity; or
2. An owner of property who sells or leases, or offers for sale or lease, any lots in a subdivision.
? Discharge of a Pollutant
Means any addition of any pollutant, or combination of pollutants, into any waters of the state from a
point source in Indiana. The term includes, without limitation, additions of pollutants into waters of the
state from the following: (1) Surface run-off collected or channeled by man. (2) Discharges through
pipes, sewers, or other conveyances that do not lead to treatment works.
? Drainage Way
Means any channel that conveys surface runoff throughout the site.
? Erosion
Means the detachment and movement of soil, sediment, or rock fragments by water, wind, ice, or
gravity.
? Erosion and Sediment Control Measure
Means a practice or a combination of practices, to control erosion and resulting sedimentation.
? Erosion and Sediment Control System
Means the use of appropriate erosion and sediment control measures to minimize sedimentation by first
reducing or eliminating erosion at the source and then, as necessary, trapping sediment to prevent it
from being discharged from or within a project site.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
Storm Water Runoff Control
CHAPTER
161
? Final Stabilization
Means the establishment of permanent vegetative cover or the application of a permanent non-erosive
material to areas where all land disturbing activities have been completed and no additional land
disturbing activities are planned under the current permit.
? Grading
Means the cutting and filling of the land surface to a desired slope or elevation.
? Impervious Surface
Means surfaces, such as pavement and rooftops that prevent the infiltration of storm water into the soil.
? Individual Lot
Means a single parcel of land within a multi-parcel development.
? Individual Lot Operator
Means a contractor or subcontractor working on an individual lot.
? Individual Lot Owner
Means a person who has financial control of construction activities for an individual lot.
? Land Disturbing Activity
Means any manmade change of the land surface, including removing vegetative cover that exposes the
underlying soil, excavating, filling, transporting, and grading. This term does not include routine ditch or
road maintenance or minor landscaping projects.
? Larger Common Plan of Development or Sale
Means a plan, undertaken by a single project site owner or a group of project site owners acting in
concert, to offer lots for sale or lease; where such land is contiguous, or is known, designated,
purchased or advertised as a common unit or by a common name, such land shall be presumed as
being offered for sale or lease as part of a larger common plan. The term also includes phased or other
construction activity by a single entity for its own use.
? Measurable Storm Event
Means a precipitation event that results in a total measured precipitation accumulation equal to, or
greater than, one-half (0.5) inch of rainfall.
? MS4 Area
Means the land area described in the City of Auburn MS4 general storm water permit pursuant to 327
IAC 15-13.
? MS4 Operator
Means the person responsible for development, implementation, or enforcement of the minimum control
measures for the City of Auburn MS4 area.
? Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System” or “MS4”
Means a conveyance or system of conveyances, including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, or storm drains, that is:
1. Owned or operated by a:
a. Federal, state, city, town, county, district, association, or other public body (created by or
pursuant to state law) having jurisdiction over storm water, including special districts under
state law such as a sewer district, flood control district or drainage district, or similar entity,
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
Storm Water Runoff Control
CHAPTER
161
or a designated and approved management agency under Section 208 of the Clean Water
Act (33 U.S.C. 1288) that discharges into waters of the state; or
b. Privately owned storm water utility, hospital, university or college having jurisdiction over
storm water that discharges into waters of the state;
2. Designed or used for collecting or conveying storm water;
3. Not a combined sewer; and
4. Not part of a publicly owned treatment works (POTW).
? Peak Discharge
Means the maximum rate of flow during a storm, usually in reference to a specific design storm event.
? Permanent Stabilization
Means the establishment, at a uniform density of seventy percent (70%) across the disturbed area, of
vegetative cover or permanent non-erosive material that will ensure the resistance of the soil to erosion,
sliding, or other movement.
? Pollutant
Means anything that causes or contributes to pollution discharged into waterways. Pollutants may
include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; nonhazardous
liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or
abandoned objects, and accumulations, so that the same may cause or contribute to pollution;
floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal
coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that
result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind. Also, but
not limited to dredged spoil; incinerator residue, filter backwash; sewage; garbage; sludge; munitions;
chemical wastes; solid wastes; toxic wastes; hazardous substances; biological materials; radioactive
materials (except those regulated under the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended; 42 U.S.C. 011, et
seq., heat, wrecked or discarded equipment; rock; sand; cellar dirt; and other industrial, municipal, and
agricultural waste; discharged into water.
? Phasing of Construction
Means sequential development of smaller portions of a large project site, stabilizing each portion before
beginning land disturbance on subsequent portions, to minimize exposure of disturbed land to erosion.
? Project Site
Means the entire area on which construction activity is to be performed.
? Project Site Owner
Means the person required to submit the Erosion Control Permit Application under this ordinance and
required to comply with the terms of this ordinance, including either of the following:
1. A developer.
2. A person who has financial and operational control of construction activities and project plans
and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications.
? Publicly Owned Treatment Works” or (POTW)
Means a treatment works as defined by Section 212 of the Act, (33 U.S.C. 1292) owned in this instance
by the City of Auburn. This definition includes any sewers, pipes, and other conveyances conveying
wastewater to the POTW treatment plant. The term does not include pipes, sewers or other
conveyances not connected to a facility providing treatment or storage. For the purposes of this
Ordinance, "POTW" shall also include any sewers, pipes or other conveyances that convey wastewaters
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
Storm Water Runoff Control
CHAPTER
161
to the POTW from persons outside the City who are, by contract or agreement with the City, users of the
City's POTW. The term also means the municipality, as defined in Section 502(4) of the Clean Water
Act, which has jurisdiction over the discharges to and the direct discharges from such a treatment works.
? Runoff
Means waters derived from melting snow or rain falling within a tributary drainage basin that exceed the
infiltration capacity of the soils of that basin, flow over the surface of the ground, or are collected in
channels or conduits.
? Sediment
Means solid material (both mineral and organic) that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been
moved from its site of origin by air, water, gravity, or ice and has come to rest on the earth’s surface.
? Sedimentation
Means the settling and accumulation of unconsolidated sediment carried by storm water run-off.
? Soil
Means the unconsolidated mineral and organic material on the surface of the earth that serves as the
natural medium for the growth of plants.
? Soil and Water Conservation District (SWCD)
Means the DeKalb County Soil and Water Conservation District.
? Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPP)
Means a plan developed to minimize the impact of storm water pollutants resulting from land disturbing
activities. The plan includes the location of the project site, buildings and other infrastructure, grading
activities, schedules for implementation, and other pertinent information related to the control of storm
water pollutants.
? Storm Water Quality Measure
Means a practice, or a combination of practices, to control or minimize pollutants associated with storm
water run-off.
? Strip Development
Means a multi-lot project site where individual lots front on an existing road.
? Subdivision
Means any land that is divided or proposed to be divided into lots, whether contiguous or subject to
zoning requirements, for the purpose of sale or lease as part of a larger common plan of development or
sale.
? Temporary Stabilization
Means the covering of soil to ensure its resistance to erosion, sliding, or other movement. The term
includes vegetative cover, anchored mulch, or other non-erosive material applied at a uniform density of
seventy percent (70%) across the disturbed area.
? Tracking
Means the deposition of soil that is transported from one (1) location to another by tires, tracks of
vehicles, or other equipment.
? Trained Individual
Means an individual who is trained and experienced in the principles of storm water quality, including
erosion and sediment control as may be demonstrated by state registration, professional certification,
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
Storm Water Runoff Control
CHAPTER
161
experience, or completion of coursework that enable the individual to make judgments regarding storm
water control or treatment and monitoring.
161.003 APPLICABILITY
The requirements under this ordinance are in compliance with 327 IAC 15-5 (Rule 5) and apply to all
persons meeting the requirements of IAC 15-5-2. This ordinance requires the control of polluted run-off from
construction sites with a land disturbance greater than or equal to one acre or disturbances of less than one
acre if it is part of a larger common plan of development or sale that will disturb more than one acre as
determined below.
For off-site construction activities that provide services including, but not limited to, road extensions,
sewer, water, and other utilities, to a permitted project site, these off-site activity areas must be
considered a part of the permitted project site when the activity is under the control of the project
site owner.
Multi-lot project sites are regulated by this ordinance in accordance wi th the following, unless the
total combined land disturbance on all individual lots is less than one (1) acre and is not part of a
larger common plan of development or sale:
1. A determination of the area of land disturbance shall be calculated by adding the total area of
land disturbance for improvements, such as roads, utilities, or common areas, and the expected
total disturbance on each individual lot, as determined by the following:
a. For a single-family residential project site where the lots are one-half (0.5) acre or more,
one-half (0.5) acre of land disturbance must be used as the expected lot disturbance.
b. For a single-family residential project site where the lots are less than one-half (0.5) acre in
size, the total lot must be calculated as being disturbed.
c. To calculate lot disturbance on all other types of project sites, such as industrial and
commercial project sites, the following apply:
i. Where lots are one (1) acre or greater in size, a minimum of one (1) acre of land
disturbance must be calculated as the expected lot disturbance.
ii. Where the lots are less than one (1) acre in size, the total lot must be calculated as
being disturbed.
For purposes of this ordinance, strip developments:
1. Are considered as one (1) project site; and
2. Must comply with this ordinance.
The requirements under this rule do not apply to persons who are involved in agricultural land
disturbing activities or forest harvesting activities.
The requirements under this rule do not apply to the following activities, provided other applica ble
permits contain provisions requiring immediate implementation of soil erosion control measures.
1. Landfills that have been issued a certification of closure under 329 IAC 10
2. Coal mining activities permitted under IC 14-34
3. Municipal solid waste landfills that are accepting waste pursuant to a permit issued by the
Indiana Department of Environmental Management (IDEM) under 329 IAC 10 that contains
equivalent storm water requirements, including the expansion of landfill boundaries and
construction of new cell either within or outside the original solid waste permit boundary
4. Road and regulated drain maintenance
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
Storm Water Runoff Control
CHAPTER
161
161.004 PROJECT SITE OWNER RESPONSIBILITIES
The project site owner has the following responsibilities:
1. Ensure that a Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) is completed and submitted in
accordance with Section 8 of this ordinance.
2. Ensure compliance with this ordinance during the land disturbing activity and the
implementation of the SWPPP.
3. Complete and submit a Notice of Intent (NOI) in accordance with Section 7 of this ordinance.
4. Complete and submit a notice of termination letter (NOT) in accordance with Section 11 of this
ordinance.
5. Ensure that all persons engaging in construction activities on a permitted project site comply
with the applicable requirements of this ordinance and the approved SWPPP.
6. The project site owner shall inform all general contractors, construction management firms,
grading or excavating contractors, utility contractors, and the contractors that have primary
oversight on individual building lots of the requirements of this ordinance, the conditions and
standards included in the SWPPP and the schedule for proposed implementation.
161.005 INDIVIDUAL LOT OWNER OR OPERATOR RESPONSIBILITIES
An Individual Lot Operator, whether owning the property or acting as the agent of the property
owner, shall be responsible for erosion and sediment control requirements associated with the
activities on Individual Lots.
For an Individual Lot where land disturbance is expected to be one (1) acre or more and the lot lies
within a project site permitted under this ordinance, the Individual Lot Owner shall:
1. Complete and submit a Notice of Intent (NOI) in accordance with Section 7 of this ordinance;
and
2. Ensure that a SWPPP is completed and submitted in accordance with Section 8 of this
ordinance.
For an Individual Lot where the land disturbance is less than one (1) acre and the lot lies within a
project site permitted under this ordinance, the Individual Lot Operator is not required to submit an
Erosion Control Permit Application or a SWPPP. The individual lot operator shall comply with the
provisions and requirements of the SWPPP developed by the project site owner and the
requirements under Section 6 of this ordinance.
161.006 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR STORM WATER POLLUTION PREVENTION
The following requirements shall be met on all project sites:
1. Sediment-laden water flowing from the project site shall be treated by erosion and sediment
control measures appropriate to minimize sedimentation.
2. Appropriate measures shall be implemented to minimize or eliminate wastes or unused building
materials, including garbage, debris, cleaning wastes, wastewater, concrete truck washout, and
other substances from being carried from a project site by run-off or wind. Identification of areas
where concrete truck washout is permissible must be clearly posted at appropriate areas of the
site. Wastes and unused building materials shall be managed and disposed of in accordance
with all applicable statutes and regulations.
3. A stable construction site access shall be provided at all points of construction traffic ingress
and egress to the project site.
4. Public or private roadways shall be kept cleared of accumulated sediment that is a result of runoff
or tracking. Bulk clearing of sediment shall not include flushing the area with water. Cleared
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
Storm Water Runoff Control
CHAPTER
161
sediment shall be redistributed or disposed of in a manner that is in accordance with all
applicable statutes and regulations.
5. Storm water run-off leaving a project site must be discharged in a manner that is consistent with
applicable state or federal law.
6. Phasing of construction activities shall be used, where possible, to minimize disturbance of
large areas.
7. Appropriate measures shall be planned and installed as part of an erosion and sediment control
system.
8. All storm water quality measures must be designed and installed under the guidance of a
trained individual.
9. Collected run-off leaving a project site must be either discharged directly into a well -defined,
stable receiving channel or diffused and released to adjacent property without causing an
erosion or pollutant problem to the adjacent property owner.
10. Drainage channels and swales must be designed and adequately protected so that their final
gradients and resultant velocities will not cause erosion in the receiving channel or at the outlet.
11. Natural features, including wetlands and sinkholes, shall be protected from pollutants
associated with storm water run-off.
12. Un-vegetated areas that are scheduled or likely to be left inactive for f ifteen (15) calendar days
or more must be temporarily or permanently stabilized with measures appropriate for the
season to minimize erosion potential. Alternative measures to site stabilization are acceptable if
the project site owner or their representat ive can demonstrate they have implemented erosion
and sediment control measures adequate to prevent sediment discharge. Vegetated areas with
a density of less than seventy percent (70%) shall be restabilized using appropriate methods to
minimize the erosion potential.
13. During the period of construction activities, all storm water quality measures necessary to meet
the requirements of this rule shall be maintained in working order.
14. Proper storage and handling of materials, such as fuels or hazardous wastes, and spill
prevention and clean-up measures shall be implemented to minimize the potential for pollutants
to contaminate surface or ground water or degrade soil quality.
15. Final stabilization of a project site is achieved when:
a. All land disturbing activities have been completed and a uniform (for example, evenly
distributed, without large bare areas) perennial vegetative cover with a density of seventy
percent (70%) has been established on all unpaved areas and areas not covered by
permanent structures, or equivalent permanent stabilization measures have been employed;
and
b. Construction projects on land used for agricultural purposes are returned to its
preconstruction agricultural use or disturbed areas, not previously used for agricultural
production, such as filter strips and areas that are not being returned to their
preconstruction agricultural use, meet the final stabilization requirements in subsection (A);
c. For individual residential lots, final stabilization meeting the criteria in subsection (A) will be
achieved when the individual lot operator:
i. Completes final stabilization; or
ii. Has installed appropriate erosion and sediment control measures for an individual lot
prior to occupation of the home by the homeowner and has informed the homeowner of
the requirement for, and benefits of, final stabilization.
161.007 NOTICE OF INTENT
Information Requirements
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
Storm Water Runoff Control
CHAPTER
161
The project site owner must submit the following information with a complete NOI letter under this ordinance:
1. Name, mailing address, and location of the project site for which the notification is submitted.
2. The project site owner’s name, address, telephone number, e -mail address (if available),
ownership status as federal, state, public, private, or other entity.
3. Contact person (if different than project site owner), person’s name, company name, address, email
address (if available), and telephone number.
4. A brief description of the construction project, including a statement of the total acreage of the
project site. Total acreage claimed in the NOI letter shall be consistent with the acreage
covered in the construction plan.
5. Estimated dates for initiation and completion of construction activities. Within forty-eight (48)
hours of the initiation of construction activity, the project site owner must notify the
commissioner and the appropriate plan reviewing agency of the actual project start date.
6. The latitude and longitude of the approximate center of the project site to the nearest fifteen
(15) seconds, and the nearest quarter section, township, range, and civil township in which the
project site is located.
7. Total impervious surface area, in square feet, of the final project site including structures, roads,
parking lots, and other similar improvements.
8. The number of acres to be involved in the construction activi ties.
9. Proof of publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the affected area that notified the
public that a construction activity is to commence, that states, “(Company name, address) is
submitting an NOI letter to notify the City of Auburn MS4 and the Indiana Department of
Environmental Management of our intent to comply with the requirements under 327 IAC 15-5 to
discharge storm water from construction activities for the following project: (name of the
construction project, address of the location of the construction project). Run-off from the project
site will discharge to (stream(s) receiving the discharge(s)).”
10. As applicable, a list of all MS4 areas designated under 327 IAC 15-13 within which the project
site lies.
11. A written certification by the operator that:
a. The storm water quality measures included in the construction plan comply with the
requirements of this ordinance;
b. The measures required by section 6 of this rule will be implemented in accordance with the
storm water pollution prevention plan;
c. If the projected land disturbance is one (1) acre or more, the applicable soil and water
conservation district or other entity designated by the department has been sent a copy of
the construction plan for review;
d. Storm water quality measures beyond those specified in the storm water pollution
prevention plan will be implemented during the life of the permit if necessary to comply with
section 6 of this rule; and
e. Implementation of storm water quality measures will be inspected by trained individuals.
12. The name of receiving water or, if the discharge is to a municipal separate storm sewer, the
name of the municipal operator of the storm sewer and the ultimate receiving water.
13. The NOI letter must be signed by a person meeting the signatory requirements in 327 IAC 15-4-
3(g).
14. A notification from the DeKalb County SWCD or an authorized IDEM representative or the City
of Auburn MS4 indicating that the constructions plans are sufficient to comply with this rule. This
requirement may be waived if the project site owner has not received notification from the
reviewing agency within 28 days.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
Storm Water Runoff Control
CHAPTER
161
a. Send NOI letters to:
i. Attention: Rule 5 Storm Water Coordinator
Indiana Department of Environmental Management
Office of Water Quality, Urban Wet Weather Section
100 North Senate Avenue
P.O. 6015
Indianapolis, Indiana 46206-6015
ii. MS4 Operator
City of Auburn
2010 South Wayne Street
Auburn, Indiana 46706
iii. DeKalb County SWCD
942 W 15th Street
Auburn, Indiana 46706
Submission Requirements
After the project site owner has received notification from the reviewing agency that the construction plans
meet the requirements of the rule or the 28 day review period has expired, all NOI letter information required
under Section 7(a) of this rule shall be submitted to the commissioner at least forty-eight (48) hours prior to
the initiation of land disturbing activities at the site. If the NOI letter is determined to be deficient, the project
site owner must address the deficient items and submit an amended NOI letter to all parties as specified in
Section 7(a) of this ordinance.
For a project site where the proposed land disturbance is one (1) acre or more as determined under section
3 of this rule, the following requirements must be met:
1. A construction plan must be submitted according to the following:
a. Prior to the initiation of any land disturbing activities.
b. Sent to the DeKalb County SWCD or IDEM authorized representative or the City of Auburn
for review and verification that the plan meets the requirements of the rule
2. If the construction plan required by subdivision (1) is determined to be deficient, the DeKalb
County SWCD or IDEM or IDEM authorized representative or the City of Auburn may require
modifications, terms, and conditions as necessary to meet the requirements of the rule. The
initiation of construction activity following notification by the reviewing agency that the plan does
not meet the requirements of the rule is a violation and subject to enforcement action. If
notification of a deficient plan is received after the review per iod outlined in subdivision (3) and
following commencement of construction activities, the plans must be modified to meet the
requirements of the rule and resubmitted within fourteen (14) days of receipt of the notification
of deficient plans.
3. If the project site owner does not receive notification within twenty-right (28) days after the plan
is received by the reviewing agency stating that the reviewing agency finds the plan is deficient,
the project site owner may submit the NOI letter information.
Site Size Fee Structure
For purposes of establishing the fee structure, the term “development” shall be defined as any residential,
commercial, industrial, or combination thereof under the administration of the City of Auburn, Indiana’s
jurisdiction and or control, whether located in the city limits or outside thereof.
Before the issuance of building permits associated herein, the following fees shall be paid to the City of
Auburn to administrate the storm water control plan.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
Storm Water Runoff Control
CHAPTER
161
1. Developments of 10.00 acres or more are $1,500.00.
2. Developments of 5.00 acres to 9.99 acres are $1,000.00.
3. Other Developments 1.00 acre to 4.99 acres are $500.00
A current active permit must be in place until all development activities associated with the project have
been completed, including but not limited to the construction of all structures within the development.
The permit shall expire at the end of five (5) years. Upon the expiration of the permit a new application shall
be made and additional fees as set forth above shall be submitted.
161.008 STORM WATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN
Submission Requirements
After the project site owner has received notification from the reviewing agency that the construction plans
meet the requirements of the rule or the 28 day review period has expired, all NOI letter information required
under Section 7(a) of this rule shall be submitted to the commissioner at least forty-eight (48) hours prior to
the initiation of land disturbing activities at the site. If the NOI letter is determined to be deficient, the project
site owner must address the deficient items and submit an amended NOI letter to all parties as specified in
Section 7(a) of this ordinance.
For a project site where the proposed land disturbance is one (1) acre or more as determined under section
3 of this rule, the following requirements must be met:
1. A construction plan must be submitted according to the following:
a. Prior to the initiation of any land disturbing activities.
b. Sent to the DeKalb County SWCD or IDEM authorized representative or the City of Auburn
for review and verification that the plan meets the requirements of the rule
2. If the construction plan required by subdivision (1) is determined to be deficient, the DeKalb
County SWCD or IDEM or IDEM authorized representative or the City of Auburn may require
modifications, terms, and conditions as necessary to meet the requirements of the rule. The
initiation of construction activity following notification by the reviewing agency that the plan does
not meet the requirements of the rule is a violation and subject to enforcement action. If
notification of a deficient plan is received after the review period outlined in subdivision (3) and
following commencement of construction activities, the plans must be modified to meet the
requirements of the rule and resubmitted within fourteen (14) days of receipt of the notification
of deficient plans.
3. If the project site owner does not receive notification within twenty-right (28) days after the plan
is received by the reviewing agency stating that the reviewing agency finds the plan is deficient,
the project site owner may submit the NOI letter information.
161.008 STORM WATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN
Submission Requirements
For a project site where the proposed land disturbance is one (1) acre or more as determined under Section
3 of this ordinance, the following requirements must be met:
1. A Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) containing the information required in
Section 8(b) of this ordinance must be submitted to the DeKalb County SWCD or an IDEM
authorized representative prior to the initiation of any land disturbing activities.
Submit two copies of the SWPPP to:
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
Storm Water Runoff Control
CHAPTER
161
DeKalb County SWCD
942 W 15th Street
Auburn, Indiana 46706
2. The DeKalb County SWCD or an IDEM authorized representative will review each application
for a site development permit to determine its conformance with the provisions of this regulation.
Within 28 days after receiving an application the DeKalb County SWCD or an IDEM authorized
representative shall, in writing:
a. Approve the permit application;
b. Approve the permit application subject to such reasonable conditions as may be necessary
to secure substantially the objectives of this regulation, and issue the permit subject to
these conditions; or
c. Disapprove the permit application, indicating the reason(s) and procedure for submitting a
revised application and/or submission.
3. Failure of the DeKalb County SWCD or an IDEM authorized representative to act on an original
or revised application within 28 days of receipt shall authorize the applicant to proceed in
accordance with the plans as filed unless such time is extended by agreement between the
applicant and the DeKalb County SWCD or an IDEM authorized representative. Pending
preparation and approval of a revised plan, development activities shall be allowed to proceed
in accordance with conditions established by the DeKalb County SWCD or an IDEM authorized
representative.
4. Approval of construction plans shall be based on Rule 5 regulations and any design criteria in
the City of Auburn Storm Water BMP manual.
5. If construction plans are altered after approval then they must be resubmitted for additional
review.
6. If the SWPPP required by subdivision (1) is determined to be deficient, the SWCD may require
modifications, terms, and conditions as necessary to meet the requirements of this ordinance.
A notice of deficiency will be sent and permit will not be issued. Deficient items will need to be
amended and resubmitted and will begin a 14-28-day review period. The initiation of land
disturbing activities following written notification by the SWCD or an authorized IDEM
representative or the City of Auburn that the SWPPP does not meet the requirements of this
ordinance is a violation of this ordinance and subject to enforcement act ion.
Information Requirements
A project site owner shall develop a Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan designed to achieve the storm
water quality and erosion control requirements specified in Section 6 of this ordinance. The SWPPP shall
serve as a guideline for storm water quality, but should not be interpreted to be the only basis for
implementation of storm water quality measures for a project site. The project site owner is responsible for
implementing, in accordance with this rule, all measures necessary to adequately prevent polluted storm
water run-off. The SWPPP must include the following:
1. Project narrative and supporting documents, including the following information:
a. An index indicating the location, in the plan, of all information required by this subsection.
b. Description of the nature and purpose of the project.
c. Legal description of the project site. The description should be to the nearest quarter
section, township, and range, and include the civil township.
d. Soil properties, characteristics, limitations, and hazards associated with the project site and
the measures that will be integrated into the project to overcome or minimize adverse soil
conditions.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
Storm Water Runoff Control
CHAPTER
161
e. General construction sequence of how the project site will be built, including phases of
construction.
f. Identify the name and the Hydrologic Unit Code (14 Digit) available from the United States
Geological Survey (USGS) for the watershed the project is located in.
g. A reduced plat or project site map showing the applicable lot numbers, lot boundar ies, and
road layout and names. The reduced map must be legible and submitted on a sheet or
sheets no larger than eleven (11) inches by seventeen (17) inches for all phases or sections
of the project site.
h. Identification of any other state or federal water quality permits that are required for
construction activities associated with the owner’s project site.
2. Vicinity map depicting the project site location in relationship to recognizable local landmarks,
towns, and major roads, such as a USGS topographic quadrangle map or county or municipal
road map.
3. A project site layout that must include the following information:
a. Location and name of all wetlands, lakes, and watercourses on or adjacent to the project
site.
b. Location of all existing structures on the project site, if applicable.
c. One hundred (100) year floodplains, floodway fringes, and floodways. Please note if none
exists.
d. Soil map of the predominant soil types, as determined by the United States Department of
Agriculture (USDA), Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) Soil Survey, or an
equivalent publication, or as determined by a soil scientist. A soil legend must be included
with the soil map.
e. Identification and delineation of vegetative cover, such as grass, weeds, brush, and trees,
on the project site.
f. Land use of all adjacent properties.
g. Existing topography at a contour interval appropriate to indicate drainage patterns.
h. Location of all proposed site improvements, including roads, utilities, lot delineation and
identification, proposed structures, and common areas.
4. A construction grading plan, including the following information:
a. Delineation of all proposed land disturbing activities, including off -site activities that will
provide services to the project site.
b. Location of all soil stockpiles and borrow areas.
c. Information regarding any off-site borrow, stockpile, or disposal areas that are associated
with a project site and under the control of the project site owner.
d. Proposed final topography at a contour interval appropriate to indicate drainage patterns.
e. Proposed final one hundred (100) year floodplains, floodway fringes, and floodways, if
different than existing.
5. A Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan, including the following information:
a. An estimate of the peak discharge, based on the ten (10) year storm event, of the project
site for both preconstruction and post construction conditions
b. Location, size, and dimensions of all storm water management systems, such as culverts,
storm sewers, conveyance channels, permanent retention or detention facilities, including
existing or manmade wetlands.
c. Locations where storm water may be directly discharged into ground water, such as
abandoned wells or sinkholes. Please note if none exists.
d. Locations of specific points where storm water discharge will leave the project site.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
Storm Water Runoff Control
CHAPTER
161
e. Name of all receiving waters. If the discharge is to a separate municipal storm sewer,
identify the name of the municipal operator and the ultimate receiving water.
f. Location, dimensions, detailed specifications, and construction details of all temporary and
permanent storm water quality measures.
g. Temporary and permanent stabilization plans include sequence of implementation and the
following:
i. Specifications and application rates for soil amendments and seed mixtures.
ii. The type and application rate for anchored mulch.
h. Construction sequence describing the relationship between implementation of storm water
quality measures and stages of construction activities.
i. Self-monitoring program including plan and procedures.
j. A description of potential pollutant sources associated with the construction activities that
may reasonably be expected to add a significant amount of pollutants to storm water
discharges.
k. Material handling and storage associated with the construction activity shall meet the
storage, spill prevention and spill response requirements in the City of Auburn Ground
Water Protection Ordinance, as amended.
6. A copy of the post construction storm water management plan.
The MS4 Operator or the SWCD or an IDEM authorized representative may upon finding
reasonable cause require modification to the SWPPP if it is determined that changes are necessary
due to site conditions or project design changes. Revised plans, if requested, must be submitted to
the appropriate entity within twenty-eight (28) calendar days of a request for a modification or
before land disturbance.
161.009 SELF-MONITORING REQUIREMENTS
A self-monitoring program that includes the following must be implemented at all permitted project
sites:
1. A trained individual shall perform a written evaluation of the project site:
a. By the end of the next business day following each measurable storm event; and
b. By a minimum of one (1) time per week.
2. The evaluation must:
a. Address the maintenance of existing storm water quality measures to ensure they are
functioning properly; and
Identify additional measures necessary to remain in compliance with all applicable statutes
and rules.
3. Written evaluation reports must include:
a. The name of the individual performing the evaluation;
b. The date of the evaluation;
c. Problems identified at the project site; and
d. Details of corrective actions recommended and completed.
4. All evaluation reports for the project site must be made available to the MS4 Operator or other
designated entity within forty-eight (48) hours of a request.
5. Maintain inspection records for three (3) from date of NOT.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
Storm Water Runoff Control
CHAPTER
161
161.010 INSPECTION AND VIOLATIONS
DeKalb County SWCD, IDEM, or an IDEM authorized representative shall make inspections as
hereinafter required and either approve that portion of the work completed or shall notify the
permittee wherein the work fails to comply with the SWPP as approved. Plans for grading,
stripping, excavating, and filling work bearing the stamp of approval of the DeKalb County SWCD,
IDEM, or an IDEM or an IDEM authorized representative shall be maintained at the site during the
progress of the work. To obtain inspections, the permittee shall notify the DeKalb County SWCD,
IDEM, or an IDEM authorized representative at least two working days before the following:
1. Start of construction
2. erosion control measures
3. Completion of site clearing
4. Completion of rough grading
5. Completion of final grading
6. Close of the construction season
7. Completion of final landscaping
The DeKalb County SWCD, IDEM, or an IDEM, or an IDEM authorized representative shall enter
the property of the applicant as deemed necessary to make regular inspections to ensure the
validity of the reports filed under Section 9.
All persons engaging in construction activities on a project site shall be responsible for compl ying
with the SWPPP and the provisions of this ordinance.
The MS4 Operator or an IDEM authorized representative shall investigate potential violations of this
ordinance to determine which person may be responsible for the violation. The MS4 Operator or an
IDEM authorized representative shall, if appropriate, consider public records of ownership, building
permits issued by local units of government, and other relevant information, which may include site
inspections, storm water pollution prevention plans, permit applications, and other information
related to the specific facts and circumstances of the potential violation. Any person causing or
contributing to a violation of any provisions of this ordinance shall be subject to enforcement and
penalty under section 13.
161.011 PROJECT TERMINATION
The project site owner shall plan an orderly and timely termination of the land disturbing activities,
including the implementation of storm water quality measures that are to remain on the project site.
Except as provided in subdivision (c), the project site owner shall submit a Notice of Termination
(NOT) letter to the MS4 Operator or other designated entity certifying that each of the following
conditions have been met:
1. All land disturbing activities, including construction on all building lots, have been completed
and the entire site has been stabilized.
2. All temporary erosion and sediment control measures have been removed.
3. All post-construction certified BMPs and associated control devices have been installed and
documented with jurisdictional entity.
The project site owner may submit an NOT letter to obtain early release from compliance with this
ordinance if the following conditions are met:
1. The remaining, undeveloped acreage does not exceed five (5) acres, with contiguous areas not
to exceed one (1) acre.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
Storm Water Runoff Control
CHAPTER
161
2. A map of the project site, clearly identifying all remaining undeveloped lots, is attached to the
NOT letter. The map must be accompanied by a list of names and addresses of individual lot
owners or individual lot operators of all undeveloped lots.
3. All public and common improvements, including infrastructure, have been completed and
permanently stabilized and have been transferred to the appropriate local entity.
4. The remaining acreage does not pose a significant threat to the integrity of the infrastructure,
adjacent properties, or water quality.
5. All permanent storm water quality measures have been implemented and are operational.
The MS4 Operator or other designated entity shall verify the information in the NOT let ter. Upon
receipt of written approval of the NOT letter from the MS4 Operator or other designated entity, the
Erosion Control Permit shall no longer be valid and the project site owner shall no longer be
responsible for compliance with this ordinance.
Following receipt of a written approval of an early release NOT letter in accordance with Subsection
(c), the project site owner shall notify all current individual lot owners and all subsequent individual
lot owners of the remaining undeveloped acreage and acreage with construction activity that they
are responsible for complying with under Section 6 of this ordinance. The remaining individual lot
owners do not need to submit an SWPPP or an NOT letter. The notice must contain a verified
statement that each of the conditions in subsection (c) have been met. The notice must also inform
the individual lot owners of the requirements to:
1. Install and maintain appropriate measures to prevent sediment from leaving the individual
building lot; and
2. Maintain all erosion and sediment control measures that are to remain on-site as part of the
construction plan.
After a verified NOT letter has been submitted for a project site, maintenance of the remaining
storm water quality measures shall be the responsibility of the individual lot owner or occupier of the
property.
161.012 DURATION OF PERMIT
A permit issued under this ordinance is granted for a period of five (5) years from the date coverage
commences.
Once the five (5) year permit term duration is reached, the permit issued under this ordinance will
be considered expired, and, as necessary for construction activity continuation, a new permit
application would need to be submitted in accordance with subsection (c).
To obtain a renewal permit, the information required under Section 7 of this ordinance must be
submitted to the MS4 Operator ninety (90) calendar days prior to the termination date of the permit.
Coverage under a renewal permit will begin on the date of expiration from the previous five (5) year
permit term. SWPPP should be updated if necessary.
161.013 ENFORCEMENT
Stop-Work Order; Revocation of Permit
In the event that any person holding a site development permit pursuant to this ordinance violates the
terms of the permit or implements site development in such a manner as to materially adversely affect
the health, welfare, or safety of persons residing or working in the neighborhood or development site so
as to be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to property or improvements in the
neighborhood, the City of Auburn or its designated representatives may refer the matter to IDEM for
enforcement.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances
Storm Water Runoff Control
CHAPTER
161
If remaining storm water quality measures are not properly maintained by the person occupying or
owning the property, IDEM may pursue enforcement against that person for correction of
deficiencies under 327 IAC 15-1-4.
Construction plans, SWPPP, self-inspection logs, and other supporting documentation associated
with the project site must be made available to the MS4 Operator or its designated represe ntatives
within forty-eight (48) hours of such a request.
Violation and Penalties
No person shall construct, enlarge, alter, repair, or maintain any grading, excavation, or fill, or cause the
same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any terms of this ordinance. Any penalties for violation of
this ordinance shall be governed by IC 13-18-4 as detailed in 327 IAC 15-1 et al.
161.014 SEPARABILITY
The provisions and sections of this ordinance shall be deemed to be separable, and the invalidity of any
portion of this ordinance shall not affect the validity of the remainder.
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Post Construction Storm
Water Control
CHAPTER 162
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 162-2
Post Construction Storm Water Control
CHAPTER 162
Table of Contents
162.001 INTRODUCTION/PURPOSE
162.002 DEFINITIONS
162.003 APPLICABILITY
162.004 PERFORMANCE CRITERIA FOR STORM WATER MANAGEMENT
162.005 STORM WATER MANAGEMENT DESIGN CRITERIA
162.006 REQUIREMENTS FOR STORM WATER MANAGEMENT PLAN APPROVAL
162.007 CONSTRUCTION INSPECTION
162.008 MONITORING, MAINTENANCE, AND REPAIR OF STORM WATER FACILITIES MONITORING
REQUIREMENTS
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 162-3
Post Construction Storm Water Control
CHAPTER 162
162.001 INTRODUCTION/PURPOSE
The purpose of this ordinance is to establish minimum storm water management requirements and controls
to protect and safeguard the general health, safety, and welfare of the public residing in watersheds within
the City of Auburn MS4 Area. This ordinance seeks to meet that purpose through the following objectives:
To prevent accelerated soil erosion and to control storm water runoff resulting from land disturbing
activities, both during and after construction.
To assure that property owners control the volume and rate of storm water runoff originating from
their property so that surface water and groundwater quality is protected, soil erosion minimized and
flooding potential reduced.
To restrict storm water runoff entering and leaving development sites to non-erosive velocities by
requiring temporary and permanent soil erosion control measures.
To assure that soil erosion control and storm water runoff control systems are incorporated into site
planning at an early stage in the planning and design process.
To eliminate the need for costly maintenance and repairs to roads, embankments, ditches, streams,
lakes, wetlands, and storm water control facilities which are the result of excessive soil erosion and
inadequate storm water runoff control.
To encourage the design and construction of storm water control systems which serve multiple
purposes, including but not limited to flood prevention, water quality protection, wildlife habitat
preservation, education, recreation, and wetlands protection.
To assure that all storm water control facilities will be properly designed, constructed, and
maintained.
To provide for enforcement of this ordinance.
• Compatibility with Other Permit and Ordinance Requirements
This ordinance is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule or
regulation, statute, or other provision of law. The requirements of this ordinance should be considered
minimum requirements, and where any provision of this ordinance imposes restrictions different from
those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provisions
are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be
considered to take precedence.
• Severability
If the provisions of any article, section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision, or clause of this ordinance
shall be judged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such order of judgment shall not affect or
invalidate the remainder of any article, section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision, or clause of this
ordinance.
• Development of a Storm Water Best Management Practices (BMP) Technical Manual
The City of Auburn will furnish additional policy, criteria and information including specifications and
standards, for the proper implementation of the requirements of this ordinance and will provide such
information in the form of a Storm Water BMP Technical Manual. This manual will include a list of
approved storm water BMPs, including specific design criteria and operation and maintenance
requirements for each practice. The manual may be updated and expanded from time to time, at the
discretion of the local review authority, based on improvements in engineering, science, monitoring, and
local maintenance experience. Storm water treatment practices that are constructed in accordance with
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 162-4
Post Construction Storm Water Control
CHAPTER 162
these design and sizing criteria will be presumed to meet the minimum water quality performance
standards.
162.002 DEFINITIONS
• Auburn, City of
means employees or representatives of the City of Auburn designated to enforce and administer this
ordinance.
• Best management practice (BMP)
means any structural or nonstructural control measure utilized to improve the quality and, as
appropriate, reduce the quantity of storm water run-off. It includes schedules of activities, prohibitions of
practice, treatment requirements, operation and maintenance procedures, use of containment facilities,
land use planning, policy techniques, and other management practices.
• Conveyance
means any structural process for transferring storm water between at least two (2) points. The term
includes, but is not limited to, piping, ditches, swales, curbs, gutters, catch basins, channels, storm
drains, and roadways.
• DeKalb County
means employees or representatives of the DeKalb County, Indiana.
• Department
refers to the Indiana Department of Environmental Management (IDEM).
• Floatable
means any solid waste that, due to its physical characteristics, will float on the surface of water. For the
purposes of this ordinance, the term does not include naturally occurring floatables, such as leaves or
tree limbs.
• Illicit discharge
means any discharge to an MS4 conveyance that is not composed entirely of storm water, except
naturally occurring floatables, such as leaves or tree limbs. Sources of illicit discharges include sanitary
wastewater, septic tank effluent, car wash wastewater, oil disposal, radiator flushing disposal, laundry
wastewater, roadway accident spillage, and household hazardous wastes.
• Impervious surface
means any surface that prevents storm water to readily infiltrate into the soils.
• Individual National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit
means an NPDES permit issued to one (1) MS4 operator that contains requirements specific to that
MS4 conveyance.
• Larger common plan of development or sale
means a plan, undertaken by a single developer or a group of developers acting in concert, to offer lots
for sale or lease where such land is contiguous, or is known, designed, purchased, or advertised as a
common unit or by a common name, such land shall be presumed as being offered for sale or lease as
part of a larger common plan. The term also includes phased construction by a single entity for its own
use.
• Maintenance Agreement
means a legally recorded document that acts as a property deed restriction, and which provides for longterm
maintenance of storm water management practices.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 162-5
Post Construction Storm Water Control
CHAPTER 162
• Development of a Storm Water Best Management Practices (BMP) Technical Manual
The City of Auburn will furnish additional policy, criteria and information including specifications and
standards, for the proper implementation of the requirements of this ordinance and will provide such
information in the form of a Storm Water BMP Technical Manual. This manual will include a list of
approved storm water BMPs, including specific design criteria and operation and maintenance
requirements for each practice. The manual may be updated and expanded from time to time, at the
discretion of the local review authority, based on improvements in engineering, science, monitoring, and
local maintenance experience. Storm water treatment practices that are constructed in accordance with
these design and sizing criteria will be presumed to meet the minimum water quality performance
standards.
• MS4 area
means a land area comprising one (1) or more places that receives coverage under one (1) NPDES
storm water permit regulated by Rule 13 or 327 IAC 5-4-6(a)(4) and 327 IAC 5-4-6(a)(5).
• MS4 operator
means the person responsible for development, implementation, or enforcement of the MCMs for a
designated MS4 area.
• Municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4)
means a conveyance or system of conveyances, including, but not limited to, roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, or storm drains,
that is:
1. owned or operated by a:
a. federal, state, city, City, county, district, association, or other public body (created by or
pursuant to state law) having jurisdiction over storm water, including special districts under
state law such as a sewer district, flood control district, or drainage district, or similar entity,
or a designated and approved management agency under Section 208 of the Clean Water
Act (33 U.S.C. 1288) that discharges into waters of the state; or
b. privately owned storm water utility, hospital, university, or college having jurisdiction over
storm water that discharges into waters of the state;
2. designed or used for collecting or conveying storm water;
3. not a combined sewer; and
4. not part of a publicly owned treatment works (POTW) as defined at 40 CFR 122.2.
• Municipal, state, federal, or institutional refueling area
means an operating gasoline or diesel fueling area whose primary function is to provide fuel to either
municipal, state, federal, or institutional equipment or vehicles.
• Notice of deficiency letter (NOD letter)
means a written notification from the department indicating an MS4 entity’s deficiencies in its NOI letter
or SWQMP submittals.
• Notice of intent letter (NOI letter)
means a written notification indicating an MS4 entity’s intention to comply with the terms of Rule 13 in
lieu of applying for an individual NPDES permit and includes information as required under sections 6
and 9 of Rule 13. It is the application for obtaining permit coverage under Rule 13.
• Notice of sufficiency letter (NOS letter)
means a written notification from the department indicating that an MS4 entity has sufficiently provided
the required information in its NOI letter or SWQMP submittals.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 162-6
Post Construction Storm Water Control
CHAPTER 162
• Notice of termination letter (NOT letter)
means a written notification from the department indicating that an MS4 entity has met the conditions to
terminate its permit coverage under Rule 13.
• Pollutant
means anything that causes or contributes to pollution discharged into waterways. Pollutants may
include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; nonhazardous
liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or
abandoned objects, and accumulations, so that the same may cause or contribute to pollution;
floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal
coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that
result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind. Also, but
not limited to dredged spoil; incinerator residue, filter backwash; sewage; garbage; sludge; munitions;
chemical wastes; solid wastes; toxic wastes; hazardous substances; biological materials; radioactive
materials (except those regulated under the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended; 42 U.S.C. 011, et
seq., heat, wrecked or discarded equipment; rock; sand; cellar dirt; and other industrial, municipal, and
agricultural waste; discharged into water.
• Pollutant of concern
means any pollutant that has been documented via analytical data as a cause of impairment in any
waterbody, or to another MS4, to which the MS4 discharges.
• Responsible individual or party
means the person responsible for development, implementation, or enforcement of the MCMs for a
designated MS4 entity.
• Retail gasoline outlet
means an operating gasoline or diesel fueling facility whose primary function is the resale of fuels. The
term applies to facilities that create five thousand (5,000) or more square feet of impervious surfaces or
generate an average daily traffic count of one hundred (100) vehicles per one thousand (1,000) square
feet of land area.
• Soil and water conservation district (SWCD)
means a political subdivision established under IC 14-32.
• Storm water
means water resulting from rain, melting or melted snow, hail, sleet or other natural occurrences.
• Storm water quality management plan (SWQMP)
means a comprehensive written document that addresses storm water run-off quality within an MS4
area. The SWQMP is divided into three (3) different submittal parts as follows:
1. Part A-Initial Application.
2. Part B-Baseline Characterization and Report.
3. Part C-Program Implementation.
• Waters
means:
1. the accumulations of water, surface and underground, natural and artificial, public and private;
or
2. a part of the accumulations of water; that are wholly or partially within flow through, or border
upon Indiana. The term does not include a private pond, or an off stream pond, reservoir, or
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 162-7
Post Construction Storm Water Control
CHAPTER 162
BMP built for reduction or control of pollution or cooling of water before discharge, unless the
discharge from the pond, reservoir, or BMP causes or threatens to cause water pollution.
• Watershed
means an area of land from which water drains to a common point.
162.003 APPLICABILITY
The requirements under this ordinance are in compliance with 327 IAC 15-5 (Rule 5) and 327 IAC 15-13
(Rule 13). The storm water pollution prevention plan, which is submitted to the City of Auburn as part of the
construction plan approval process, must include post-construction storm water quality measures. These
measures are incorporated as a permanent feature into the site plan and are left in place following
completion of construction activities to continuously store and/or treat storm water from the stabilized site.
Any project located within the City of Auburn that includes clearing, grading, excavation, concrete or
bituminous paving, and other land disturbing activities, resulting in the disturbance of or impact on one (1)
acre or more of total land area, is subject to the requirements of this Ordinance. This includes both new
development and re-development, and disturbances of less than one (1) acre of land that are part of a larger
common plan of development or sale if the larger common plan will ultimately disturb one (1) or more acres
of land, within the MS4 area.
The requirements under Rule 13 do not apply to persons who are involved in agricultural land disturbing
activities or forest harvesting activities.
The requirements under Rule 13 do not apply to the following activities, provided other applicable permits
contain provisions requiring immediate implementation of soil erosion control measures.
Landfills that have been issued a certification of closure under 329 IAC 10
Coal mining activities permitted under IC 14-34
Municipal solid waste landfills that are accepting waste pursuant to a permit issued by the Indiana
Department of Environmental Management (IDEM) under 329 IAC 10 that contains equivalent storm
water requirements, including the expansion of landfill boundaries and construction of new cell(s)
either within or outside the original solid waste permit boundary
Road and regulated drain maintenance
It will be the responsibility of the project site owner and/or project site owner’s designee to ensure proper
construction and installation of all storm water BMPs in compliance with this Ordinance, and to notify the City
of Auburn MS4 Operator with a notice of termination letter (NOT) upon completion of the project and
stabilization of the site. However, all eventual property owners of storm water quality management facilities
meeting the applicability requirements must comply with the requirements of this Ordinance.
162.004 PERFORMANCE CRITERIA FOR STORM WATER MANAGEMENT
Unless judged by the City of Auburn to be exempt, the following performance criteria shall be addressed for
storm water management at all sites:
All site designs shall establish storm water management practices to control the peak flow rates of
storm water discharge associated with specified design storms and reduce the generation of storm
water. These practices should seek to utilize pervious areas for storm water treatment and to
infiltrate storm water from driveways, sidewalks, rooftops, parking lots, and landscaped areas to the
maximum extent practical to provide treatment for both water quality and quantity.
All storm water generated from new development shall not discharge untreated storm water directly
into a receiving water body.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 162-8
Post Construction Storm Water Control
CHAPTER 162
For new development, structural storm water treatment practices shall be designed to remove 80%
of the average annual post development total suspended solids (TSS) load. It is presumed that a
BMP complies with this performance standard if it is:
1. Sized to capture the prescribed water quality volume (WQ).
2. Designed according to the specific performance criteria outlined in the City of Auburn’s Storm
Water BMP Technical Manual,
3. Constructed properly, and
4. Maintained regularly.
The calculations for determining peak flows as found in the Storm Water BMP Technical Manual
shall be used for sizing all storm water BMPs unless prior approval is received from the City of
Auburn.
For sites that discharge to DeKalb County controlled drains the storm water BMP shall be designed
to meet any applicable requirements in the DeKalb County Storm Water Control Ordinance and
receive County Drainage Board approval if appropriate.
New retail gasoline or diesel fuel outlets, new municipal, state, federal, or institutional gasoline or
diesel refueling areas, or new privately owned gasoline or diesel refueling areas, or existing
gasoline or diesel outlets and refueling areas that replace their existing tanks or install additional
new tanks must install appropriate BMPs to reduce lead, copper, zinc, and hydrocarbons in storm
water.
Individual properties that have 5.0 acres or more of paved (asphalt, concrete, brick, stone pavers,
or other impervious materials) area must install appropriate practices to reduce lead, copper, zinc,
and hydrocarbons in storm water.
Infiltration practices are to be allowed in wellhead protection areas.
Vegetated filter strips are required along unvegetated swales and ditches.
Discharge from the MS4 conveyance into sinkholes or fractured bedrock without treatment that
results in the discharge meeting Indiana groundwater quality standards as references in 327 IAC 2-
11 are prohibited.
Discharges from storm water Class V injection must meet Indiana groundwater quality standards.
162.005 STORM WATER MANAGEMENT DESIGN CRITERIA
The specific storm water BMP design criteria are not detailed in this Ordinance. The detailed storm water
management design criteria are provided in the City of Auburn’s Storm Water BMP Technical Manual. The
Storm Water BMP Technical Manual allows select design information to change over time as new
information or techniques become available without requiring the formal process needed to change
ordinance language. The Ordinance can then require those submitting any development application to
consult the current Storm Water BMP Technical Manual for the exact design criteria for the storm water
management practices appropriate for their site.
Approved BMP’s are listed in the City of Auburn’s Storm Water BMP Technical Manual. The approved BMPs
must be designed, constructed, and maintained according to guidelines provided in the Storm Water BMP
Technical Manual or as provided by the manufacturer of the storm water BMP. Practices other than those
specified in the approved list may be utilized. However, the burden of proof, as to whether the performance
(minimum 80% TSS removal) and ease of maintenance of such practices will be placed with the applicant.
Details regarding the procedures and criteria for consideration of acceptance of such BMPs are available
from the International Storm water Best Management Practices (BMP) Database developed by the Federal
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 162-9
Post Construction Storm Water Control
CHAPTER 162
Highway Administration (FHWA) and the American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE). The information and
data is available at http://www.bmpdatabase.org.
• Minimum Control Requirements
All storm water BMPs will be designed so that the specific storm frequency storage volumes to meet
water quality and water quantity reduction requirements as identified in the current Storm Water BMP
Technical Manual are met.
In addition, if hydrologic or topographic conditions warrant greater control than that provided by the
control requirements present in the BMP Technical Manual, the City of Auburn reserves the right to
impose any and all additional requirements deemed necessary to control the volume, timing, and rate of
run off.
• Site Design Feasibility
Storm water management practices for a site shall be chosen based on the physical conditions of the
site. Among the factors that should be considered include:
• Topography
• Maximum Drainage Area
• Depth to Water Table
• Soils
• Slopes
• Terrain
• Head
• Location in relation to environmentally sensitive features or urban areas.
Applicants shall consult the Storm Water BMP Technical Manual for guidance on the factors that
determine site design feasibility when selecting storm water BMPs
162.006 REQUIREMENTS FOR STORM WATER MANAGEMENT PLAN APPROVAL
The City shall review the Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) to determine whether the
requirements of this ordinance and the City of Auburn Construction Site Run-Off Control located in Section
162 of the City of Auburn Municipal Code. If the City determines that the proposed SWPPP complies with
the standards in the Construction Site Runoff Control and Post Construction Runoff Control Ordinances, a
permit shall be issued specifying the work approved. If the proposed plan does not comply with these
standards, the permit request shall be modified or denied. Upon request, the City will furnish the applicant
or other interested persons with a statement in writing of the reasons for permit denial or approval. If
necessary, the City may request additional information from the applicant.
162.007 CONSTRUCTION INSPECTION
• Notice of Construction Commencement
The applicant must notify the City of Auburn in advance before the commencement of construction of
the BMP. The staff of the City of Auburn shall conduct regular inspections of the construction site. All
inspections shall be documented and written reports prepared that contain the following information:
1. The date and location of the inspection;
2. Whether construction is in compliance with the approved storm water management plan;
3. Variations from the approved construction specifications; and
4. Any infractions of this ordinance that exist.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 162-10
Post Construction Storm Water Control
CHAPTER 162
If any infractions are found, the property owner shall be notified in writing of the nature of the infraction
and the required corrective actions. No added work shall proceed until any infractions are corrected and
all work previously completed has received approval by the City of Auburn.
• As Built Plans
All project site owners are required to submit “as built” plans for any storm water BMPs located on-site
after final construction is completed. The plan must show the final design specifications for all storm
water BMPs and must be certified by a professional engineer. A final inspection by the City of Auburn is
required before the release of any performance securities can occur.
• Landscaping and Stabilization Requirements
Any area of land from which the natural vegetative cover has been either partially or wholly cleared or
removed by development activities shall be revegetated within fifteen (15) days from the substantial
completion of such clearing and construction. The following criteria shall apply to revegetation efforts:
• Reseeding must be done with an annual or perennial cover crop accompanied by placement of
straw mulch or its equivalent of sufficient coverage to control erosion until such time as the
cover crop is established over ninety percent (90%) of the seeded area.
• Replanting with native woody and herbaceous vegetation must be accompanied by placement
of straw mulch or its equivalent of sufficient coverage to control erosion until the plantings are
established and are capable of controlling erosion.
• Any area of revegetation must exhibit survival of a minimum of seventy percent (70%) of the
cover crop throughout the year immediately following revegetation. Revegetation must be
repeated in successive years until the minimum seventy percent (70%) survival for one (1) year
is achieved.
In addition to the above requirements, a landscaping plan must be submitted with the final design
describing the vegetative stabilization and management techniques to be used at a site after
construction is completed. This plan will explain not only how the site will be stabilized after
construction, but who will be responsible for the maintenance of vegetation at the site and what
practices will be employed to ensure that adequate vegetative cover is preserved. This plan must be
prepared by a registered landscape architect or the owner of the real estate, with the approval of the
local soil conservation district, and must be approved prior to receiving a permit.
• Inspection Authority
After the approval of the Storm Water Management Plan by the City of Auburn and the commencement
of construction activities, the City of Auburn has the authority to conduct inspections of the work being
done to ensure full compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance and the terms and conditions of the
approved permit.
The City of Auburn has the authority to perform long-term, post-construction inspection of all public or
privately owned BMPs. The inspections will follow the Operation and Maintenance procedures included
in the Storm Water BMP Technical Manual and/or permit application for each specific BMP. The
inspection will cover physical conditions, available water quality storage capacity, and the operational
condition of key BMP elements but is not limited to these items. Noted deficiencies and recommended
corrective actions will be included in an inspection report. If deficiencies are found during the inspection,
the owner of the BMP will be notified by the City of Auburn and will be required to take all necessary
measures to correct such deficiencies. If the owner fails to correct the deficiencies within the allowed
time period, as specified in the notification letter, the City of Auburn will undertake the work and collect
from the owner using lien rights if necessary.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 162-11
Post Construction Storm Water Control
CHAPTER 162
162.008 MONITORING, MAINTENANCE, AND REPAIR OF STORM WATER FACILITIES MONITORING
REQUIREMENTS
The City of Auburn may require monitoring of the discharge from a BMP if
Illicit Discharges to the BMP have been detected;
Maintenance problems have been noted; and/or
Complaints have been received from City residents
Monitoring required may include the following:
Routine visual monitoring of dry weather flows;
Routine visual monitoring of premises for spills or pollutant discharges;
A log of monitoring dates, potential pollution sources noted above, and mitigation measures taken;
and/or
Laboratory analyses for pollutants, if determined to be necessary.
Required monitoring may be discontinued after conditions requiring monitoring no longer exist and the
City of Auburn has been provided written notice prior to cessation. The required activity may not cease
if written notice to continue is issued by the City of Auburn.
• Maintenance Easement
Prior to the issuance of any permit that has a BMP as one of the requirements of the permit, the
applicant or owner of the site must execute a maintenance easement agreement that shall be binding on
all subsequent owners of land served by the BMP. The agreement shall provide for access to the BMP
at reasonable times for periodic inspection by the City of Auburn, or their designated representative, to
ensure that the BMP is maintained in proper working condition to meet design standards and any other
provisions established by this ordinance. The easement agreement shall be recorded by the City of
Auburn in the land records.
• Maintenance Covenants
Maintenance of all storm water BMPs shall be ensured through the creation of a formal maintenance
covenant that must be approved by the City of Auburn and recorded into the land record prior to final
plan approval. As part of the covenant, a schedule shall be developed for when and how often
maintenance will occur to ensure proper function of the BMP.
The covenant shall also include plans for periodic inspections to ensure proper performance of the BMP
between scheduled cleanouts, any and all maintenance easements required to access and inspect the
storm water BMPs, and to perform routine maintenance as necessary to ensure proper functioning.
The City of Auburn, in lieu of a maintenance covenant, may accept dedication of any existing or future
storm water BMP for maintenance, provided such BMP meets all the requirements of this Ordinance and
includes adequate and perpetual access and sufficient area, by easement or otherwise, for inspection
and regular maintenance.
• Inspection of Storm Water BMPs
Inspection programs may be established on any reasonable basis, including but not limited to: routine
inspections; random inspections; inspections based upon complaints or other notice of possible
infractions of this Ordinance. All storm water management BMPs must undergo, at the minimum, an
annual inspection to document maintenance and repair needs and ensure compliance with the
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 162-12
Post Construction Storm Water Control
CHAPTER 162
requirements of this Ordinance and accomplishment of its purposes. Inspections may include, but are
not limited to: reviewing maintenance and repair records; sampling discharges, surface water,
groundwater, and material or water in BMPs; and evaluating the condition of storm water BMPs.
Any maintenance needs found must be addressed in a timely manner, as determined by the City of
Auburn, and the inspection and maintenance requirement may be increased as deemed necessary to
ensure proper functioning of the storm water BMP.
• Right-of-Entry for Inspection
When any new storm water BMP is installed on private property, or when any new connection is made
between private property and a public storm sewer conveyance, sanitary sewer or combined sewer, the
property owner shall grant to the City of Auburn the right to enter the property at reasonable times and in
a reasonable manner for the purpose of inspection. This includes the right to enter a property when it
has a reasonable basis to believe that an infraction of this ordinance is occurring or has occurred, and to
enter when necessary for abatement of a public nuisance or correction of an infraction of this ordinance.
• Records of Installation and Maintenance Activities
Parties responsible for the operation and maintenance of storm water BMPs shall make records of the
installation and of all maintenance and repairs, and shall retain the records for at least 5 (five) years.
These records shall be made available to the City of Auburn during the inspection of the BMP and at
other reasonable times upon request.
• Failure to Maintain Practices
If a responsible party fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the maintenance covenant, the City of
Auburn, after reasonable notice, may correct a violation of the design standards or maintenance needs
by performing all necessary work to place the BMP in proper working condition. In the event that the
storm water BMP becomes a danger to public safety or public health, the City of Auburn shall notify the
party responsible for maintenance of the storm water BMP in writing. Upon receipt of that notice, the
responsible person shall have fourteen (14) days to conduct maintenance and repair of the BMP in an
approved manner. After proper notice, the City of Auburn may assess the owner(s) of the BMP for the
cost of repair work and any penalties; and the cost of the work shall be a lien on the property, or
prorated against the beneficial users of the property, and may be placed on the tax bill and collected as
ordinary taxes by the county.
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Auburn Plan Commission
and BZA Fee Schedule
CHAPTER 164
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 164-2
Auburn Plan Commission and BZA Fee Schedule
CHAPTER 164
Table of Contents
164.10 FEE SCHEDULE
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 164-3
Auburn Plan Commission and BZA Fee Schedule
CHAPTER 164
164.10 FEE SCHEDULE
Applications filed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter requiring Plan Commission or Board of
Zoning Appeals action shall be accompanied by the filing fees specified by the fee schedule below.
Fees shall be waived for work to be completed by or on the behalf of any unit of government.
(Ord. 2014-02 passed 02.18.14)
Advisory Plan Commission Fees
1. Development Plan Petition
a. Developmen Plan $350.00
b. Development Plan (Amended) $250.00
c. Parking Lot Only Development Plan $40.00
2. Subdivision of Land
a. Primary Plat
i. First Lot $250.00
ii. Each Additional Lot Plus $20 for each Additional Lot
b. Secondary Plat $200.00
c. Plat Amendment $200.00
d. Replat $200.00
e. Plat Vacation $200.00
3. Zoning Map Amendment
a. Zoning $100.00
b. Rezoning $100.00
4. Special Meeting Request $600.00
Board of Zoning Appeals Fees
1. Special Exception Use $200.00
2. Use Variance $200.00
3. Development Standards Variance $100.00
4. Administrative Appeals $200.00
5. Special Meeting Request $400.00
Other Permits and Fees
1. Improvement Location Permit
a. Residential $25.00
b. Non-Residential $50.00
c. With a Building Permit No Fee
d. Accessory Structures Under
200 Square Feet in Size No Fee
Fence No Fee
2. Temporary Improvement Location Permit
a. Temporary Sign No Fee
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 164-4
Auburn Plan Commission and BZA Fee Schedule
CHAPTER 164
b. Residential $25.00
c. Non-Residential $50.00
3. Zoning Verification Letter $25.00
4. Miscellaneous Permits / Application
a. All Other Miscellaneous $40.00
Permits / Applications
(Ord. 2019-22 passed 12.03.19)
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Auburn Building Code
Fee Schedule
CHAPTER 163
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 163-2
Auburn Building Code Fee Schedule
CHAPTER 163
Table of Contents
163.10 FEES
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 163-3
Auburn Building Code Fee Schedule
CHAPTER 163
163.10 FEES
The following fees shall be paid to the city prior to issuance of a site improvement permit. Except as noted,
fees are assessed on a per-structure basis and the intended use. Fees shall be waived for work to be
completed by or on the behalf of any unit of government.
Residential uses
1. New construction of site-built dwellings and accessory structures, including basements,
attached or detached garages, carports, decks, porches, balconies and exterior stairs (note:
detached residential accessory buildings that are single-story, less than 120 square feet in floor
area, and less than 12 feet in height at the highest point, are exempt from permitting
requirements):
a. $.06 per square foot of gross floor area.
b. $35 minimum, $600 maximum.
2. Installation of manufactured structures for only residential use:
a. One or two-family residential, $75.
b. Multi-family residential:
i. $30 per individual module as delivered to the site for installation.
ii. $90 minimum.
3. Remodeling or alteration, site-built or manufactured structure:
a. $.06 per square foot of gross floor area to be remodeled or altered.
b. $35 minimum, $600 maximum.
Commercial, industrial and agricultural uses
1. New construction of site-built primary and accessory buildings, including basements, attached
or detached garages, carports, decks, porches, balconies and exterior stairs:
a. $.06 per square foot of gross floor area.
b. $35 minimum.
2. Installation of manufactured structure for all except residential use:
a. $35 per individual module as delivered to the site for installation.
b. $90 minimum.
3. Remodeling or alteration of site-built or manufactured structure:
a. $.06 per square foot of gross floor area to be remodeled or altered.
b. $35 minimum.
4. Signs subject to a Class 1 construction design release, $30.
Miscellaneous uses or work (fees assessed in addition to other fees in this schedule).
1. Electrical service tap:
a. Permanent, new, or replacement service, $25.
b. Temporary service, $25.
2. Electrical premise wiring:
a. One-family and two-family dwelling, new construction, remodeling or alteration:
i. $25 per dwelling unit.
ii. $25 per accessory structure.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 163-4
Auburn Building Code Fee Schedule
CHAPTER 163
b. Multi-family dwelling and hotel/motel, new construction, remodeling or alteration:
i. $12 per dwelling unit, hotel/motel room, or hotel/motel suite.
ii. $300 maximum.
iii. Accessory structures, $.02 per square foot of gross floor area.
c. Commercial and industrial, primary and accessory buildings:
i. New construction, $.02 per square foot of gross floor area.
ii. Remodeling or alteration, $.02 per square foot of affected gross floor area.
iii. $40 minimum, $200 maximum.
d. Sign wiring, new or replacement, 1-5 signs per site on one permit, $30.
3. Plumbing: drain, waste and vent (DWV), potable water or non-potable water:
a. New construction or addition, $.02 per square foot of gross floor area.
b. Remodeling or alteration, $.02 per square foot of gross floor area in the room, floor, or other
area affected.
c. Residential, $30 $ minimum, $100 maximum.
d. Commercial and Industrial $40 minimum, $200 maximum.
4. Fire suppression system, wet or dry, new, alteration or replacement:
a. $1 per sprinkler head.
b. $40 minimum, $150 maximum.
5. Permanent swimming pool, $75.
6. Foundation (only assessed if a foundation permit was issued prior to issuing a full site
improvement permit):
a. One-family and two-family residential, $40.
b. Multi-family residential, commercial and industrial, $75.
7. Balcony, deck, porch, or exterior stairs, or other exterior above-grade floor system, $25.
8. Reinspection, $40.
9. Permit renewal, $30.
10. Conditional certificate of occupancy, $30.
11. All other, $40.
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Code of Ordinances
CITY OF AUBURN
Demolition Permit
Procedures
CHAPTER 165
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 165-2
Demolition Permit Procedures
CHAPTER 165
Table of Contents
165.01 PERMIT REQUIRED
165.02 DEFINITIONS
165.03 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT
165.04 INSPECTION OF PROPERTY
165.05 ENFORCEMENT AND FINAL INSPECTION
165.06 PENALTY
165.07 FEES
165.08 DEMOLITION PERMIT REQUIREMENT CHECKLIST
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 165-3
Demolition Permit Procedures
CHAPTER 165
165.01 PERMIT REQUIRED
It shall be unlawful to demolish any primary building or structure, or any accessory structure built on a
foundation over three hundred and twenty (320) square feet in size, within the Auburn Corporate Limits
without first securing a demolition permit.
Such permit shall be provided by the Administrator/Zoning Administrator of the Department of
Building, Planning and Development, and shall contain information regarding the location of the
building or structure, the date when demolition is to commence and the approximate duration of the
permit.
The Administrator/Zoning Administrator or the applicant shall notify other parties that may be
affected by the proposed demolition (utilities, property owners, governmental entities, etc.) as they
deem necessary before the start of the demolition.
165.02 DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following words and definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
• Demolition
The razing, tearing down, or removal of all or part of a building; the removal or outer facing of a building
but leaving a skeleton or structural frame; or the removal of an upper story or stories of a building.
• Building
Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy.
• Structure
Anything constructed or created which provides location in or on the ground or attached to something
having a location in or on the ground.
• Accessory Structure
A structure that is subordinate to a primary structure in area, intent, and/or purpose; contributes to the
comfort, convenience, or necessity of the occupants of the primary structure; does not alter or change
the character of the property; and is located on the same lot as the primary structure.
• Demolition Permit Requirement Checklist
A checklist developed by the Department of Building, Planning and Development that may be changed
from time to time to ensure a safe and complete demolition and one that meets the requirements of the
this Chapter.
• Liability Insurance
The contractor shall, as a prerequisite to obtaining a demolition permit, obtain and thereafter maintain
such liability insurance as will protect the contractor and the City from the claims set forth below which
may arise out of, or result from, the contractor’s operation under this permit, whether such operations be
by the contractor(s) or by subcontractor(s) or by anyone directly or indirectly employed by any of them,
or by anyone for whose acts any of them may be liable.
165.03 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT
The Administrator/Zoning Administrator may issue a demolition permit upon submittal of an appropriate
application in compliance with the Permit Application Process described below.
Permit Application Process.
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 165-4
Demolition Permit Procedures
CHAPTER 165
1. Applicant must complete an application in writing on a form furnished by the Department of
Building, Planning and Development.
2. Applicant must provide the following information to apply for the demolition permit:
a. A description of the building or structure to be demolished.
b. The location of the building or structure to be demolished.
c. Proof of ownership by the applicant of the building or structure to be demolished in the form
of a title deed showing the legal description, court order conveying real estate, or other
evidence of title accepted in the State of Indiana to prove ownership such as a recent
property tax ill, or property tax receipt.
d. If the applicant is not the owner, a signed affidavit by the owner is required giving
permission to demolish the building or structure.
e. Documentation of liability insurance as defined on the “Demolition Permit Requirement
Checklist”.
f. Estimated Start and Completion Dates.
g. Applicant must show proof that notification to all utilities were given to ensure disconnection
of the utilities prior to demolition.
h. Applicant must agree to address all appropriate items as defined by the
Administrator/Zoning Administrator in the “Demolition Permit Requirement Checklist”.
165.04 INSPECTION OF PROPERTY
Prior to issuing a Demolition Permit: The Administrator/Zoning Administrator shall inspect the
property with the property owner or a designated representative, to ensure that the property can be
safely prepared for demolition, protected from the public, and provided adequate access around the
site as possible during demolition.
During Demolition:
1. Demolition shall be performed in a competent manner and with the least amount of noise and/or
dust as possible. Care shall be taken to protect neighboring structures. Adequate protection
shall be provided to prevent injury to any city or public utility or pertinence. It shall be the duty of
all persons working on or responsible for such demolition to see that the demolition site is
adequately secured to protect the general public, particularly children, from exposure to any
potential hazards and from accessing the site during demolition.
2. The Administrator/Zoning Administrator may limit the hours during the day in which demolition
activity may occur.
After Demolition: The Administrator/Zoning Administrator will inspect the property after notification
of completion to ensure compliance with the “Demolition Permit Requirement Checklist”.
165.05 ENFORCEMENT AND FINAL INSPECTION
Upon completion of the demolition, the Administrator/Zoning Administrator shall inspect the property
to ensure compliance of this ordinance. If the demolition work is properly completed, the
Administrator/Zoning Administrator shall issue a Completion Certificate to the property owner. This
certificate shall allow the owner to redevelop the property according to the requirements of the City
of Auburn Zoning Ordinance and other applicable regulations, or to use the property as a yard
and/or open space.
If the inspection performed by the city determines that the applicant is not in full compliance with the
requirements of the demolition permit of this Chapter, the Administrator/Zoning Administrator shall
advise the applicant in writing of the terms of the non-compliance. The applicant shall have thirty
City of Auburn—Code of Ordinances Page 165-5
Demolition Permit Procedures
CHAPTER 165
(30) days from the date of the notice to comply and, if full compliance is made, the
Administrator/Zoning Administrator shall issue a Certificate of Completion.
In the event that the applicant fails to comply within thirty (30) days of the notice given, the applicant
shall be in violation of this ordinance and subject to fines as described in Section 6 below.
165.06 PENALTY
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this Chapter shall be fined not less than onehundred
dollars ($100.00), and not more than five-hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense, plus court
costs and other expenses incurred in the enforcement of said Sections. Each day of the existence of any
violation of this Chapter shall be considered a separate offense.
165.07 FEES
Prior to the issuance of a demolition permit, the applicant shall pay a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) to the City of
Auburn. This fee shall be collected by the Department of Building, Planning and Development at the time of
submitting a completed and approved permit application as defined in Section 3 of this Chapter.
165.08 DEMOLITION PERMIT REQUIREMENT CHECKLIST
The Department of Building, Planning and Development shall create a separate document to work in
conjunction with the demolition permit. This document shall be updated from time to time in order to keep up
with ever-changing code requirements. The City Council may have oversight review of the checklist.