CHAPTER 150 -ZONING LAWS -DEFINITIONS 
150.01 Definitions applicable to the Mater Plan. 
150.02 Definitions. 	For the purposes of Chapters 150 through 157 relating to zoning, certain words and phrases shall have the following meanings: 
ACCESSORY BUILDING. A subordinate building or structure that is located on the same lot as a principal building and not used or designed for human occupancy. 
ACCESSORY USE. A subordinate use that relates to the same lot as a primary use and is a use other than human occupancy, except as specified herein. 
ADVERTISING STRUCTURE. Any notice or advertisement, pictorial or otherwise, and all such structures used as an outdoor display, regardless of size and shape, for the purposes of making anything known, the origin or place of sale of which is not on the property with such advertising structures. 
AGRICULTURAL BUILDING. A structure utilized for the conduct of farming operations but it does not include a dwelling. 
AIRCRAFT. Any contrivance, now known or hereinafter invented, for use or designed for navigation of or flight in the air or outer space, including missiles. 
AIRPORT. Any area which is used or intended to be used for the taking off and landing of aircraft, including helicopters, and any appurtenant areas which are used or intended to be used for airport buildings or facilities, including open spaces, taxiways and tie-down areas. 
ALLEY. A right of way, other than a street, road crosswalk, or easement, that provides secondary access for the special accommodation of the abutting property. 
AUTOMATIC CAR WASH. A building, or portion there of, where automobiles are washed with the use of chain conveyor and blower or steam-cleaning device. 
BLOCK. An area that abuts a street and lies between two adjoining streets or barriers such as a railroad right of way or a waterway. In the absence of the preceding, a distance of 300 feet in either direction from the subject site shall constitute a block. 
BOARDING HOUSE. A building, not available to transients, in which meals are regularly provided for compensation for at least 3 but not more than 30 persons. 
BUILDING. A roofed structure for the shelter, support, enclosure or protection of persons, animals, or property. 
BUILDING AREA. The horizontal projected area of the building on a lot, excluding open areas or terraces, unenclosed porches not more than one story high, and architectural features that project no more than 2 feet. 
BUILDING LINE. The line that establishes the minimum permitted distance on a lot between the front line of a building and the street right-of-way line. 
BUSINESS. The purchase, sale, or exchange of goods or services, or the maintenance for profit of offices or recreational or amusement enterprises. 
CEMETERY. Land used for the burial of the dead and dedicated for cemetery purposes, including columbarium, crematories, mausoleums and mortuaries when operated in conjunction with and within the boundaries of such premises. 
CLINIC. An establishment in which patients are admitted for medical or dental study or treatment and in which the services of at least 2 physicians, dentists or chiropractors and other medical practitioners are provided. 
CORNER LOT. A lot at the junction of and abutting two intersecting or intercepting streets. 
DETACHED BUILDING. A building that has no structural connection with another building. 
DRIVE-IN RESTAURANT. A food service establishment where food is consumed on the premises outside of fully enclosed buildings or structures. 
DWELLING. A building or part of a building that is used primarily as a place of abode, including mobile home as defined herein, but not including a hotel, motel, lodging house, boarding house, or tourist home or travel trailer; 
a.  Single-Family: A detached building designed  
for or occupied by one family exclusively.  
b.  Two-Family: A detached building designed for or occupied  

by two families. A duplex dwelling has one family unit above the other and a double dwelling has one family unit beside the other. 
c. A multi-family dwelling is a building designed for or occupied by three or more families. 
DWELLING, FARM. One family dwellings, located upon farms and occupied or used by the owner, farm tenant or other persons employed thereon. 
DWELLING UNIT. A dwelling or part of a dwelling used by one family as a place of abode. 
EXPANDO ROOM. An expandable manufactured housing unit. 
FAMILY. One or more persons living as a single 
housekeeping unit, but not including a group occupying a hotel, motel, club, nurses home, dormitory or fraternity or sorority house. 
FARM, CONFINEMENT FEEDING. Any operation involving the production of livestock or fowl or related operations, indoors or outdoors, wherein more than 100 head of livestock or 5,000 fowl are kept within buildings or structures or in paved or unpaved feed lots, wherein 5 square feet or less of feed lot area is provided per laying hen, or 8 square feet or less per hog weighing 225 pounds or less, or 15 square feet or less per lamb or ewe, or 50 square feet or less per sow, or 50 square feet or less per feeder steer, or 100 square feet or less per dairy cow, provided that this definition shall not apply to operations involved with the processing of products of confinement feeding operations. 
FARM GENERAL. An area used for agricultural operations, including truck gardening, forestry, the operation of a tree or plant nursery, or the production of livestock and poultry except as defined under "farm, confinement feeding"; or the processing of farm products produced on the farm by the resident owner or tenant, but it does not include commercial or custom slaughtering. 
FILLING OR SERVICE STATION. Any building, structure, or land used for the dispensing, sale or offering for sale at retail of any automobile fuels, oils or accessories, including lubrication or washing of automobiles and replacement or installation of minor parts and accessories, but not including major repair work such as motor replacement, body and fender repair or spray painting. 
FRONT LINE. With respect to a building, means the line of the face of the building nearest the front lot line. 
FRONT LOT LINE. Except as deed restrictions specify otherwise, 
a. for an interior or through lot, means 
the line marking the boundary between the lot and the abutting street; and 
b. for a corner lot, means the line marking the boundary between the lot and the shorter of the two abutting street segments. 
GARAGE, PRIVATE. A detached accessory building or a portion of a main building on the same lot as a dwelling for the housing of vehicles of the occupants of the dwelling, including carports. 
GARAGE, PUBLIC. Any garage other than a private garage. 
GARAGE, AUTOMOBILE REPAIR. A building other than a private garage used for the care, repair, or equipment of automobiles, or where such vehicles are parked or stored for remuneration, hire or sale. 
GARAGE, TRUCK REPAIR. A building other than a private garage 
used for the care, repair, or equipment of trucks, over 8000 
pounds, or where such vehicles are parked or stored for 
remuneration, hire or sale. 

GROUND FLOOR AREA. The area of a building in square feet as measured in a horizontal plane at the ground floor level within its largest outside dimensions, exclusive of open porches, breezeways, terraces, garages, and exterior stairways, furnace and laundry areas. 
HEIGHT. With respect to a building, means the vertical distance from the lot ground level to the highest point, for a flat roof; to the deck line, for a mansard roof; and to the mean height between eaves and ridges, for a gable, hip, or gambrel roof. 
HOME OCCUPATION. Home Occupation shall mean any use customarily conducted entirely within a dwelling and carried on by an inhabitant thereof, which use is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the structure for dwelling purposes and which use does not change the character thereof and that no accessory building shall be used for such home occupation. In no event shall a barber shop or beauty shop or similar occupation be construed as a home occupation. Such home occupations may include: 
a. 	Consultive professional occupations, whose function is one 
of rendering a service and does not involve the dispensation of goods or products. 
b. 	The selling or otherwise disposing of agricultural services 
and products produced on the premises . 
c. 	Secondary business offices, where an agricultural 
operation on the premises requires such office . 
d. 	
The giving of music lessons and similar occupations. 

e. 	
The home office of a salesman, when all sales are done by written order with no commodities or displays on the premises. 

f. 	
Drafting, designing and the like, using only the normal drafting equipment. 


The following criteria shall apply for the evaluation of a "Home Occupation": 
a. 	
There shall be no employment of help other than the one member of the resident family. 

b. 	
There shall be no use of material or mechanical equipment 


not recognized as being part of normal household or hobby uses, except in the "AG" District. 
c. There shall be no sales of products or services not produced on the premises. 
d.  The use shall not generate pedestrian or vehicular traffic  
beyond that normal to the district in which it is located.  
e.  It shall not involve the use of commercial vehicles for  

delivery of materials to or from the premises, other than a vehicle not to exceed one (1) ton, owned by the operator of such home occupations, which shall be stored in an entirely enclosed garage. 
f. 	No excessive or unsightly storage of materials or supplies, 
indoor or outdoor, for purposes other than those permitted in the district. 
g. 
It shall not involve the use of signs or structures other than those permitted in the district of which it is a part. 

h. 
Not more than one (1) room in the dwelling shall be employed for the home occupation. 

i. 
No building or space outside of the main building shall be used for home occupational purposes except for agricultural uses. 

j. 	
In no way shall the appearance of the structure be so 


altered or the conduct of the occupation within the structure be such that the structure may be reasonably recognized as serving a non residential use (either by color, materials or construction, lighting, signs, sounds or noises, vibrations, etc.) 
k. 	There shall be no use of utilities or community facilities beyond that normal to the use of the property for residential or agricultural purposes as defined in the 
district. 
INDUSTRIAL USE, GENERAL. Manufacturing, processing, extraction, heavy repairing, dismantling, storage, or disposal of equipment, raw materials, manufactured products or wastes, in which operations, other than transportation, may be performed in either open or closed areas. 
INDUSTRIAL USE, LIGHT. Manufacturing, processing, extraction, heavy repairing, dismantling, storage, or disposal of equipment, raw materials, manufactured products or wastes, in which all operations, other than transportation, are performed entirely within enclosed buildings and for which all loading and unloading facilities are enclosed. 
INTERIOR LOT. A lot other than a corner lot or a through lot. 
JUNK YARD. A place, usually outdoors, where waste or discarded used property other than organic matter is accumulated and/or stored and is or may be salvaged for re-use or resale, including but not limited to, one or more unlicensed or inoperable motor vehicles, farm machinery or equipment of any kind. 
KENNEL. A place primarily for keeping 4 or more dogs, or other small animals, that are ordinarily kept as pets and are at least 4 months old. 
LOCAL STREET. A street designed primarily to provide access to abutting properties. 
LODGING HOUSE. A building, not available to transients, in which lodgings are regularly provided for compensation for at least 3 but not more than 30 persons. 
LOT. A parcel, tract or area of land accessible by means of a street or place, abutting upon a street or place for at least sixty (60) percent of the lot width prescribed for the District in which the lot is located. It may be a single parcel separately described in a deed or plat which is recorded in the office of the County Recorder, or it may include parts of, or a combination of such parcels which adjacent to one another and used as one. In determining lot area and boundary lines no part thereof within the limits of a street shall be included. 
LOT COVERAGE. The percentage of the lot area that is represented by the building area. 
LOT GROUND LEVEL: 
a.  For a building having walls abutting (that is, generally parallel to and not more than 5 feet from) one street only, means the elevation of the sidewalk at the center of the wall abutting the street;  
b.  For a building having walls abutting more than one street, means the average of the elevations of the sidewalk at the centers of all walls that face streets; and  
c.  For a building having no wall abutting a street, means the average level of the ground adjacent to the exterior walls of  

the building. 
LOT WIDTH. The distance between the side lot lines as measured on the building line. 
MANUFACTURED HOME. "Manufactured home" means a dwelling unit, designed and built in a factory, which bears a seal certifying that it was built in compliance with the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Code. More specifically: 
a. 	
Was constructed after January 1, 1981; and, 

b. 	
Has more than nine hundred and fifty (950) square feet of occupied space and is composed of more than one(1) section; and, 

c. 	
Is placed onto a permanent underfloor foundation in accordance with approved installation standards, 

d. 	
Is placed into a permanent perimeter enclosure, in accordance with approved installation standards, 

e. 	
Has wheels, axles, and hitch mechanisms removed; and, 

f. 	
Has siding material of a type customarily used on site constructed homes, 

g. 	
Has roofing material of a type customarily used on site constructed home; Subject to the following specifications: 


Installation, Siding and Roofing Standards for Manufactured Homes, 
1.Permanent perimeter enclosure. A manufactured home, must be set onto an excavated area with crawl space walls or basement walls constructed in accordance with the terms of the One and Two Family Dwelling Code. The space between the floor joists of the homes and the excavated under-floor grade shall be completely enclosed with the permanent perimeter enclosure, except for required openings. 
2.Support system (foundation). All load-bearing foundations shall be installed in conformance with the regulations in the One and Two Family Dwelling Code and with the manufactures installation specifications. 
(a) 	
Siding Standards -The following siding materials are approved for usage on manufactured homes, 

(1) 	
Residential horizontal aluminum lap siding. 

(2) 	
Residential horizontal vinyl lap siding. 

(3) 	
Cedar or other wood siding. 

(4) 	
Wood grain, weather resistant, press board siding. 

(5) 	
Stucco siding. 

(6) 	
Brick or stone siding. 



(b) 	
Roofing Standards -The following material are approved for usage on manufactured homes, 

(1) 	
Asbestos shingles on a roof pitched according to the design specifications of the shingles. 

(2) 	
Fiberglass shingles on a roof pitched according to the designed specification of the shingles. 

(3) 	
Shake shingles on a roof pitched according to the designed specification of the shingles. 

(4) 	
Asphalt shingles on a roof pitched according to the designed specification of the shingles. 

(5) 	
Slate materials on a roof pitched according to the designed specification of the shingles. 

(6) 	
Tile materials on a roof pitched according to the designed specification of the shingles. 




MANUFACTURED HOUSING CONSTRUCTION AND SAFETY STANDARDS CODE. Title IV of the 1974 Housing and Community Development Act (42 U.S.C. 5401 ct scq), as amended (previously known as the federal Mobile Home Construction and Safety Act), rules and regulations adopted thereunder, which include H.U.D. approved information supplied by the home manufacturer, and regulations and interpretations of said code by the Indiana Administrative Building Council. 
MINERAL EXTRACTION. (a) mining or quarrying, and (b) removal, of earth materials. 
MOBILE HOME. "Mobile home" means any vehicle or portable structure designed for long term occupancy, containing sleeping accommodations, a flush toilet, a bathtub or shower, kitchen facilities, and plumbing and electrical connections providing for attachment to outside systems; designed to be transported after fabrication on its own wheels, flatbed truck, or other trailer or detachable wheels; which, when arriving at the site where it is to be occupied as a complete dwelling unit, including major appliances, and ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operation, is located on foundation supports, and is connected to external utilities and electrical system. Mobile home does not include modular homes or manufactured home. 
MOBILE HOME LOT. "Mobile home lot" means a designated site within a mobile home park for the exclusive use of the occupants. 
MOBILE HOME PARK. An area of land on which 2 or more mobile homes are regularly accommodated with or without charge, including any building or other structure, fixture, or equipment that is used or intended to be used in providing that accommodation. 
NONCONFORMING USE. An existing use of land or building which fails to comply with the requirements set forth in this ordinance applicable to the District in which such use is located at the time of the adoption of this ordinance or any amendments hereto. 
ONE AND TWO FAMILY DWELLING CODE, INDIANA. The mandatory state wide building code adopted by the Indiana Administrative Building Council for one and two family residential dwellings. 
OPEN USE. The use of a lot without a building, or a use for which a building with a floor area no larger than 5 per cent of the lot area is only incidental. 
PERSON. Includes a corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization, or any other group that acts as a unit. 
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT. An area planned for one or more uses as an integrated and harmonious unit displaying desirable and fitting site design characteristics, the use requirements of this ordinance being generally applicable to the area as a whole rather than to the individual components. 
PLAT. A map or chart that shows a division of land and is intended to be filed for record. 
PRINCIPAL BUILDING. A building in which the principal use of the lot on which it is located is conducted, including a building that is attached to such a building in a substantial way, such as by a roof (with respect to residential uses, it means the main dwelling). 
PRIVATE SCHOOL. A school other than a public school. 
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE. An office used by members of a recognized profession such as architects, artists, dentists, engineers, lawyers, musicians, physicians and surgeons. 
PUBLIC CAMP. An area of land used or designed to be used to accommodate 2 or more camping parties, including cabins, tents, travel trailers, or other camping outfits, but not including a travel trailer park. 
PUBLIC LAW 360, ACTS OF 1971. Enabling legislation requiring the Indiana Administrative Building Council to adopt rules and regulations for the construction, repair or maintenance of one or two family residential dwellings. 
PUBLIC STREET. A street established for or dedicated to the public use. 
REAR LOT LINE. The lot line that is opposite the front lot line and farthest from it, except that for a triangular or other irregularly-shaped lot it means the line 10 feet long, parallel to the front lot line, and wholly within the lot, that is farthest from the front lot line. 
SCHOOL, PUBLIC. An institution conducting regular academic instruction at kindergarten, elementary and secondary levels. 
SIDE LOT LINE. A lot boundary line other than a front or rear lot line. 
SIGN. Any notice or advertisement, pictorial or otherwise, used as an outdoor display for the purpose of advertising the property or the establishment or enterprise, including goods and services, upon which the sign is exhibited. 
STREET, ARTERIAL Streets that carry traffic in and out of town and to the surrounding areas. 
STREET, COLLECTOR Streets which consolidate and direct local traffic to arterial streets. 
STREET, LOCAL Streets which provide access to adjoining properties in residential or local business areas. 
STRUCTURAL CHANGE. A substantial change, or repair, excluding normal and usual repair, in a supporting member of a building, such as a bearing wall or partition, column, beam, or girder, or in an exterior wall or the roof. 
STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected that requires 
location on or in the ground or attachment to something having a location on or in the ground. 
THROUGH LOT. A lot fronting on two parallel or approximately parallel streets and includes lots fronting on both a street and a watercourse or lake. 
TOURIST HOME. A building in which not more than 5 guest rooms are used to provide or offer overnight accommodations to transient guests for compensation. 
TRADE OR BUSINESS SCHOOL. A secretarial or business school or college when not publicly owned or not owned or conducted by or under the sponsorship of a religious, charitable or nonprofit organization; or a school conducted as a commercial enterprise for teaching instrumental music, dancing, barbering, hair dressing, or drafting or for teaching industrial or technical art. 
TRAVEL TRAILER. A vehicle or other portable structure 30 feet or less in length that is designed to move on the highway and designed or used as a dwelling. 
TRAVEL TRAILER PARK. An area of land on which 2 or more travel trailers are regularly, accommodated with or without charge, including any building or structure, fixture, or equipment that is used or intended to be used in connection with providing that accommodation. 
TRUCK SERVICE CENTER. An occupancy which provides especially for the servicing of trucks, with incidental operations similar to those permitted for "Automobile Service Station". 
USE. The employment or occupation of a building, structure or land for a person's service, benefit or enjoyment. 
VISION CLEARANCE ON CORNER LOTS. A triangular space at the street corner of a corner lot, free from any kind of obstruction to vision between the heights of 3 and 12 feet above established grade, determined by a diagonal line connecting two points measured 15 feet equidistant from the street corner along each property line. 
YARD. A space on the same lot with a principal building that is open and unobstructed by structures except as otherwise authorized by this ordinance. 
YARD, FRONT. A yard extending across the full width of the lot; 
unoccupied other than by steps, walks, terraces, driveways, lamp posts and other similar structures, the depth of which is the least distance between the nearest street right-of-way and the front line of the building. 
YARD, REAR. A yard that extends across the full width of a lot and is bounded on the rear by the rear lot line, and the depth of which is the least distance between the rear lot line, and the rear of the principal building. 
YARD, SIDE. A yard, between the principal building and the adjacent side lot line, that extends from the front yard, or street right-of-way where there is no front yard, to the rear yard, and the width of which is the least distance between the side lot line and the adjacent side of the building. 
150.03. Specific Definitions. 
1. 
BOARD The Board of Zoning Appeals of the Town of Bremen, Indiana. 

2. 
COMMISSION. The Town of Bremen Plan Commission. 

3. 
COUNTY The County of Marshall, Indiana. 

4. 
SPECIAL EXCEPTION. The authorization of a use designated as being permitted in the district concerned if it meets special conditions, and upon application, is specifically authorized by the Board. 

5. 
TOWN. The Town of Bremen, Indiana. 

6. 
TOWN COUNCIL. The Council of the Town of Bremen, Indiana. 

7. 
VARIANCE. A modification of the specific requirements of this Ordinance granted by the Board in accordance with the terms of this Ordinance for the purpose of assuring that no property, because of special circumstances applicable to it, shall be deprived of privileges commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same vicinity and District. 

8. 
ZONE MAP. The two maps entitled "Bremen, Indiana, Zone Map" and "Bremen, Indiana, Jurisdictional Area, Zone Map", as may be applicable and, any amendments thereto. 


150.11 ACCESSORY USES. Accessory uses such as the following are permitted in all districts, and with the exception of "Buildings" may be installed in any required yard. Bird baths and bird houses Buildings (such as private garages, studios and tool sheds) Curbs Driveways Fences and hedges Lamp posts Mail boxes Names plates Parking spaces Utility installations for local service (such as poles, lines, hydrants and telephone booths) Retaining walls Trees, shrubs, plants and flowers Walks. 
150.12 SETBACKS. Accessory Buildings In Residential Districts. If an interior lot abuts a corner lot or alley separating them and the front yards of the two lots are perpendicular to each other, an accessory building on the rear lot line of the corner lot may be located no closer to the street abutting the interior lot than the principal building on the interior lot, but no closer than 5 feet. 
150.13 SETBACKS: Vision Clearance At Intersections. At the intersection corner of each corner lot, the triangular space determined by the two lot lines at that corner and by a diagonal line connecting the two points on those lot lines that are 15 feet respectively from the corner shall be kept free of any obstruction to vision between the heights of 3 and 13 feet above the established 

150.14 RESTRICTIONS ALONG STREAMS 
a. 	No structure other than a fence may be erected and, if erected in violation of this section, no such 
structure may be used, if the location of the structure is 
within 75 feet of the meander, or high-water, line of any 
stream shown on the Zone Map. 

b. Within the areas covered by the restrictions imposed by 
sub-section A, no use is permitted other than the 
following, and upon application for an improvement 
location permit under Section 22.0; 

(1)Agricultural uses. (3)Forestry. 
(2)Public utilities (4)Recreation. 
Such application for an improvement location permit shall be accompanied by a letter from the County Drainage Board stating that the proposed use is in accord with the provisions of the Indiana Drainage Code (Acts 1965, Chapter 305). 
150.15 Restrictions Along Limited Access Highways. 	No structure other than a fence or accessory use as defined hereinabove excluding "buildings" may be erected, and if erected in violation of this section, no such structure may be used if the location of the structure is within one hundred feet (100') of a limited access highway. 
150.16. MOBILE HOMES 
a. 
Permanent Occupancy. Mobile homes may be permanently occupied as residences provided continuous permanent concrete, brick or stone foundation supports the home and any additions thereto; and wheels and axles are removed; and the mobile home is located in an area that is an approved mobile home park under this Code. 

b. 
Non-residential Occupancy. Mobile homes, trailers or 
vans may be utilized as contractors offices, watchmans' 
shelters, or tool or equipment storage only on the site and 
only during the period of construction of improvement 
projects. 


c. 
All requirements of this and other ordinances of the 
County with respect to water supply and sanitary waste 
disposal will be met and a letter from the County Health 
Officer so stating accompanies the application for an 
improvement location permit for this use. 


d. 
Storage of Travel Trailers and Boats. No travel trailers or boats shall be stored or parked in any residential district within the Front Yard or Side Yard. 



150.17 MISCELLANEOUS RESIDENTIAL RESTRICTIONS: 
1. 
An accessory building may not be erected before the principal building, except on a farm; and 

2. 
In the case of a through lot, the area at each end of the lot 

between the setback line and the middle of the street shall be treated as if it were part of the front yard. 

3. 
On corner and reversed corner lot, the side yard setback 

shall be the same as the front yard setback on adjoining lots. 

4. 
Where 25% or more of the lots in a block are occupied by 

buildings, the average setbacks of such buildings determines the dimensions of the front yard in the block, however, if there is no other building within 330 feet of the proposed building in either direction, than the standard setback for the District shall apply. 

5. 
Front yard or building setback lines established in recorded subdivisions establish the dimension of front yards in such subdivisions, except when such building setback lines may be less restrictive as provided in the applicable District. 

6. 
The depth to width ratio of the usable area of a lot shall not be greater than 3 to 1. 


150.18 WATER POLLUTION No authorization of a use under this ordinance includes the authority to discharge liquid or solid wastes into public waters except as permitted under State and Federal Law. Plans and specifications for proposed sewage and other waste treatment and disposal facilities must be approved by appropriate state agency. 

150.19 STANDARDS FOR MANUFACTURED HOMES. 
a. PERMITTED PLACEMENT. The establishment, location, and use of manufactured homes as scattered site residences shall be permitted in any zone permitting installation of a dwelling unit subject to requirements and limitations applying generally to such residential use in the district and provided such homes shall meet the following requirements and limitations: 
1. The home shall meet all requirements applicable to 
single-family dwellings and possess all necessary improvement location, building and occupancy permits and other certifications required by the Code; 
2. The home shall be larger than 950 square feet of 
occupied space or meet the minimum square footage requirements for the appropriate zone; 
3. The home shall be attached and anchored to a 
permanent foundation in conformance with the regulations in the Indiana One and Two Family Dwelling Code and with manufacturer's installation and specifications; 
4. The home shall be covered with an exterior 
material customarily used on site build residential dwellings, and such material shall extend over the top of the foundation (or meet the community's site built residential dwelling home standards). 
5. The home shall have a roof composed of a material 
customarily used on site build residential dwellings, such as asbestos, fiberglass, shake, asphalt or tile, which shall be installed onto a surface appropriately pitched for the materials used. 
b. STRUCTURAL ALTERATION. Due to its integral design, any structural alteration or modification of a manufactured or mobile home after it is placed on the site must be approved by the authorized building commissioner of the Town of Bremen. 
CHAPTER 153 PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 
ARTICLE I 
153.01 CONFORMANCE OF USE. 
(A) 
No building, structure or land shall be used, and no building or structure shall be erected, reconstructed, or structurally altered, which is arranged, intended, or designed to be used for any purpose other than a use which is permitted and specified in a district in which such building or structure is located. 

(B) 
All existing buildings and structures, and all buildings and structures hereafter established, shall conform to the standards set forth in this Section and this Ordinance. 

(C) 
No permanent or temporary structures (including fences, sheds, hedges, trees, retaining walls or other obstructions) may be erected on a public or private utility easement, street, alley, or right-of-way. Violation of this Section may result in an Order of Abatement resulting in removal of the structure or building at the cost of the violator. 



153.02 LOCATION OF BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES. 
Except as otherwise provided in this Ordinance, every building shall be constructed or erected upon a lot, or platted parcel of land. 

153.03 PRINCIPAL BUILDING LIMITATIONS. 
No more than one principal building devoted to residential uses shall be located on a lot, except as part of planned multi-family development and other planned projects, approved in accordance with this Ordinance. 

153.04 ACCESSIBILITY TO PROPERTY REQUIREMENT. 
No building, structure or use of land for any purpose may be placed on a lot which does not abut a public street, or an approved private street, which will provide safe and convenient access for servicing, fire protection, and required off-street parking. The exception to this Section is for property used for agricultural purposes, and also as provided for in the following: 
(A) 
Attached multi-family dwellings need not abut a street, provided that all portions of every dwelling unit are within 300 feet of a public or private street that furnishes direct access to the property, and that access to each dwelling unit will be made available either through a public right-of-way or a private street, or vehicular or pedestrian way owned by the individual unit owner in fee or in common ownership. 

(B) 
Driveways in business or commercial, government use, and industrial districts may be used to provide access to uses in any of these districts which are located on lots which do not abut a street. Any such lot, which existed prior to the effective date of this Ordinance, may be used as if it abutted a street, provided that it is served with a driveway built to appropriate standards located on a permanent, recorded easement. 



153.05 MINIMUM LOT AREA AND FRONTAGE. 
Except where provided in this Section, no building or structure shall be erected or 
located on a lot unless such lot conforms with the area regulations of the district 
in which it is located. 
(A) 
All lots in all districts hereinafter created shall have a minimum lot size of 6,000 square feet if the property is served by a community sewage disposal system, and 36,000 square feet if the property is served by an individual sewage disposal system. 

(B) 
All lots in all districts hereinafter created shall have a minimum frontage of sixty (60) feet, if such lot abuts a street. Curved lots and cul-de-sac lots shall conform to the particular district wherein provisions are set forth in this Ordinance for such lots. 

(C) 
Every lot shall conform to the minimum width, depth, and frontage requirements set forth for the district in which such lot is located. 

(D) 
The minimum lot area for each dwelling unit shall be subject to the approval of the Marshall County Health Officer, if not served by community sewer service. 



153.06 GROUND FLOOR AREA. 
The ground floor area requirements for dwellings, as set forth in the districts, 
shall apply. Dwellings shall not be changed except in conformity with this 
ordinance. 

153.07 BUILDING HEIGHT. 
All buildings and structures hereinafter designed, erected or constructed, and existing buildings or structures which may be reconstructed, altered, moved, or enlarged shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height, or shall comply to the height requirements set forth for the district in which the building or structure is located, with the addition of the following: 
(A) 
An agricultural structure may be erected or changed to any height necessary for its operation. 

(B) 
Spires, church steeples, chimneys, cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, scenery lofts, penthouses, stacks, tanks, water towers, transmission towers, utility poles, and necessary mechanical appurtenances (excluding radio and TV, micro wave towers) may be erected or changed to any height that is not otherwise prohibited 



153.08 SETBACK REQUIREMENT. 
(A) 
All buildings and structures hereafter erected or constructed, and all existing buildings hereafter reconstructed, structurally altered, moved or maintained, enlarged, expanded, or otherwise modified shall conform to the setback requirements set forth for the district in which the building or structure is located. 

(B) 
Notwithstanding other provisions of this Section, architectural features such as cornices, eaves, steps, gutters and fire escapes may project up to three (3) feet into any required yard unless it would obstruct driveways which 


may be used for service or emergency vehicles. 

153.09 LOT COVERAGE. 
All buildings hereafter designed, constructed or erected, and any existing building or structure which may be reconstructed, structurally altered, moved or maintained, 
enlarged, expanded or otherwise modified shall not exceed the maximum 
building coverage regulations for the district in which the building or structure is 
located. 

153.10 ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES. 
Accessory buildings and structures, except as otherwise permitted in this Section, shall be subject to the following regulations: 
(A) 
Where the accessory building is structurally attached to the principal building on the lot, it shall be subject to and conform to all the provisions of this Section applicable to principal structures. 

(B) 
Accessory buildings (garages, sheds, etc.) shall not be erected in any yard, except the rear yard, and shall conform to all applicable setback requirements for the district in which the lot is located. 

(C) 
Accessory structures (mailboxes, bird baths, fences and hedges, etc.) may be located in any yard. 

(D) 
An accessory building shall not exceed one story or 15 feet in height. 



153.11 PERMITTED PUBLIC UTILITIES. 
(A) 
The following public utility uses shall be permitted in all districts: poles, cables, wires, conduits, vaults, pipes, mains, and valves for electric, gas, water, sewer, steam and communication systems. All utility buildings and structures shall comply with the applicable zoning district regulations in which they are 

permitted. Such public utility infrastructure shall be located in designated utility easements, or in such locations agreed to by the property owner as to provide service to the property. 

(B) 
The Town may, at the request of the property owner, install underground electric service for a property, however the additional cost that underground service incurs over and above the cost of overhead electric service, shall be paid for by the property owner. 



153.12 VEHICLE PARKING AND LOADING. 
The intent of this Section is to alleviate or prevent congestion of the public street, and so promote the safety and welfare of the public, by establishing minimum requirements for the off-street parking, and loading and unloading of motor vehicles in accordance with the use of which property is put. 

153.13 EXTENT OF CONTROL. 
The off-street parking and loading requirements of this Ordinance shall apply as follows: 
(A) 
All buildings and structures constructed or erected and all land uses 

initiated after the effective date of this Ordinance shall provide necessary off-street parking or loading facilities, and conform to the parking requirements of this Section hereinafter for the use thereof. The exception to this regulation is that a building or structure for which a building permit has been issued prior to the effective date of this Ordinance, but is still in the process of construction, must comply with the parking requirements set forth in the original development plan at the time of issuance of the building permit. 

(B) 
Any existing building or structure which is expanded, enlarged or reconstructed to a larger size or a different configuration shall provide necessary off-street parking for that use, and shall conform to the parking requirements of this Section. 

(C) 
Any nonconforming building, structure or use which is expanded, enlarged or reconstructed to a larger size or a different configuration shall provide the necessary off-street parking for that use, and shall conform to the requirements in this Section. 



153.14 EXISTING PARKING AND LOADING SPACES. 
Accessory off-street parking and loading spaces in existence on the effective date of this ordinance may not be reduced in number unless already exceeding the requirements of this Section for equivalent of new construction, in which event, said space shall not be reduced below the number required herein for such 
equivalent new construction.  
153.15 PARKING REQUIREMENTS TABLE.  
PARKING REQUIREMENTS  
Uses  Required Parking Spaces  
Airport or heliport  1 per 2 employees plus  
1 per 4 public seats  
Artificial lake of 3 acres or more or,  
private swimming pool (not private  
residential)  1 per 2 users  
Automobile or trailer sales area  1 per 1,000 sq. ft. used  
for retailing  
Automobile sales and repair (indoor)  1 per 200 sq. ft of floor  
area  

Banks, business offices, professional 
offices, similar business uses, 
postal stations, telegraph offices, 
and similar service uses 1 per 500 sq. ft. of floor area 
Boarding or lodging house or fraternity, sorority, or student cooperative house 1 per 3 occupants 
Bowling alley 3 per lane plus 1 per 6 Business uses not otherwise listed 
Cemetery or crematory 
Church or temple 
Clinic 
College, university, or trade of business school 
Confinement feeding operation 
Country club or golf course 
Dancing academy 
Department store, retail showroom, apparel shop, flower shop, drugstore, hardware store, stationer, news­dealer, record shop, photo studio, barber shop, beauty shop, reducing salon, restaurant, delicatessen, bakery, grocery, meat market, supermarket, cold-storage locker service (individual), roadside sales stand, electrical appliance shop, radio-TV shop, dressmaker, millinery, tailor and pressing shop, self-service laundry, laundry agency, billiard room, tavern, night club, and similar business uses 
Fairground 
Greenhouse (commercial), facilities for raising or breeding non-farm fowl or animals (commercial), sales barn for livestock resale 
Hospital 
Hotel 
Industrial park spectator seats 
As determined by the Board 
1 per 2 employees plus 1 per 4 seats 
1 per 6 seats in main auditorium 
1 per 2 employees plus 3 per doctor 
1 per 3 students or staff members 
1 per 2 employees 
1 per 2 employees plus 3 pr golf hole 
1 per 200 sq. ft. of floor area 
1 per 125 sq. ft, of floor area 
1 per 200 sq. ft. of principal building area 
1 per 3 employees plus 1 per 125 sq. ft. of sales area 
1 per 4 beds plus 1 per doctor plus 1 per 3 employees plus 1 per hospital vehicle 
1 per 3 employees plus 1 per 2 sleeping rooms 
1 per 2 employees on largest shift 
Industrial uses generally Junk yard Kindergarten or day nurser 
children Mobile home park or travel trailer park 
Mortuary 
Motel Nursing home or home for aged 
Outdoor commercial recreational use 
500 sq. ft. 
Penal or correctional institution 
inmates (capacity) 

Police station or fire station Private club or lodge Private recreational development 
Public camp 
Public library, museum, or municipal or government building 
Public or commercial sewage disposal plant 
Radio or TV tower or station 
Railway right-of-way, railroad operational use headquartered 
Railway station or motor bus station 
Residential use, including farm tenant housing and farm seasonal worker housing 
1 per 3 employees 1 per 2 employees 1 per 2 employees plus 1 per 5 
1 per 2 employees plus 1 per mobile home & travel trailer stand 
1 per 6 seats in main auditorium 
1 per sleeping room 
1 per 7 persons in residence 
1 per 3 employees plus 1 per of use area 
1 per 3 employees plus 1 per 10 
1 per 3 employees on shift 1 per 6 active members 1 per 2 customers or 
members 
1 per camp site plus 1 per cabin 1 per 125 sq. ft. of floor 
area 
1 per employee per shift 1 per employee per shift 1 per 2 employees where 
1 per 10 seats in waiting room plus 1 per 2 employees of connected ratial use 
2 per dwelling unit 
Riding stable  1 per 5,000 sq. ft. of lot  
area  
School  1per 3 staff members plus  
1 per 6 auditorium seats  
Seasonal fishing or hunting lodge  1 per member  
Slaughterhouse  1 per 2 employees  
Stadium or coliseum  3 per 4 employees plus 1  
per 4 seats  
Telephone exchange or public utility  1 per employee at or  
substation  working out of site  
Theater (indoor)  1 per 3 seats  
Theater (outdoor)  1 per 2 employees  
Tourist home  1 per employee plus 1 per  
sleeping accommodation  
Truck freight terminal  1 per 2 employees plus 4  
for customers  
Veterinary hospital for small  1 per 3 animal spaces  
animals or kennel  (cases or pens)  
Warehouse (grain elevator)  1 per 2 employees  
Wholesale produce terminal  1 per 2 employees  
153.16 LOADING REQUIREMENT TABLE.  

1. 	
As used in this section, the term "loading berth" means an off-street, off-alley area designed or used to load goods on, or unload goods from, vehicles. 

2. 	
Business uses, except those that do not receive or transport goods in quantity by truck delivery, shall be provided with loading berths (which, if open, shall be paved with a hard or dust-proof surface), as shown in the following table: 


Gross Floor Area  
Use  (square feet)  Berths  
Retail Stores, Depart­ 3,000 or more but not  
ment Stores, Wholesale  more than 15,000  1  
Establishments, Storage  Each 25,000 or fraction  
Uses, and Other Busi­ thereof more than  
ness Uses  15,000  1 additional  
Office Buildings  100,000 or less  1  
More than 100,000 but  

not more than 335,000 2 Each 200,000 or fraction thereof, more than 
335,000 	1 additional 
3. 	(a) Each of the following uses for which Special Exceptions are provided by Chapter 114, shall be provided with loading berths, as shown in the following table. Loading berths must not face on the bordering street and must be at least as far from the nearest residential use as the number of feet shown. 
Distance 
from Nearest  
Residential  
Use  Berths  
Use (feet)  
Commercial facility for  
raising and breeding  
non-farm fowl and  
animals  1  100  
Commercial greenhouse  15,000 sq. ft. or less -1  50  
Over 15,000 sq. ft.  -2  
Hospital  200 beds or less  -1  50  
More than 200 but  
not more than  
500 beds  -2  
More than 500 beds -3  
Industrial park  same as subsection (c)  100  
Junk yard  2  1320  
Riding stable  1  50  
Stadium or coliseum  2  50  
Wholesale produce  
terminal  Per development plan  100  

(b) 	For the following uses, loading berths, if any, must be at least as far from the nearest residential use as the number of feet respectively shown by the following table: 
Use Distance from Nearest Residential 
Use (feet) 
Airport 	100 
Mineral extraction, borrow pit, topsoil removal, and their storage areas 300 Outdoor commercial recreational enterprise 50 Penal or correctional institution 300 Sales barn for livestock resale 100 Truck freight terminal 100 Warehouse (grain elevator) 100 
(4) 	Industrial uses shall be provided with loading berths, as 
shown in the following table:  
Gross Floor Area of Industrial Use (square feet)  Berths  
15,000 or less More than 15,000 but not more than 40,000 More than 40,000 but not more than 100,000  1  3  2  

Each 40,000 or fraction thereof, more than 100,000 	1 additional 
(5) 	Each loading berth prescribed by this section must provide at least a 12-foot by 45-foot loading space, with a 14-foot height clearance. 

153.17 DESIGNS AND MAINTENANCE. 
(A) 
Parking space -Description. A required off-street parking space shall be an area of not less than one hundred sixty (160) square feet, and not less than nine (9) feet wide by eighteen (18) feet long for 45-degree angled parking. For perpendicular parking the parking space shall not be less than two hundred (200) square feet in area, and not less than ten (10) feet wide by twenty (20) feet long. 

(B) 
Access. Parking facilities and spaces shall be designated with the appropriate means of vehicular access to a street or alley in such a manner as will least interfere with the movement of traffic. 

(C) 
Surfacing. All off-street parking areas shall be pavement, asphalt or concrete, in compliance with municipal standards for those surfaces. 

(D) 
Lighting. Any lighting used to illuminate an off-street parking area shall be so arranged as to reflect the light away from adjoining residential districts. 



153.18 LOCATION OF PARKING AREAS. 
Off-street parking areas shall be located nearest to the entrance of the building that said parking area is to serve: 
(A) 
For one and two-family dwellings, on the same lot as the building they are required to serve. 

(B) 
For multi-family dwellings containing four (4) or more dwelling units on 

the same lot or parcel of land as the building they are required to serve, three hundred (300) feet to the nearest entrance of the principal building being served. 

(C) 
For bed-and-breakfasts and other similar short term lodging, on the same lot as the building being served. 

(D) 
For those uses not specified above, off-street parking shall be provided on the same lot or parcel of land not over three hundred (300) feet from the entrance of the principal building being served. 



153.19 OBSTRUCTIONS OF PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. 
No structure shall be permitted which obstructs or otherwise interferes with a street right-of-way or any other public easement. 

153.20 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS. 
PURPOSE. The intention of this Section is to permit more flexibility in a development through land use controls that foster good environmental design without violating the constitutional requirements of uniform classification and adequate standards; that permit planned developments in accordance with the Master Plan of the Town; and to encourage and allow a variety of building types and arrangements, and to allow the development of land areas so planned, located or situated as to merit and justify consideration of granting certain exceptions to required standards for the zoning district in which it is located. 

153.21 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND CONDITIONS. 
The general requirements for Planned Unit Developments are as follows: 
(A) 
A Planned Unit Development may contain residential, commercial, industrial, professional, of Special Exception as an integral part of the development. 

(B) 
The tract proposed shall consist of one or more contiguous parcels of land compromising an area of four (4) acres or more in size, unless the tract be bounded on all sides by public rights-of-way, public lands, waterways, or less restrictive use districts, in which case it may be smaller than four (4) acres. 

(C) 	
The land involved must be either in one ownership or the subject of an application filed (1) filed jointly by the owners of all property included (including the holder of any written option still in force), or by any 

governmental agency. 

(D) 
The tract must be served directly by streets of appropriate size, function, and capacity as specified in this Ordinance, unless otherwise permitted by the Town Council. 

(E) 
All buildings shall be served by public sewer, water and electric utilities, unless otherwise permitted by the Town Council. 

(F) 	
All utilities shall be placed in a recorded public utility easement. 

(G) 	
All specifications and requirements of this Ordinance apply to the 

Planned Unit Development, except there shall be no minimum lot sizes, no minimum setbacks, no maximum lot coverage, and no minimum lot widths, unless 

(H) 
Upon abandonment of a planned unit development, or upon the expiration of a two (2) year period after authorization during which the development has not been completed, the authorization for it expires. 



153.22 PRELIMINARY DEVELOPMENT PLAN. 
A Planned Unit Development may not be approved under this Section without submission and approval of a development plan which shall include the following: 
(A) 
Legal description 

(B) 
Property boundary lines with dimensions 

(C) 
Scale of not less than 1 inch equals 100 feet 

(D) 
Vicinity map showing surrounding streets 

(E) 
Location, size, height, and setback of proposed buildings 

(F) 
Floor area ratio 

(G) 
Location of parking lots and spaces 

(H) 
Location and width of all streets and sidewalks 

(I) 
Curb cut location and width 

(J) 
Existing curb cut approaches and street intersections 

(K) 
Topographic survey and description of physical features of property 

The Preliminary Plat shall contain the following: 

(A) 
Detailed site plan as specified in Section 152.04 of this Ordinance 

(B) 
Building facade rendering 

(C) 
Proposed property landscape features 

(D) 
All signs, which shall conform to the specifications in this Ordinance 

(E) 	
Location and capacity calculations for storm water removal, sewage disposal, electric usage, water usage 

(F) 
Covenants as may be required by the Commission 

(G) 	
Statement of proposed exceptions to the requirements of the District in which the proposed development is located 



153.23 	PRIVATE STREETS. 
(A) 
Private streets rights-of-way and pavements in planned unit developments shall be constructed to conform to the standards set forth in the "Town of Bremen Construction and Design Standards" Ordinance, and Chapter 156; Subdivision Control Ordinance. 

(B) 
At or near the entrance on a dedicated public street, the applicant or the private organization shall maintain a signpost carrying a sign, having at least an area of fifteen (15) inches by twenty-one (21) inches, on which is printed and clearly legible in at least 2-inch letters the name of the private street and the words "Private Street" and, in at least 1-inch letters, the words "Not Dedicated for Public Use or Maintained by the Public." The material on the sign shall be arranged substantially as follows: 

(NAME OF STREET) 
PRIVATE STREET 
NOT DEDICATED FOR PUBLIC USE 
OR MAINTAINED BY THE PUBLIC 


(C) 
Private streets shall be maintained by the owners, or by the private organization, so that fire, police, health, school, sanitation or other necessary service vehicles and public utility vehicles have adequate access. Adequate access includes an adequate turning area. 



153.24 COVENANTS. 
When required by the Commission, covenants must include at least the following provisions satisfactory to the Commission: 
(A) 
Adequate provision for an organization with direct responsibility to, and control by, the property owners involved to provide for the operation and maintenance of any common facilities jointly shared by the owners. 

(B) 	
A financial guarantee: 


(1) 	that satisfactory maintenance will be provided for any common facilities in accordance with standards prescribed by the property 
owner's organization and set forth in the covenants, and 
(2) that the facilities will be operated and maintained at no expense to the municipality, or any other governmental unit. 

153.25 DETAILED SITE PLAN. 
The purpose of the site plan is to enable the Commission to make a finding that 
the proposed development is in conformity with the intent and provisions of this 
Ordinance, and to guide the Building Commissioner in the issuance of permits. 

153.26 ELEMENTS OF THE SITE PLAN: 
The site plan shall be drawn to scale and shall indicate clearly and with full dimensioning the following information: 
(A) 
The boundaries of the subject property, all existing easements, section lines and property lines, existing streets, buildings, water courses, water­ways and lakes, and other physical features in or adjoining the property. 

(B) 
Location and dimension of all existing and proposed buildings and structures, and the structural features of those improvements including; height, elevation, size, volume, setbacks, screening, landscaping, open space, signs, and outdoor lighting. 

(C) 
Location, dimensions and type of construction of existing and proposed streets, alleys, driveways, curb cuts, entrances and exists, loading and parking areas, numbers of parking and loading spaces, internal circulation patterns, and any permanent utility equipment or infrastructure located on the property. 

(D) 
Evidence of adequate storm water removal through connections to the municipal storm water collection system, or design of an appropriate system of swales, culverts, water retention areas, or any other devices approved by the Engineer of the Town of Bremen to accommodate removal of storm water from the property. 

(E) 
Evidence of appropriate sewage disposal through connections to the municipal sewage disposal system or an individual septic system application approved by the Marshall County Health Department. 

(F) 
Certain elements of the requirements set forth in this Section regarding specific items present in the detailed site plan may be waived at the discretion of the Building Commissioner. 


ARTICLE II -SIGNS 

153.51 FINDINGS: 
The Town Council finds: 
(A) 
The manner of the erection, location, and maintenance of signs affects the public health, safety, morals, and public welfare of the people of this community. 

(B) 
The safety of motorists, cyclists, pedestrians, other users of the public streets, and property is effected by the number, size location, and appearance of signs that are intended to and result in the diversion of the attention of drivers. 

(C) 
The size and location of signs, may, if uncontrolled, constitute an obstacle to effective fire-fighting and the provision of other emergency services. 

(D) 
The construction, erection, and maintenance of signs suspended from or placed on the tops of buildings, walls, or other structures may constitute an direct danger to pedestrian and vehicular traffic below, especially during periods of strong winds. 

(E) 	
Uncontrolled and unlimited signs degrade the aesthetic attractiveness of 

the 	natural manmade attributes of the community and thereby undermine the economic value of tourism, visitation, and permanent economic growth. 

(F) 
Uncontrolled and unlimited signs may result in a roadside clutter that impedes the flow of information from businesses to consumers thereby harming the economic health of the community, and that impedes the flow of information from traffic signs and signals thereby creating hazards to drivers and pedestrians. 

(G) 
It is therefore necessary for the promotion and preservation of the public health, safety, and welfare of the people of this community that the erection, 


construction, location, and maintenance of signs be regulated and controlled. 

153.52 INTENT: 
This Article shall be constructed and implemented to create a comprehensive and balanced system of sign control that accommodates both the need for a well-maintained, safe, and attractive community, and the need for effective business identification, advertising, and communication. It is the intent of this Article, and it shall be interpreted, to promote the health, safety, convenience, aesthetics, and general welfare of the community by controlling signs that are intended to communicate to the public, and to authorize the use of signs that are: 
(A)  Compatible with their surroundings and the historical theme of the Town.  
(B)  Designed, constructed, installed and maintained in a manner that does  
not  endanger public safety or unduly distract motorists.  
(C)  Appropriate to the type of activity to which they pertain.  
(D)  Large enough  to  convey  sufficient  information  about  the  owner  or  

occupants of a particular property, the products or services offered for sale, or the activities advertised, and small enough to satisfy the needs for regulation. 

153.53 NON-COMMERCIAL SIGNS: 
Any Sign allowed under this Article may be used to convey any non-commercial message or expression in lieu of the message specifically permitted under this article. All regulations and restrictions regarding size, location, illumination, configuration, and number shall remain in effect. 

153.54 PERMIT: 
No sign shall be erected until an Improvement Location Permit is issued by the Building Commissioner. 

153.55 SIGNS: 
Certain uses located in properly zoned districts need and have a right to advertise through the use of sign displays. So, it is the intent of this section to encourage creative and imaginative design and use of signs in order to create a more attractive economic and business climate. To ensure that the physical appearance of the community is protected and maintained, it is necessary to regulate the size, location, construction, and manner of the display of signs as set forth in the section. 

153.56 GENERAL PROVISIONS: 
(A) 
All signs, permanent and temporary, shall be constructed, connected, operated, and maintained according to the specifications of the applicable building and electrical codes. 

(B) 
All signs shall be maintained in a good state of repair. 

(C) 
The total area of any embellishments shall not exceed 15 percent of the display area of the sign to which the embellishment is added. 

(D) 
One (1) non-illuminated identification sign on each side of each entrance to subdivisions not exceeding thirty (30) square feet in area and no more than (3) feet in height, to be designed as an integral, architectural feature of the entrance or of the building complex giving only name of subdivision and logo. 

(E) 
One (1) non-illuminated "For Sale" or "For Rent" sign per lot not exceeding six (6) square feet in area nor closer than ten (10) feet to adjacent zoning lots; said "For Sale" or "For Rent" signs permitted in the Subsection shall be placed only on the lot to which signs refer. 



153.57 FREESTANDING SIGNS: 
(A) 	General Provisions -Freestanding Signs 
(1) 	
The sign, pole or standard shall not extend beyond the property line or into the public right-of-way. 

(2) 	
Freestanding signs shall be designed so that all framework for the 


lateral support of the sign shall be contained within the body of the sign or within the structure to which it is attached and shall not be visible. Exposed guy wires, chains, or other connections shall not be made of permanent part of the sign. 
(B) 	Height -Freestanding Sign 
(1) 	The maximum height of freestanding signs located along other than limited-access highways shall vary with the width of the lot on which the sign is located, as follows: 
Lot Width Maximum Height 
0 -50 feet 25 feet 51 -100 feet 35 feet 
(2) Along limited-access highways, the maximum height of freestanding signs shall be 35 feet, subject to approval by the Board of Appeals, provided that: 
(a) 	
Such signs shall identify highway-oriented uses, such as automobile service station, motels, and restaurants, located within 2,000 feet of the center line of the interchange; and 

(b) 
A variance may be granted by the Board of Appeals 


permitting signs in excess of 35 feet where a physical obstruction exists which would otherwise restrict the visibility of the sign, provided that in no case shall the visual height of the sign, as viewed from the highway, exceed 85 feet above the grade of the highway. 
(3) 	Freestanding signs which function as directional signs shall have a 
maximum height of 3 feet. Freestanding signs located within 25 feet of the street pavement shall have a minimum clearance of the (10) feet above the grade of the right-of-way and the lowest point of the sign, except that, for purposes of this Ordinance, decorative pole covers shall not be considered to be part of the sign. 
(C) 	Location -Freestanding Signs 
(1) 
Freestanding signs shall be located a minimum of ten (10) feet from the right-of-way line of other than limited-access highways, provided, 

however, that a setback of five (5) feet may be permitted by the granting of a variance by the Board of Appeals where a physical obstruction exists which would otherwise restrict the visibility of the sign. 

(2) 	
Along limited-access highways, freestanding signs shall be located a minimum of 50 feet from the right-of-way line. 

(3) 	
Freestanding signs which function as directional signs shall be located a minimum of five (5) feet from the right-of-way line. 



153.58 MARQUEE OR CANOPY SIGNS: 
The following provisions shall apply to marquee or canopy signs: 
(A) 
One (1) sign shall be permitted for each entrance to the building or structure to which the sign is attached. 

(B) 
No sign shall extend beyond the outer edge of the marquee or roofed structure. 

(C) 
There shall be at least an eight (8) foot, six (6) inch clearance between the grade of the sidewalk and the lowest point of the sign. 



153.59 PROJECTING SIGNS: 
The following provisions shall apply to projecting signs: 
(A) 
Except as may be provided hereafter, one (1) projecting sign shall be permitted for each ground floor use. If the lineal ground floor use frontage exceeds 200 feet, an additional projecting sign shall be permitted, and for each additional 300 lineal feet, another projecting sign shall be permitted. 

(B) 
Where a use has such frontage on more than one (1) street, there may be one (1) projecting sign for each frontage, provided that only a sign computed for the frontage of a street shall face the street, or there may be one (1) corner projecting sign, which shall be computed on the basis of one-half the frontage of the use on both streets. 

(C) 	
It is the intent of this section to require the use of lateral supports that are 

contained within the framework of the sign or lateral supports that run parallel to the sign frame and chains shall not be permitted for use as a supporting member. 

(D) 
The height of a projecting sign shall not exceed 8 feet above the parapet wall of the building, and the lowest point of the projecting sign shall be not less than 10 feet above the grade. 

(E) 
The projection of projecting signs shall be limited by the more restrictive of the following: 

(1) 	
No projecting sign shall project further than the property line or over 

any 	public sidewalk or right-of-way (except for under canopy signs not to exceed 3 square feet). 

(2) 	
No projecting sign shall project further than one--half the distance from the sign location to the nearest side lot line; or 

(3) 	
The projection of projecting signs shall be limited to 5"3". 




153.60 	ROOF-MOUNT SIGNS: The following provisions shall apply to roof-mounted signs: 
(A) 	
Roof-mount signs shall not be permitted, except where: 

(4) 
The maximum height of roof-mount signs shall be six (6) feet and shall not at its highest point exceed the highest point of the roof itself. 

(5) 
The backs of roof-mount signs shall be concealed by another sign, shall be screened by suitable architectural treatment, or shall be painted to blend with the surroundings and kept so painted. 



(B) 
Signs shall be illuminated by direct or indirect lighting, provided that the beam from an indirect source shall be effectively concealed from view. 


(1)  The supporting members of roof-mounted signs shall appear to be  
free of  any extra bracing, angle irons, guy wires, or cables.  
(2)  Supports shall appear to be an architectural and integral part  
of the building.  
(3)  Supporting columns of round, square, or shaped steel members may  
be  erected if required bracing visible to the public is  
minimized or covered.  


153.61 TEMPORARY SIGNS: 
(A) 	
Temporary mobile signs shall be permitted, provided that: 

(1) 	
There shall not be more than one (1) temporary sign per lot. 

(2) 	
A temporary sign shall not exceed 32 square feet in display area. 

(3) 
Temporary signs shall be for temporary use only, not to exceed 30 days in any calendar year, a 12 month period of time, following the issuance of a temporary sign permit, provided, however, that the holder of a temporary sign permit may apply for a 30-day extension. 

(4) 
Exposed lamps on temporary signs shall be covered with a wire mesh, or similar material, so that an exposed electrical socket cannot be accidentally touched. Lamps shall not exceed 50 watts and shall be of the incandescent type only. 

(5) 	
Flashing arrows and directional indicators shall be prohibited. 



(B) 	
Special Signs: 


Signs of a special nature, such as temporary signs, historical markers, and public service signs, shall be authorized as conditional uses. Other signs, such as governmental signs or public right-of-ways shall be exempt from the sign provisions. 
(1) 
Procedure -Special signs, not covered herein, shall be considered on an individual basis by the Commission, and shall be authorized 

only upon the showing of a special, demonstrated need not provided for elsewhere in the Ordinance, and shall be in the public interest. 

(2) 	
Standards -For Special Signs 

(a) 	
Special Signs -Special event posters, flags, banners, pennants, or bunting shall be permitted for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days, or the length of the promotion. 

Extensions for additional on (1) month periods may be granted upon petition. 

(b) 	
Special Signs for construction projects shall be permitted for a period of time of the proposed construction. Signs must be removed upon completion of the project. 

(c) 
Special event posters, including flags, pennants, or bunting shall be permitted for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days. 



(3) 	
Public Service Signs -Public service and governmental signs on private property shall be allowed if authorized by the ` Commission. 

(4) 	
Historical Markers and Tablets -Historical markers and tablets 


may be displayed on private or public property if approved by the 
Commission. Such signs shall represent an historically significant fact 
or event and shall 
conform in design and size with others or a similar nature. 
(5) 	Traffic Signs -Traffic regulatory, warning, direction, and 
information signs shall be allowed if approved or required by the Commission in Business and Manufacturing Districts. Such signs shall comply with the standard of the Manual on Union Traffic Control Devices of the Federal Highway Administration and shall be compatible with the site. 

153.62 REVOLVING SIGNS: 
Slow-speed (six revolutions per minute) revolving signs shall be permitted, provided that the mechanism required to operate the sign is effectively concealed from view, and further provided that a direct beam of light shall not be said to be revolving. Revolving signs shall be permitted only in the LBD-Local Business District and GB-General Business Districts. 

153.63 PERMITTED SIGNS BY DISTRICT: 
(A) 
Signs permitted in the AG-Agricultural and GU-Government Use Districts are as follows: 

(1) 
Commemorative, historical, and memorial signs, markers and plaques not exceeding six (6) square feet in display area and containing no advertising material thereon. 

(2) 	
Identification signs denoting the name of occupants and/or professions, not exceeding one (1) square foot in display area. 

(3) 	
Public information signs. 

(4) 	
Real estate signs, provided that: 

Such signs shall not exceed seven (7) square feet in display area for residential uses or 32 square feet in display area for non-residential uses. 

(5) 	
Seasonal decorations and displays, provided that such signs 
shall be temporary. 




(B) 
Signs permitted in the R-12, R-8, R-6, and MF Residential Districts and in the residential sections of PUD Developments shall be as follows: 

(1) 	
All signs permitted in sub-section A above. 

(2) 	
Development signs, provided that: 

(a) 	
Such signs shall be displayed on the construction site only for the duration of the construction. 

(b) 	
The maximum display area of such signs shall be 100 square feet. 



(3) 	
Identification signs for real estate developments, provided 
that: 


There shall not be more than one (1) such sign, a maximum of 32 square feet in copy area, or two (2) such signs, a maximum of 16 square feet each in copy area, and containing no advertising materials, except the name and street address of the development, located at each of the principal entrances. 

(4) 	
Institutional bulletins, not exceeding 32 square feet in copy 
area. 




(C) 
Signs permitted in the DD-Downtown Business District shall be as follows: 

(1) 	
All signs permitted in sub-sections A and B above. 

(2) 
Identification signs for permitted uses, provided that the display area of such signs shall not exceed one (1) square foot in area per linear front foot of the use. 

(3) 
Identification signs to identify a planned shopping center, provided that: 




There may be one (1) freestanding sign, not exceeding 64 square feet in display area, per frontage. 
(D) Signs permitted in the LBD-Local Business District, DD-Downtown Business District, GB-General Business District, and in LI-Light Industry District, and GI-General Business District shall be as follows: 
(1)All signs permitted in sub-section A and B above. 
(2)All double face on-premise signs, including projecting and non-projecting, freestanding, and building-mounted shall be limited in area as follows: 
(a) 	
The total display area of all double face on-premise signs shall not exceed three (3) square feet for each linear foot of lot frontage. 

(b) 	
When measuring area, the display area of one face of a double face sign shall be counted. 


(3)The copy area of a single face on-premise sign shall not be 
larger than 40% of the portion of the facade of the building which is ten (10) feet above the grade. 
(4)Identification signs to identify planned shopping centers and planned industrial parks, provided that: 
One (1) freestanding sign shall be permitted for the first 200 feet of frontage and one (1) additional freestanding sign shall be permitted for every additional 300 feet of frontage contained in the project. 
(5)The combined display area of all freestanding signs shall not exceed three(3) square feet for each foot of frontage. 
(E) Signs permitted in the HPO-Historic Preservation District shall be as follow: 
All signs permitted in sub-sections A and B above. 

153.64 SIGNS NOT PERMITTED IN ANY DISTRICT: 
(A) 
Portable and mobile signs shall not be permitted, except under a Temporary Sign Permit. 

(B) 	
Signs which are structurally unsafe, as determined by the Building Commissioner. 

(C) 
Signs obstructing free ingress or egress from a required exit, or which prevent light or ventilation as required in local codes and ordinances. 

(D) 
Signs which by reason of size, location, content, coloring, or illumination violate municipal and state highway standards. 

(E) 
Signs, words, phrases, symbols, colors, or characteristics which may mislead, interfere with, or confuse traffic. 

(F) 
Signs erected on or attached to any sidewalk, street, or highway right-of­way, curb, curbstone, hydrant, lamp postree, barricade, temporary walkway, 

telephone, telegraph, or electric light pole, other utility pole, public fence, or on a fixture of the fire alarm or police system except public information signs. 

(G) 	
Signs which involve revolving or rotating beams of light. 



153.65 SIGNS UNSAFE, OBSOLETE OR NON-CONFORMING: 
(A) 
Unsafe Signs -If the Building Commissioner deems any sign as unsafe or insecure, or is a menace to the public, he may give written notice to the person whom the sign permit has been issued, or the owner of the building. If that person fails to remove or alter the sign or to present compelling evidence as to the safety and security of the sign within ten (10) days after such notice, such sign may be removed or altered by the Building Commissioner, at the expense of the sign permit issuee or owner of the property upon which it is located. The Building Commissioner may cause any sign which is an immediate peril to persons or property to be removed or repaired summarily and without notice. 

(B) 	
Obsolete Signs -Any obsolete sign which does not advertise a bona fide 


business conducted, or a product sold, shall be taken down and removed by the owner, agent, or person having the beneficial use of the structure upon which sign may be found within sixty (60) days after written notification from the 
Building Commissioner, and upon failure to comply with such notice within the time specified in such order, the Building Commissioner may cause removal of such sign, and any expense incident thereto shall be paid by the owner of the property to which such a sign is attached. 
At the termination of a business, commercial or industrial enterprise, all signs pertaining thereto shall forthwith be removed from public view. 
(C) Non-conforming Signs -All signs not in conformance with this Article shall be removed, altered, or converted to conform to the provisions of this Ordinance not more than ten (10) years after the effective date thereof. 

153.66 ALTERATIONS: 
No display sign or outdoor advertising device shall be altered, rebuilt, enlarged, extended, or relocated except in conformity with the provisions of the Ordinance. The repainting, changing of parts, and preventative maintenance of signs shall not be deemed to be altered. 

153.67 MAINTENANCE: 
All signs shall be adequately maintained to keep them in a state of good 
appearance and repair. 
Painted signs will be considered in need of refinishing if: 

(A) 	
Twenty percent (20%) or more of the surface shows evidence of peeling, cracking, or blistering of paint. 

(B) 	
Twenty percent (20%) or more of the surface shows evidence of mildew. 

(C) 	
The colors used have faded appreciably and the surface sheen is gone. 



153.68 MISCELLANEOUS 
(A) 	Theatrical Bills and Posters. No person shall post or stick up any bill, card, poster or advertisement within the Town advertising shows, lectures, theatre plays or other entertainment of any person, company or troupe not residing or organized in the Town without first procuring a license from the Town. 
(B 	Advertisements for Sale of Medicine and Goods. No person shall 
post within the Town any bill, painting or sign advertising any goods or medicine for sale without first procuring a license from the Town. 
(C) 
Distribution of Advertising Restricted. No person shall peddle, distribute or circulate, scatter, deposit or hand out any advertising card, bill dodge, circular, poster, sheet or paper of any kind or description upon any public street or walk, in front of or opposite the lot upon which any church building, public or private school building or any public or private hall, chapel or residence is situated, or upon any lot, or in any building in the Town without the express consent of the person lawfully in charge of the aforementioned structure. 

(D) 	
Throwing Away Advertisements. No person shall throw or place any 

advertisement, circular, bill or paper upon the street, alleys, walks or public places in the Town. 

(E) 
Consent Required to Post Advertisement. No person shall post, print or paint and advertisement upon any private wall, door gate or fence located in the Town without first having obtained the consent of the owner in writing. 

(F) 	
Painting on Curbs Prohibited. No person shall post, paint, or print an 

advertisement upon any curbstone, gutter stone, sidewalk or water hydrant in the Town. 

(G) 	
Posters on Utility Poles Prohibited. No person shall paint, print, paste, stencil, tack, nail or otherwise mark upon, or in any manner place 


upon or affix to any utility pole in the Town, any work, letter, character, figure, sentence, device, hand bill or notice. This Section shall not apply to the posting of any hand bill or notice of any public 
sale or property by any sheriff, administrator, executor or guardian, or to any notice required by law to be posted. 
(H) 
Signs Over Sidewalks Restricted. No person shall erect or maintain any sign extending over the walks or streets of the Town which is less than 10 feet above the walks or streets, or which extends from the building or structure to which it is attached over the streets or walks for a distance of more than 8 feet. 

(I) 
Sign Posts Prohibited on Sidewalks. No person shall support any sign by means of a post or other supporting structure extending upwards from the streets or walks of the Town. 

(J) 
Permit Required to Hang Signs. Any person desiring to hang, erect or otherwise display any emblem, advertising material or other display of similar nature over the walks or streets of the Town, shall first obtain a permit to do so. 


An applicant for a permit to hang or erect a sign shall file an application with the Building Commissioner. The application shall contain the following information: 
(1) 
Overall dimensions of sign. 

(2) 
Height it will be above sidewalk. 

(3) 
Number of feet it will extend over sidewalk. 

(4) 
Proposed method of installation. 

(5) 
Proof of financial responsibility. 


If the specifications set forth in the application shall be found satisfactory and consistent with approved practice and methods, the Building Commissioner shall approve the application by endorsing his approval thereon. The Building Commissioner shall issue a permit. 
(K) 
Permit Fee. The fee for the permit and inspection shall be the same as those charged for regular building permits. 

(L) 
Proof of Financial Responsibility. No permit will be issued unless the applicant shall place on file with the Building Commissioner a policy of insurance in full force and effect, issued by a responsible and reputable company authorized to do business in the State of Indiana, insuring the owner of the sign against personal liability to the extent of $50,000 for injury and death to any one person, and $100,000 for injury and death to two or more persons. The policy of insurance must remain in full force and effect at all times. 

(M) 
Inspection of Signs. The Building Commissioner or his representative shall periodically inspect each sign or display for which a permit has been issued. If the installation is found to be unsatisfactory or unsafe, the permit shall be revoked until such time as the installation is made satisfactory and safe. 


The Building Commissioner, upon finding the installation of an overhanging sign or other advertising display to be in an unsafe condition, shall declare the same to be a nuisance and give notice for the abatement of the same. Notice shall be given in writing to the owner of the sign that the same is found to be in an unsafe condition, thereby endangering the safety of the public, which condition constitutes a nuisance, and the same must be abated within five (5) days from the receipt of notice. 
CHAPTER 155 ZONING ORDINANCE 
155.01 GENERAL DISTRICTS. 
The intent of this Section is to identify designations and specifications of zoning districts throughout the community. The districts are designed and intended to promote appropriate and orderly growth and development for the property in that particular zoning. 

155.02 TABLE OF PERMITTED USES. 
The range of uses permitted by right and by special exception in each district established in Chapter 154 is summarized in Table 5-1. Any use not listed in the Table shall not be permitted unless the petitioner secures Special Exception Use approval from the Board of Zoning Appeals, through the process outlined in Section 
152.23 of this Ordinance. In the event of a conflict between Table 5-1 and the text of these regulations, the text shall control. 

155.03 HIERARCHY OF DISTRICTS. 
The districts established in this Ordinance are classified from "highest" to "lowest" in terms of levels of development regulations, and they are listed in the following order: 
"highest"  Residential R-12 District  R-12  
Residential R-8 District  R-8  
Residential R-6 District  R-6  
Residential Multifamily District  MF  
Government Use District  GU  
Agricultural District  AG  
Local Business District  LBD  
General Business District  GB  
Downtown Business District  DD  
Light Industry District  LI  
"lowest"  General Industry District  GI  
155.04 R-12 RESIDENTIAL  

This district is the most restrictive of the residential districts and is intended for detached, single family dwellings on individual lots, and vacant land which is to be developed for detached, single family residential neighborhoods. This designation is meant primarily for new development. The regulations are designed to keep single family residential neighborhoods stable and to provide a suitable environment for family living. The minimum lot size in this district is 12,000 square feet. Maximum residential density for this district is 3.7 dwelling units per acre. 

155.05 PERMITTED USES: 
(A) 
Single family dwellings, detached 

(B) 
Farm dwellings 

(C) 
Farm, general 

(D) 
Public park or recreational facilities 

(E) 
Public and utility rights-of-way 

(F) 
Church, Synagogue, or similar place of worship 

(G) 
Off street parking facilities as required in Chapter 153 of this Ordinance 

(H) 
Signs as regulated under Chapter 153 of this Ordinance 

(I) 
Private Swimming pools 



155.06 SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES: 
(A) 
Bed and breakfast or similar establishment 

(B) 
Country Club or golf course 

(C) 
Home occupation 

(D) 
Day Care facility 

(E) 
Planned unit development 



155.07 PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS. 
All uses permitted in the Residential R-12 districts shall conform to the applicable development standards established in this Section and in Chapter 153 of this ordinance. 
(A) Area, yard and developmental regulations shall be as follows: 
(1) 
Maximum Residential Density (dwelling units per acre) 3.7 

(2) 
Maximum lot coverage 	40% 

(3) 
Minimum lot size12,000 sf 

(4) 
Minimum ground floor area per dwelling 	1,500 total 

exclusive of garages and outside porches 	(960 if 2 story) 

(5) 
Yard requirements: 

(6) 
Dimension requirements minimum width 	100 feet Dimension requirements minimum depth 100 feet 


(a) Front:  abutting an arterial street  40 feet  
abutting a local street  40 feet  
(b) Side  10 feet  
(c) Rear  20 feet  

(B)Notes for this Section: 
(1) 
The maximum residential density number controls the allowable number of dwellings units permitted on each acre of land. 

(2) 
For residential subdivisions of Section 153.20 of this ordinance. 

(3) 
For subdivisions of 5 acres or less, the requirements of Chapter 156 of this Ordinance apply. 



155.08 R-8 RESIDENTIAL 
This district provides development areas for single family and two family duplexes on lots no smaller than 8,000 square feet. Maximum residential density for this area is 
5.4 dwelling units per acre. 

155.09 PERMITTED USES: 
(A) 
All uses permitted in R-12 and; 

(B) 
Boarding or lodging house 

(C) 
Bed and breakfast 

(D) 
Two family dwelling duplex 

(E) 
Public library or museum 

(F) 
Off street parking facilities as required in Chapter 153 of this Ordinance 

(G) 
Signs as regulated under Chapter 153 of this Ordinance 



155.10 SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES: 
(A) 
Country Club or golf course 

(B) 
Home occupation 

(C) 
Day Care facility 

(D) 
Planned unit development 

(E) 
Charitable institutions 

(F) 
Group home, nursing home 

(G) 
Fire station 



155.11 PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS. 
All uses permitted in the Residential R-8 districts shall conform to the applicable development standards established in this Section and in Chapter 153 of this 
ordinance.  
(A)Area, yard and developmental regulations shall be as follows:  
(1) Maximum Residential Density (dwelling units per acre) (2) Maximum lot coverage (3) Minimum lot size (4) Minimum ground floor area per dwelling -single family For two family dwellings (5) Yard requirements: (a) Front: 35 feet (b) Side 10 feet (c) Rear 20 feet (6) Dimension requirements minimum width 80 feet Dimension requirements minimum depth 100 feet  5.4 40% 8,000 sf 1,200 sf 960 if 2 story 960  
(B)Notes for this Section:  

(1)The maximum 	residential density number controls the allowable number of dwellings units permitted on each acre of land. 
(2)For residential subdivisions of 10 lots or more, the minimum lot size may be varied subject to Section 153.20 of this ordinance. 
(3)For subdivisions of 5 acres or less, the requirements of Chapter 156 of this Ordinance apply. 
(4)For bed and breakfasts or other overnight lodging, the property shall conform to requirements in Section 153.15, Parking Requirements Table and Section 153.15, 153.16, 153.17, 153.18 of this Ordinance. 

155.12 R-6 RESIDENTIAL 
This district provides development areas for single family and two family duplexes on lots no smaller than 6,000 square feet. Maximum residential density for this area is 
7.2 dwelling units per acre. This designation is created to maintain the character of the existing neighborhoods. R-6 standards will be used to make sure that the infill development takes the same characteristics as the surrounding neighborhood. 

155.13 PERMITTED USES: 
(A) 
All uses permitted in R-8 district and; 

(B) 
Orphanage 



155.14 SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES: 
(A)Country Club or golf course (B)Home occupation (C)Day Care facility (D)Planned unit development (E)Charitable institutions (F)Group home, nursing home (G)Fire station 
155.15 PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS. 
All uses permitted in the Residential R-6 districts shall conform to the applicable development standards established in this Section and in Chapter 153 of this ordinance. 
(A)Area, yard and developmental regulations shall be as follows:  
(1) Maximum Residential Density (dwelling units per acre)7.2  
(2) Maximum lot coverage  40%  
(3) Minimum lot size  6,000 sf  
(4) Minimum ground floor area per dwelling -single family  800 sf  
For two family dwellings  700 sf  
(5) Yard requirements:  
(a) Front  25 feet  
(b) Side  5 feet  
(c) Rear  15 feet  
(6) Dimension requirements minimum width  60 feet  
Dimension requirements minimum depth  100feet  
(B)Notes for this Section:  

(1) 
The maximum residential density number controls the allowable number of dwelling units permitted on each acre of land. 

(2) 
For Bed and breakfasts or other overnight lodging, the property shall conform to requirements in Section 153.15, Parking Requirements Table, and Sections 153.15, 153.16, 153.17, 


153.18 of the Ordinance. 

155.16 MF -MULTI-FAMILY DISTRICT. 
This district provides for multifamily dwellings on lots no smaller than 8,000 square feet. Each additional unit over two, will require an additional 2,000 square feet of lot area. The maximum density of any multi-family development will be 18 dwelling units per acre. 

155.17 PERMITTED USES: 
(A)All uses permitted in R-6 and; 
(B)Mixed use development, conforming to Section 153.20 of this Ordinance 


155.18 SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES: 
(A)Country Club or golf course (B)Home occupation (C)Day Care facility (D)Planned unit development (E)Charitable institutions (F)Group home, nursing home (G)Fire station 
155.19 PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS. 
All uses permitted in the Residential R-8 districts shall conform to the applicable development standards established in this Section and in Chapter 153 of this Ordinance. 
(A)Area, yard and developmental regulations shall be as follows:  
(1) Maximum Residential Density (dwelling units per acre) (2) Maximum lot coverage (3) Minimum lot size (4) Minimum ground floor area per dwelling -single family Two-family dwellings Multi-family dwellings (5) Yard requirements: (1) Front: (2) Side (3) Rear  18 40% 8,000 sf 800 sf 700 sf 700 sf 25 feet 10 feet 20 feet  
(B)Notes for this Section:  

(1) 	
The maximum residential density number controls the allowable number of dwellings units permitted on each acre of land. 

(2) 	
For bed and breakfasts or other overnight lodging, the property shall conform to requirements in Section 153.15, Parking Requirements Table, and Sections 153.15, 153.16, 153.17, 

153.18 of this Ordinance. 

(3) 	
All standards set forth in Section 153.20, Planned Unit Developments shall apply to multi-family developments which occur in the designation. 



155.20 GU -GOVERNMENT USE DISTRICT. 
This Section intends to provide space for government institutions and facilities, such as schools, parks and recreation areas, government buildings and structures, public utility buildings and structures, and other public uses. 

155.21 PERMITTED USES: 
(A)Civil/social service agency 
(B)Municipal or government building 
(C)Police or Fire station 
(D)Postal station 
(E)Public garage 
(F)Public library or museum 
(G)Public or employee parking area 
(H)Public park or recreation area 
(I)Public organic disposal site 
(J)Railroad right-of-way 
(K)Railway or motor bus station 
(L)School, public 
(M)Public utility uses 


155.22 PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS. 
Property development standards for this district shall be determined on an individual basis for each project or proposed development, and will be administered in conformance with Sections 153.20 and 153.21 of this Ordinance. 
Each evaluation of a proposed project will use due consideration in determining the property development standards for such project utilizing the following factors: 
(A)The surrounding zoning and land uses 
(B)Any overlay zoning districts applicable to the property 
(C)Conformance to the Master Plan 
(D)Existing conditions 


155.24 AG -AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT. 
This district intends to provide land for farm and agricultural uses. Single-family residence will also be permitted use in AG district, providing the lot is at least two and half (2 1/2) acre in size. 

155.25 PERMITTED USES: 
(A)Commercial greenhouse 
(B)Dwelling, farm 
(C)Farm, general 
(D)Home occupation 
(E)Police or Fire station 
(F)Public park or recreational facilities 
(G)Railroad right-of-way and other necessary uses 
(H)Public and utility right-of-way 
(I)Church, Synagogue, or similar place of worship 
(J)Off street parking facilities as required in Chapter 153 of this Ordinance 
(K)Signs as regulated under Chapter 153 of this Ordinance 
(L)Swimming Pools 


155.26 SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES: 
(A) Automobile Sale, New-Used 
(B)Auction sales yard 
(C)Bait sales (live) 
(D)Contractor's storage yard 
(E)Country club or golf course 

(F)Farm Implement Sale 
(G)Lawn & Garden Sale 
(H)Lodge or private club 
(I)Mobile Home Sale 
(J)Outdoor commercial or recreational enterprise 
(K)Planned unit development, subject to Section 153.20 of this Ordinance 
(L)Private recreational development 
(M)Public camp 
(N)RV Sales 
(O)Riding stable 
(P)Seasonal hunting or fishing lodge 
(Q)Shooting range, outdoor 
(R)Theater, outdoor 
(S)Wholesale produce terminal 
(T)Kennels 

155.27 PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS. 
All uses permitted in the Agricultural -AG district shall conform to the applicable development standards established in this Section and in Chapter 153 of this Ordinance. 
(A)Area, yard and developmental regulations shall be as follows:  
(1) Maximum Residential Density (dwelling units per acre)  2.5  
(2) Maximum lot coverage  20%  
(3) Minimum lot size  2.5 acre  
(4) Minimum ground floor area per dwelling  1,200 sf  
(5) Yard requirements:  
(a) Front:  abutting an arterial street  50 feet  
abutting a local street  40 feet  
(b) Side  10 feet  
(c) Rear  20 feet  

(6) Dimension requirements minimum width 200 feet (B)Notes for this Section: 
(1) 	
The maximum residential density number controls the allowable number of dwellings units permitted on each acre of land. 

(2) 	
For subdivisions of 10 acres or less, the requirements of Chapter 156 of this Ordinance apply. 



155.28 LBD -LOCAL BUSINESS DISTRICT. 
This district is to maintain existing business activities which have been historically conducted in neighborhoods that are generally residential. The surrounding residential uses shall be protected by limiting development and expansion of the district, limiting outside storage and signage. 

155.29 PERMITTED USES: 
(A)Existing uses and (B)Those uses that are of a less obtrusive nature that are currently existing in the district when Ordinance is adopted. 

155.30 SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES: 
Those uses which are permitted uses in General Business District (specifically excluding Special Exception Uses in Section 155.34.) 

155.31 PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS. 
All uses permitted in the Local Business District -LBD, shall conform to the applicable development standards established in this Section and elsewhere in this Ordinance. 
(A)Area, yard and developmental regulations shall be as follows: 
(1)  Maximum lot coverage  no requirements  
(2)  Minimum lot size  no requirements  
(3)  Lot dimensions  no requirements  
(4)  Ground floor requirements  no requirements  
(5)  Building height  35 feet  
(6)  Yard requirements:  
(a) Front:  25feet  
(b) Side  10 feet  
(c) Rear  20 feet  

(7) 
Off-street parking (must be paved) Section 153.20 & 

(8) 
Signs Section 153 

(9) 
Loading Section 153 

(10) 
Outside storage (inventory and materials) Prohibited (except 


153.21 
for operable motor vehicles). 

155.32 GB -GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT. 
This district provides space for all types of commercial uses. Standards in this district will be more strict than other business districts to accomplish two goals: to promote commercial development in an established district, and to safeguard adjacent zones from unsightly development. 

155.33 PERMITTED USES: 
(A)Apparel store (B)Bakery, retail (C)Barber shop (D)Beauty shop (E)Business or professional office (F)Clinic (G)Drug store (H)Dry cleaning establishment (I)Electric appliance sales and service (J)Flower shop (K)Gift shop (L)Grocery (M)Hardware store (N)Jewelry store (O)Police or fire station (P)Postal station (Q)Public or employee parking area (R)Public or private park or recreation area (S)Restaurant (T)Variety store 

155.34 SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES: 
(A)Assembly halls for nonprofit organizations (B)Automobile sales, new and used (C)Day care facility (D)Farm Implement Sale (E)Filling or service station (F)Lawn & Garden Sale (G)Mobile Home Sale (H)Outdoor commercial recreation enterprise (I)Railroad and public utility rights-of-way (J)RV Sales 

155.35 PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS. 
All uses permitted in the General Business -GB district shall conform to the applicable development standards established in this Section and in Chapter 153 of this Ordinance. 
(A)Area, yard and developmental regulations shall be as follows: 
(1) Maximum lot coverage  no requirements  
(2) Minimum lot size  no requirements  
(3)Lot dimensions  no requirements  
(4)Ground floor requirements  no requirements  
(5)Building height  35 feet  
(6) Yard requirements:  
(a) Front:  abutting an arterial street  25 feet  
abutting a local street  15 feet  
(b) Side  10 feet  
(c) Rear  20 feet  
(7)Off-street parking (must be paved)  Section 153.20 &  
153.21  
(8)Signs  Section 153  
(9)Loading  Section 153.21  


155.36 DD -DOWNTOWN DISTRICT. 
This district is to promote the business and residential activities in the downtown area. Downtown businesses will not be required to provide off-street parking spaces. Other property development standards will be relaxed, since the space limitations will confine the area to very limited physical change. 

155.37 PERMITTED USES: 
(A)All uses permitted in General Business District and; (B)Dwelling, single, two, and multi-family when located above permitted commercial use (C)Hotel or motel 
(D)Municipal or government building 
(E)Newsdealer 
(F)Public garage 
(G)Railroad and public utility rights-of-way 
(H)Retail showroom 
(I)Tavern 
(J)Theater, in door 
(K)Wholesale business 


155.38 SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES: 
(A)All special exception uses permitted in General Business District and; 
(B)Commercial greenhouse 


155.39 PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS. 
All uses permitted in the Downtown Business District -DD, shall conform to the applicable development standards established in this Section and in Chapter 153 of this Ordinance. 
(A)Area, yard and developmental regulations shall be as follows: 
(1)  Maximum lot coverage  no requirements  
(2)  Minimum lot size  no requirements  
(3)  Lot dimensions  no requirements  
(4)  Ground floor requirements  no requirements  
(5)  Building height  35 feet  
(6)  Yard requirements:  
(1) Front:  no requirements  
(2) Side  no requirements  
(3) Rear  10 feet  
(7)  Off-street parking  Section 153.20 & 153.21  
(8)  Signs  Section 153.  
(9)  Loading  Section 153.  
155.40 LI -LIGHT INDUSTRY DISTRICT.  

This district provides for light industry areas. The intent of this Section is to create and protect wholesaling and industrial areas for manufacturing, processing and assembly of parts and products, distribution of products at wholesale, transportation terminals, and a broad variety of specialized industrial operations. 

155.41 PERMITTED USES: 
(A)Advertising structures 
(B)Automobile repair, indoors 
(C)Automobile sales, new and used 
(D)Boat sales, service, storage 
(E)Contractor's storage yard 
(F)Filling or service station 
(G)Greenhouse, commercial 
(H)Kennel 
(I)Light Industry 
(J)Municipal or government building 
(K)Plant nursery 
(L)Police or fire station 
(M)Public garage 

(N)Public or employee parking 
(O)Railroad and public utility rights-of-way 
(P)Restaurant 
(Q)Signs 
(R)Warehousing 
(S)Wholesale operations 


155.42 PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS. 
All uses permitted in the Light Industry District -LI, shall conform to the applicable development standards established in this Section and in Chapter 153 of this Ordinance. 
(A)Area, yard and developmental regulations shall be as follows: 
(1)  Maximum lot coverage  no requirements  
(2)  Minimum lot size  no requirements  
(3)  Lot dimensions  no requirements  
(4)  Ground floor requirements  no requirements  
(5)  Building height  40 feet  
(6)  Yard requirements:  
(1) Front:  30 feet  
(2) Side  20 feet  
(3) Rear  20 feet  
(7)  Off-street parking  Section 153.20 &153.21  
(8)  Signs  Section 153.  
(9)  Loading  Section 153.  
155.44 GI -GENERAL INDUSTRY DISTRICT.  

This district will provide industrial space outside of the LI zones. Because the GI zone will be generally isolated from other industrial uses, strict property development regulations will be used to safeguard adjoining land uses. 

155.45 PERMITTED USES: 
(A)All uses permitted in LI district and; 
(B)Petroleum storage and distribution 
(C)Truck freight terminal 
(D)Wholesale produce terminal 


155.46 SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES: 
(A)Anhydrous ammonia or similar fertilizers, storage and distribution 
(B)Bottled gas storage and distribution 
(C)Warehousing, storage and sale, whether wholesale or retail, of fireworks 

that do not comply with IC 22-11-14-8. 

155.47 PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS. 
All uses permitted in the General Industry District -GI, shall conform to the applicable development standards established in this Section and in Chapter 153 of this Ordinance. 
(A)Area, yard and developmental regulations shall be as follows: PURPOSE. Overlay districts are zoning districts, which are applied only in conjunction with other zoning districts, and may impose additional use or development requirements upon the underlying zoning districts. The effect is to have both the overlaying district and the underlying zoning controlling the use and development of a lot. Overlay districts are applicable on an area wide basis to support specific public policy objectives and should be consistent with the Master Plan for the community. 
(1)  Maximum lot coverage  no requirements  
(2)  Minimum lot size  no requirements  
(3)  Lot dimensions  no requirements  
(4)  Ground floor requirements  no requirements  
(5)  Building height  40 feet  
(6)  Yard requirements:  
(1) Front:  no requirements  
(2) Side  5 ft adjoining a street  
(3) Rear  5 ft adjoining a street  
(7)  Off-street parking  Section 153.20 & 153.21  
(8)  Signs  Section 153.  
(9)  Loading  Section 153.  
155.48 SPECIAL OVERLAY DISTRICTS  


155.60 SPECIAL EXCEPTION, REQUIREMENTS AND PROCEDURES 
The Special Exceptions listed in the individual Districts and those listed below and their accessory buildings and uses may be permitted by the Board in the Districts, in accordance with the procedures set forth in this section. 

155.61 SPECIAL EXCEPTION, ALL DISTRICTS 
Uses permitted in any District subject to the requirements of this section: 
Airport or heliport Artificial lake of three or more acres Cemetery Church or Temple Hospital Mineral Extraction Public water wells, water stations, filtration plants, reservoirs and storage tanks Radio, T.V. transmitting towers and microwave tower Sewage disposal plant (primary use) Telephone exchange Transmission lines for gas, oil, electricity, or other utilities 

155.62 MINIMUM LOT AREA: SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES 
A lot on which one of the following uses is located may not be smaller in area than the area prescribed for that use opposite it on the following table: 
USE MINIMUM LOT AREA 
Airport 80 acres Assembly halls 1 acre Auction sales yard 2 acres 
Cemetery or Crematory 20 acres 
Charitable institutions 1 acre 
Church or temple 1 acre 
Clinic 15,000 sq. ft. 
Commercial facility for raising 

and breeding non-farm fowl and 
animals 3 acres Commercial greenhouse 25,000 sq. ft. Heliport 1 acre Hospital 5 acres Hotel or motel 25,000 sq. ft. Junk Yard 10 acres Kennel 2 acres Lodge or private club * Marina * Travel Trailer Park 5 acres (4,000 sq. ft. 
per unit) 
Fraternity or Sorority * 
Farm equipment sales 1 acre 
Penal or correctional institution 320 acres 
Police station or fire station 20,000 sq. ft. 
Public camp 5 acres 
Public or commercial garbage 

disposal plant 5 acres 
Public or commercial sanitary 

fill or refuse dump 10 acres Public or employee parking lot 1,500 sq. ft. Riding Stable 20,000 sq. ft. puls 5,000 
sq. ft. for every horse over 
four 
Seasonal fishing or hunting lodge * 
Slaughterhouse 6 acres 
Stadium or coliseum 5 acres 
Storage of disabled vehicles 3 acres 
Tourist home * 
Transmission lines for gas, oil, 

electricity or other utilities * 
Truck service center 1 acre 
Warehouse (grain elevator) 3 acres 
Wholesale produce terminal 15 acres 

* The requirements of the district in which the use is located apply to the use. 

155.63 SETBACKS: SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES 
A. 	The following uses are subject to the special setbacks prescribed, in feet by the following table. If no figure appears for the front yard setback, the standard setback prescribed for the District applies. 
USE 
Anhydrous Ammonia or similar liquid fertilizer, storage & distribution (commercial) 
Assembly halls Bottled gas storage and distribution Cemetery or Crematory Charitable institutions Clinic Commercial facility for raising and 
breeding non-farm fowl and animals Commercial greenhouse Confinement feeding Home for the aged Hospital Hotel or Motel Industrial Park 
Junk Yard 
Kindergarten or day nursery Liquid fertilizer storage and distribution (commercial) Manufacturing, storage or use 
or explosives Material storage, open Mineral extraction, borrow pit, or 
topsoil removal, and their storage 
areas Travel trailer park Nursing home, orphanage Outdoor commercial recreational 
enterprise Penal or correctional institution Petroleum tank farm (commercial) Private recreational development Public camp Public or commercial sanitary fill, 
refuse dump, or garbage disposal plant Public or commercial sewage disposal plant 
Public water wells, water stations, filtration plants, reservoirs and storage tanks 
Race track Sales barn for livestock resale Shooting range Slaughterhouse Stadium or coliseum Storage of disabled vehicles Theater, outdoor Warehouse (grain elevator) 
FRONT 
300 300 
100 100 300 
100 
100 
150 300* 
300 
300* 300* 
150 100 
100 300 
100 
300 300 
300 
300 
100* 100 100 
SIDE REAR 
300  300  
20  15  
300  300  
50  50  
20  15  
10  30  
100  100  
40  40  
300  300  
10  
40  40  
20  
75*  

35 (abutting 
other use) 150 150 300* 300* 20 15 
300 300 
300* 300* 300* 300* 
150 150 40 40 10 30 
40 40 100 100 300 300 40 40 40 40 
300 300 
300 300 
20 15 40 40 300 300 40 40 300 300 50 50 
100* 100* 40 40 75* 
35 (abutting other use) Wholesale produce terminal 100 75* 35 (abutting other use) 
* Abutting residential use 
B. 	Buildings with the following uses may be located no closer to private interior roads in planned developments that are subject to through traffic than the distance, in feet, respectively prescribed by the following table: 
USE 	SETBACK 
Country club or golf course 85 
Industrial park 85 
Mobile home park or travel trailer park 50 
Outdoor commercial recreational enterprise 40 
Public camp 40 
Wholesale produce terminal 85 


155.64 	MINIMUM DISTANCES FROM RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT OR USE SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES 
A. 	The following uses may not be located close to an RA, R1, R2, R3 or MH District than the distance, in feet, listed opposite in the following table: 
USE 	FEET 
Auction sales yard 25 Airport or heliport 25 Anhydrous ammonia, or similar liquid fertilizer, storage or distribution (commercial 300 Borrow pit 300 Confinement feeding operation 1320 Manufacturing, storage or use of explosives 300 Material storage, open 300 Mineral extraction area 300 Penal or correctional institution 300 Public or commercial sewage disposal plant 300 Sales barn for livestock resale 300 Slaughterhouse 300 Topsoil removal area (including storage area) 300 Truck freight terminal 100 Wholesale produce terminal 100 Farm equipment sales 50 
B. 	A parking area or loading berth for any of the following uses may not be located closer to a residential district or use than the distance, in feet, listed opposite it in the following table: 
USE PARKING LOADING AREA AREA 
Airport or heliport 	25 
100 Clinic 10 Commercial facility for raising and 
breeding non-farm fowl and animals 25 50 Commercial greenhouse 50 Contractor's storage yard 300 300 Country club or golf course 10 General industry 25 100 Hospital 25 50 Industrial park 25 100 Junk yard 1320 1320 Light industry 25 100 Mineral extraction, borrow pit, or topsoil 
removal, and their storage areas 300 Outdoor commercial recreational enterprise 25 50 Penal or correctional institution 300 300 Private recreational development 25 Public camp 25 Sales barn for livestock resale 50 100 Slaughterhouse 50 300 Stadium or coliseum 25 50 Theater, outdoor 25 50 Travel trailer park 25 Truck freight terminal 100 100 Warehouse (grain elevator) 100 100 Wholesale produce terminal 100 100 

155.65 FENCES AND WALLS SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES 
The following uses shall be fenced or walled as respectively prescribed by the following table at the discretion of the Council: 
USE ENCLOSURE 
Airport or heliport Adequate to protect abutting use Auction sales yard Adequate to protect abutting 
use Confinement feeding operation 6-foot woven wire fence Contractor's storage yard Solid wall or solid painted 
fence sufficient to hide from view Kindergarten or day nursery (play area only) 4-foot wire mesh fence 
Mineral extraction, borrow pit, topsoil removal, and their storage areas (where they abut residential uses) 6-foot woven wire fence 
Outdoor commercial recreational enterprise, if accessible to public 6-foot woven wire fence Private swimming pool, if accessible to public 6-foot chain link fence Public or commercial garbage disposal plant 6-foot solid painted fence 
Public or employee parking area (along front line and such other boundaries as the Commission considers necessary to protect residential property), 4-foot masonry wall, 6 except at approved entrances and exits inches thick 
Slaughterhouse 6-foot solid painted fence EXCEPTION USES 
Storage of disabled vehicles  6-foot solid painted fence  
Theater, outdoor  8-foot painted board fence  
Truck service center  6-foot solid painted fence  
Wholesale produce terminal  6-foot wire mesh fence  
155.66  SCREEN  PLANTING  ABUTTING  RESIDENTIAL  USE  - SPECIAL  

Tight screen planting of the dimensions given five years after installation, effective during all seasons to block the view from abutting existing residential uses shall be provided for the following uses in accordance with the following table at the discretion of the Council. 
USE  SCREEN  
Airport or heliport  6 feet high; 3 feet wide  
Artificial lake of 3 or more acres  6 feet high; 3 feet wide  
Cemetery or crematory  6 feet high; 3 feet wide  
Commercial facility for raising and  
breeding non-farm fowl and animals  6 feet high; 3 feet wide  
Confinement feeding operation  6 feet high; 6 feet wide  
Country club or golf course  6 feet high; 3 feet wide  
General industry  6 feet high; 3 feet wide  
Hospital  6 feet high; 3 feet wide  
Hotel or motel  6 feet high; 6 feet wide  
Industrial park  5 feet high  
Kennel  6 feet high; 6 feet wide  
Kindergarten or day nursery  6 feet high; 3 feet wide  
Light Industry  6 feet high; 3 feet wide  
Mineral extraction, borrow pit, topsoil  
removal, and their storage areas  6 feet high; 3 feet wide  
Travel trailer park  6 feet high; 3 feet wide  
Outdoor commercial recreational  
enterprise  8 feet high; 3 feet wide  
Police station or fire station  6 feet high; 3 feet wide  
Private recreational development  8 feet high; 3 feet wide  
Private swimming pool  6 feet high; 3 feet wide  
Public camp  8 feet high; 3 feet wide  
Public or commercial sanitary fill or  
garbage disposal plant (also along  
abutting street)  5 feet high; 3 feet wide  
Public or commercial sewage disposal  
plant  6 feet high; 3 feet wide  
Restaurants, Drive In  6 feet high; 3 feet wide  
Race Track  8 feet high; 6 feet wide  
Riding stable  6 feet high; 3 feet wide  
Shopping center  6 feet high; 3 feet wide  
Shooting range  8 feet high; 6 feet wide  
Slaughterhouse (along abutting street)  6 feet high; 6 feet wide  
Stadium or coliseum  6 feet high; 6 feet wide  
Storage or disabled vehicles  6 feet high; 3 feet wide  
Telephone exchange or public utility  
substation (also along abutting  
street)  Adequate for purpose  
Truck freight terminal  6 feet high; 6 feet wide  
Truck service center  6 feet high; 3 feet wide  

Warehouse (grain elevator) 6 feet high; 3 feet wide Wholesale produce terminal 6 feet high; 3 feet wide 

155.67 ENTRANCES -EXCEPTION USES 
As used in this section the term "entrance" means a passageway generally 30 feet wide from premises to thoroughfare by which vehicles enter or leave. The applicant shall obtain a permit from the Town Engineer for the "entrance". 
A. 	This subsection limits the number of entrances to a primary or secondary street. However, it does not apply to entrances for emergency use only. 
B. 	Each of the following uses, for which Special Exceptions are prescribed is limited to 1 entrance. 
Artificial lake of 3 or more acres or private swimming pool Bait Sales Clinic Commercial facility for raising and breeding non-farm fowl and animals Commercial greenhouse Contractor's storage yard Country club or golf course Home for aged Industrial park Kennel Kindergarten or day nursery Manufacturing, storage or use of explosives Material storage, open Mineral extraction, borrow pit, topsoil removal, and their storage areas Penal or correctional institution Private recreational development Public camp Public or commercial sanitary land fill or garbage disposal plant Public or commercial sewage disposal plant Public or employee parking area Race track Radio, TV transmitting towers and micro-wave towers Railroad right-of-way and necessary uses Riding stable Roadside produce sales stand Sales barn for livestock resale Shooting range Slaughterhouse Storage of disabled vehicles Telephone exchange Theater, outdoor Tourist home Truck freight terminal Truck service center Warehouse (grain elevator) Wholesale produce terminal 
C. 	Each of the following uses, for which Special Exceptions are prescribed is limited to 2 entrances: 
Airport or heliport 
Cemetery or crematory 
Confinement feeding operation 
Hotel and motel 
Outdoor commercial recreational enterprise 
Stadium or coliseum 
Travel trailer park 


155.68 PROCEDURE -SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES 
A. 	The Special Exceptions listed in the Districts and this Section and their accessory buildings and uses may be permitted by the Council in the Districts indicated therein, in accordance with the procedure set forth in this section. 
The Special Exceptions listed in the Districts and this Section are those customarily located in the community. When an appeal is taken to the Council upon the denial of an application for an Improvement Location Permit for a use not specifically stated or implied elsewhere in these regulations and not listed the Council shall refer the matter of this proposed use to the Plan Commission for consideration as an amendment to the regulations. 
B. 	Upon receipt of an application for an Improvement Location Permit for a Special Exception by the Building Commissioner, it shall be referred to the Commission for investigation as to the manner in which the proposed location and character of the Special Exception will affect the Master Plan. The Commission shall report the results of its study to the Council within forty-five days following receipt of the application. If no such report has been filed with the Council within this time period, the Council may proceed to process the application. 
The Council shall then proceed with a hearing on the application in the manner prescribed in the ordinance adopting these regulations. Following the hearing, and upon a affirmative finding the Council that: 
1. 	
The proposed Special Exception is to be located in District wherein such use may be permitted, and 

2. 	
The requirements set forth in the District and this Section for such Special Exception will be met, and 

3. 	
The Special Exception is consistent with the spirit, purpose and intent of these regulations, will not substantially and permanently injure the appropriate use of neighboring property, and will serve the public convenience and welfare; the Council shall order the Building Commissioner to issue an Improvement Location Permit for the Special Exception. 


C. 	An Existing Use which is listed herein as a Special Exception, and which is located in a District in which such Special Exception may be permitted, is a conforming use. Any expansion of such Special Exception involving the enlargement of the buildings, structures and land area devoted to such use shall be subject to the procedure described in this section. 
CHAPTER 156 SUBDIVISION CONTROL 
ARTICLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS 
156.01 SHORT TITLE. 
This chapter and any amendments to it shall be known and cited as the Subdivision Control Standards of the Town of Bremen, Indiana. General Provisions for this chapter are contained in Sections 156.02 through 156.12. 

156.02 PURPOSE. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide minimum rules, regulations and standards in order to achieve orderly development in the town through land subdivision and development; to promote the utilization of land to assure the residents of the town the best possible environment; to cause land subdivision and re-subdivision to be made in accordance with the Zoning Ordinances and Thoroughfare Plan of the town; to provide for the proper arrangement of streets in relation to other existing or planned streets; and to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the town. This chapter shall be administered to ensure the orderly growth and development, the conservation, protection, and proper use of land by adequate provision for circulation, utilities and services. 

156.03 ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY. 
The Plan Commission of the Town of Bremen shall be the administrative agency for this Chapter. 

156.04 INTERPRETATION. 
In interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the town. 

156.05 EFFECT OF JUDGMENTS. 
If any court of competent jurisdiction shall rule invalid the application of any provision of this chapter, or amendments thereto, that judgment shall not effect the application of that provision to any other subdivision not specifically included in that judgment. 

156.06 APPLICABILITY. 
This chapter shall apply to all land within the jurisdiction of the Town of Bremen as now, or hereinafter established and the area within the two mile zoning jurisdiction outside the town limits The exception to this provision is that all lots in a recorded subdivision existing at the time of adoption of this Ordinance shall not be required to meet the regulations of this chapter. 

156.07 COMPLIANCE. 
(A) 
No plat or replat of any subdivision, or subdivision of any lot, tract or parcel of land, shall be affected, nor shall any street, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, water main, or other facility in connection therewith be laid out, constructed, opened or dedicated for public use or travel, or for the common use of occupants or buildings abutting thereon, except in strict accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 

(B) 
No lot shall be sold, nor shall an improvement location permit to erect any building or structure be issued, unless and until a final plat has been approved and recorded. In addition, the infrastructure and improvements required by the town in connection therewith shall be constructed, inspected and approved by the Building Commissioner, Town Engineer, Department Superintendent, or any other designated official, or the said infrastructure or improvements shall be guaranteed by posting a performance bond with the town for 100% of the cost of construction and installation prior to the approval of the final plat and the issuance of an improvement location permit for the property. 



156.08 FINANCING OF INFRASTRUCTURE COSTS. 
(A) 
All infrastructure construction and dedication costs shall be financed by the person or organization developing the subdivision. The town and the municipal utility shall not finance or pay for any infrastructure construction or dedication costs without the Town Council's specific approval and order for such action. 

(B) 
Infrastructure oversizing in anticipation of future development outside of the subdivision may be financed by the town and/or the municipal utility upon order of the Town Council. 



156.09 SUITABILITY FOR SUBDIVISION. 
No land shall be subdivided for a residential use, if such land is considered by the Bremen Plan Commission to be unsuitable for such use by reason of flooding, improper drainage, unsuitability of the soil for conventional or modified septic systems on more than half the lots in the subdivision, or topography or other features harmful to the health, safety and welfare of possible residents or the community as a whole. The septic suitability of the soil shall be determined by the Marshall County Health Department, and a written report of their recommendations shall guide the Plan Commission's decision on suitability of septic for the subdivision. 

156.10 CONFORMANCE TO MASTER PLAN. 
The subdivision shall conform to the Master Plan, Zoning Ordinances and Thoroughfare Plan of the Town of Bremen, and shall not encroach upon areas designated in the Master or Thoroughfare Plan for public facilities. 

156.11 PROVISION FOR FUTURE SUBDIVISION. 
If a tract of land is subdivided into larger parcels than ordinary residential building lots, such parcels shall be arranged as to allow the opening for future streets and logical further subdivision. 

156.12 VARIATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS. 
Variations and exceptions from the design and dimensional standards and improvement requirements of these regulations may be made by the Plan Commission in cases where owing to exceptional conditions, there are extreme difficulties or hardships in the way of carrying out the strict letter of these regulations. 
PROCEDURES FOR SUBDIVISION APPROVAL. 

156.20 APPLICATION PROCEDURES FOR SUBDIVISION APPROVAL. 
A subdivider desiring approval of a subdivision plat of any land lying within the jurisdiction of the Town of Bremen, shall submit a written application to the Plan Commission. The application shall be accompanied by an application fee in a certified check or money order in the amount of twenty dollars ($20.00) plus one dollar ($1.00) for each lot in the proposed subdivision, to be deposited at the Clerk/Treasurer's office. 

156.21 PRELIMINARY PLAT FOR SUBDIVISION. 
A preliminary plat of every subdivision is required. Four (4) copies of the preliminary plat drawings shall be submitted to the Plan Commission no less than thirty (30) working days prior to the date of the public hearing on the proposed subdivision. The preliminary plat shall contain the following information: 
(A) 
The proposed name of the subdivision and names of streets therein which shall not duplicate or closely approximate the name of any other subdivision or streets in the jurisdiction of the town. 

(B) 
Names and addresses of the owner, subdivider, and the planner, engineer or surveyor who prepared the plan. 

(C) 
North arrow and graphic scale; The preliminary plat drawing shall be drawn to a scale of fifty (50) feet to one (1) inch, or one hundred (100) feet to one inch; provided however, that if the resulting drawing would be over twenty-four (24) inches in the longest dimension and eighteen (18) inches is the shortest dimension, a scale recommended by the Commission may be used. 

(D) 
Boundary line 	of proposed subdivision, and location and dimensions of all existing easements, and property lines. 

(E) 
Design drawings or specifications including profile and cross sections of the proposed streets, including roadway widths, approximate gradients, types and widths of pavements, curbs, sidewalks, crosswalks and storm drainage system. 

(F) 
Parcels to be dedicated for the public use, and a description of any infrastructure included in that parcel. 

(G) 
Existing topographic contours at vertical intervals of not less than two (2) feet. 

(H) 
Design drawings and specifications for all other infrastructure or improvements to be installed as required by Engineering Standards set out in Chapter 158. If developer intends to provide other than connection to municipal wastewater system, he shall justify his proposal in writing. 

(I) 
Ground water levels stated in inches below ground surface given at points of lowest ground elevation, and design drawings and specifications for storm drainage system including storm water run off and detention calculations. 

(J) 
Lot layout, dimension and area. Each lot shall be numbered 

(K) 
Building setback or front yard lines 

(L) 
Legend and notes 

(M) 
Other features or conditions that would affect the subdivision favorably or 

adversely. 

(N) 
A copy of any Subdivision Covenants or Deed Restrictions to be incorporated into the plat of the subdivision shall be attached to the plat. 

(O) 
Site location map. 

(P) 
Erosion 	control plan if over one acres (as required by Soil Conservation Service). 

(Q) 
Legal description of property. 

(R) 
Source of title of the applicant to the land as shown by the last entry in the books of the County Recorder. 



156.22 PRELIMINARY PLAT REVIEW. 
(A) 	
The Building Commissioner, Town Engineer, Town Attorney and Superintendents of Electric, Street, Water and Sanitation Departments shall review the preliminary plat information for conformity to the this Ordinance. These individuals, and any other designated officials requested by the Plan Commission, shall submit to the Plan Commission their recommendations regarding the conformity of the proposed subdivision to this Ordinance. Developer may submit data prior to submission of preliminary plat for guidance in design of the preliminary plat. 

(B) 
If the subdivision complies with the regulations of this chapter, the staff shall place the subdivision on the agenda of the first available meeting of the Commission for public hearing. 



156.23 PUBLIC HEARING NOTICE REQUIREMENTS. 
(A) 
The applicant is responsible for placing a legal notice twice, a week apart, in a local newspaper of general circulation with date of 1st publication at least fifteen 

(15) 
days prior to the public hearing, stating the time, place and date of the hearing, and a legal description and a common description of the location of the proposed subdivision. Notification shall be on a form as prescribed by the Commission and in a method prescribed by IC 5-3-1-2. The cost of the notice shall be responsibility of the applicant. 

(B) 
The applicant shall notify by direct mail all property owners within 300 feet of the edge of the subdivision of the time, place and date of the Commission hearing regarding the proposed subdivision. 



156.24 PLAN COMMISSION ACTION. 
(A) 
If, after the public hearing, the Commission finds that the subdivision complies with all the regulations set forth in this chapter, the Commission shall approve the subdivision with or without modifications, and make written findings of fact which shall include any modifications or conditions imposed. 

(B) 
If, after the public hearing, the Commission finds that the subdivision does not comply with the standards regarding subdivision approval, the Commission shall deny approval of the subdivision and make written findings of fact and decision which set forth its reasons for disapproval. 

(C) 
The approval of a preliminary plat shall be effective for a period of one (1) year unless, upon application of the subdivider, the Commission grants an extension of such approval. If the Final Plat on all or a portion of the tract in the preliminary plat has not been recorded within this time limit, the preliminary plat must be resubmitted to the Plan Commission for approval. 



156.25 FINAL PLAT. 
The Final Plat shall meet the following specifications: 
(A) 
The Final Plat may include all or part of the preliminary plat which has received approval. 

(B) 
The original drawing of the Final Plat of the subdivision shall be printed on mylar with a one (1) inch border used, and shall be drawn to a scale of fifty (50) feet to one (1) inch, provided that if the resulting drawing would be over twenty-four 

(24) 
inches in the longest dimension and eighteen (18) inches in the shortest dimension, a scale of one hundred (100) feet to one (1) inch may be use, provided the resulting drawing shall be on an 18" x 24" sheet. 

(C) 
The following basic information shall be shown: 

(1) 	
Accurate boundary lines, with dimensions and angles, which provide a survey of the tract, closing with an error of not more than one (1) foot in five thousand (5000) feet. 

(2) 	
Accurate distances and directions to the nearest established street corners or official monuments. 

(3) 	
Accurate locations of all existing and recorded streets intersecting at the boundary of the tract. 

(4) 	
Accurate metes and bounds description of the property. 

(5) 	
Source of title of the applicant to the land as shown by the last entry in the books of the County recorder. 

(6) 	
Street names, which do not closely approximate the names of other existing streets in the town. 

(7) 	
Mathematical curve data for all curves included in the plan. 

(8) 	
Street lines with accurate, center line bearings and distances in feet and hundredths of foot. 

(9) 	
Lot numbers dimensions and area. 

(10) 	
Accurate locations of easements for utilities and any limitations on such public, semi-public or community use. 

(11) 	
Accurate location and dimensions for any property to be dedicated or reserved for public, semi-public or community use. 

(12) 	
Building lines and dimensions. 

(13) 	
Location, type, material and size of all monuments and lot 


markers.  
(14)  Restrictions which will run with the land.  
(15)  Name of the Subdivision.  
(16)  Name and address of the owner of the subdivision.  
(17)  North arrow, scale and date.  
(18)  Note required, construction of sidewalk and curbs (within town limits)  
(19)  Certification by a registered land surveyor.(as per form 1).  
(20)  Certification of dedication of streets and other public property. (as per form 2).  
(21)  Certificate for approval by the Commission. (as per form 3 and 3A).  


156.26 PROCEDURES FOR FINAL PLAT APPROVAL. 
(A) 
Upon filing of the final plat the staff shall place the plat on the agenda of the 	first available meeting of the Plan Commission. 

(B) 
Public hearing is not required. 


(C)When the final plat is submitted to the Commission, it shall be accompanied by a one of the following: 
(1) 	
A certificate that all improvements and installations for the subdivision required for its approval have been made or installed in accordance with specifications, and such improvements have been inspected and approved by the duly authorized municipal official; or 

(2) 	
A surety bond which shall: 


(a)Run to the Commission. 
(b)Be in an amount determined by the Commission to be sufficient to complete the improvements and installations in compliance with this Ordinance. 
(c)Be with surety satisfactory to the Commission, and 
(d)Specify the time for completion of the improvements and installations. 
(D) 
Upon completion of the improvements and installations required of a subdivider for the approval of a final plat, and prior to the acceptance thereof for public maintenance by the Commission or, if applicable, to any other governmental unit, the subdivider shall provide a three (3) year maintenance bond which shall: 

(1) 	
Run to the Commission, and if applicable, to any other 
governmental unit having a legal responsibility for the 
maintenance of said improvements and installations. 


(2) 	
Be in the amount equal to twenty percent (20%) of the cost of said improvements and installations as estimated by the Commission. 

(3) 	
Provide surety satisfactory to the Commission. 

(4) 	
Warrant the workmanship and all materials used in the construction, installation and completion of said improvements and installations to be of good quality and to have been constructed and completed in a workmanlike manner in accordance with the standards, specifications and requirements of this Ordinance and the satisfactory plans and specifications thereof. 

(5) 	
Provide for that for a period of three (3) years after said installations and improvements have been completed or are accepted for public maintenance by any appropriate governmental unit or agency thereof, the subdivider will at his own expense make all repairs to said improvement or installations, or the foundations thereof, which may become necessary by reason of improper workmanship or materials. However, these repairs do not include damage resulting from forces beyond the control of said subdivider. 

(E) 
Commission action. 

(1) 	
If the Commission finds that the final plat, together with the modifications or conditions, complies with all regulations set forth in this chapter, the Commission shall approve the final plat, and shall affix its seal upon the plat, together with the certifying signature of its president or secretary (or the vice-president and/or assistant secretary). The staff shall then record the final plat. 

(2) 	
If the Commission finds that the final plat together with the modifications or conditions does not comply with the regulations set forth in this chapter, the Commission shall deny approval of the final plat and make written findings of fact and decision which set forth its reasons for disapproval. 



156.30 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS. 
The Final Plat of a subdivision shall conform to the principals and standards in the Master Plan. 

156.31 CONFORMANCE TO ZONING AND FLOOD PROTECTION REGULATION. 
The subdivision shall conform to all provisions set forth in the Zoning Ordinance, and to all regulations as set forth in Flood Control Ordinance. 

156.32 CONFORMANCE TO DESIGN STANDARDS. 
All infrastructure design associated with subdivision development shall conform to the latest design standards adopted by the Town Council and incorporated into the "Town of Bremen Construction and Design Standards". 

156.33 STREETS. 
(A)All new streets shall conform to the guidelines specified in Thoroughfare Plan. 
(B)Street right-of-ways and pavement widths shall adhere to the appropriate classification under the definition of "streets," if the street is to become publicly owned. 
(C)The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all streets shall be correlated to existing and planned streets, existing topography, public convenience and safety, and in appropriate relation to the existing and proposed uses of land to be served by the streets. 
(D)No street shall have a name which duplicates or so closely approximates so to be confused with any existing street within the Town's jurisdictional limits, unless the new street is to be an extension of an existing street. 
(E)The minimum right-of-way for all streets or cul-de-sacs shall be as per Town of Bremen Construction Design Standards and shall not exceed six hundred (600) feet in length. 
(F)Intersections of more than two (2) streets at one point shall be avoided. 
(G)The street layout shall provide access to all lots within the subdivision, and where streets cross other streets, jogs shall not be created unless specifically approved by the Plan Commission. 
(H)Wherever there exists a dedicated or platted portion of a street adjacent to the proposed subdivision, the remainder of the street to the prescribed width shall be platted within the proposed subdivision. 
(I)Certain proposed streets, where appropriate, shall be extended to the boundary line of the tract to be subdivided so as to provide for normal circulation of traffic within the town and the surrounding areas. 
(J)Local streets are to be laid out so that their use by through traffic will be discouraged. 
(K)Streets are to be laid out such that logical and orderly development may occur, and to provide for the appropriate and efficient extension of utility services to the subdivision or adjoining areas. 

156.34 BLOCKS. 
(A)Blocks shall be of sufficient width to permit two tiers of lots of appropriate depth, except where reverse frontage on an arterial street is required. 
(B)Blocks shall not exceed twelve hundred fifty (1250) feet in length, and shall have a minimum length of three hundred (300) feet. 
(C) In the event a block length exceeds one thousand (1000) feet, a crosswalk easement of at least ten (10) feet in width may be required near center and entirely across any block, should it be determined that pedestrian access is required. Crosswalks shall be constructed in accordance with standards as adopted in the "Town of Bremen Construction Design Standards", and dedicated to the public use. 

156.35 LOTS. 
(A)All lots shall abut on a public street. 
(B)All lots shall conform to the minimum regulations set forth in the Town Code. 
(C)Lots shall be numbered consecutively throughout the entire subdivision. 
(D)Corner residential lots shall be sufficiently wide to permit appropriate setbacks from both streets. 
(E)The depth to width ratio of the usable area of a lot shall be a maximum of three 
(3) to one (1). 
(F)Widths and areas of lots shall not be less than provided in Zoning Requirements for that district, however, if the subdivision does not have municipal sanitary sewer and/or water available, the lot area necessary to install a private water and/or sewage disposal system on the lot in accordance with the Marshall County Health Department regulations shall be come the required minimum lot area. 

156.36 EASEMENTS. 
(A)Easements for utilities or access shall be provided. Such easements shall have a minimum width of twelve (12) feet, and where the easement is located along A lot line, the lot line shall be the center line of the easement. Easements shall be continuous to the street at the end of the block to connect with adjoining blocks in the shortest direct line. 
(B)Where a subdivision is traversed by a water course, drainage way, channel, or stream there shall be provided an adequate storm water easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially with such water course. Parallel streets may be required in connection therewith. 

156.37 ALLEYS. 
Alleys shall be discouraged in residential districts, but may be included in commercial and industrial areas where needed for loading, unloading or access purposes, and shall be at least sixteen (16) feet in width. 

156.38 UTILITIES. 
(A)All utilities located in the public right-of-way shall conform to standards set forth in the "Town of Bremen Construction and Design Standards" . 
(B)All utilities in residential subdivisions, including electric, gas, water, sewer and communication infrastructure (telephone, cable television, etc.) shall be installed underground. 

156.39 PUBLIC USE SPACES. 
Wherever a park recreation area, school, playground, or other public uses are located within the subdivision area as shown on the Master Plan, the Commission may request their dedication for such purposes, or their reservation for a period not to exceed three (3) years from the date of the recording of the Final Plat of the subdivision. 

156.40 CONFORMANCE TO MUNICIPAL STANDARDS. 
All improvements shall be constructed in conformance with the "Town of Bremen Construction and Design Standards", which is supplemental to this chapter. 

156.41 CONTINUING AUTHORITY OF COMMISSION. 
Subsequent to the passage of this Ordinance, the Commission may determine new sites and locations or alter or change existing sites and locations for schools, parks, or other public use areas within the jurisdiction of the Commission, and certify to the Town Council the amended or additional plan under the same procedure as established for the certification and approval of the Master Plan or Thoroughfare Plan. 
FORM 1 SURVEYORS CERTIFICATE 
"I, ___________________, HEREBY CERTIFY THAT I AM A REGISTERED LAND SURVEYOR, LICENSED IN COMPLIANCE WITH THE LAWS OF THE STATE OF INDIANA, THAT THIS PLAT CORRECTLY REPRESENTS A SURVEY COMPLETED BY ME ON _____________________., THAT ALL THE MONUMENTS SHOWN THEREON ACTUALLY EXIST, AND THAT THE LOCATION, SIZE, TYPE AND MATERIAL OF SAID MONUMENTS ARE ACCURATELY SHOWN." 
(SEAL) Signature 
FORM 2 DEED OF DEDICATION 
Each final plat submitted to the commission for approval shall carry a deed of dedication in substantially the following form. 
"We, the undersigned __________________, owners of the real estate shown and described herein, do hereby certify that we have laid off, platted and subdivided, and to thereby lay off, plat and subdivide, said real estate in accordance with the within plat. 
This subdivision shall be know and designated as ________________, and addition to __________________. All streets and alleys shown and not heretofore dedicated, are hereby dedicated to the public. 
Front and side yard building lines are hereby established as shown on this plat, between which lines and the property lines of the street, there shall be erected or maintained no building or structure. 
Thee are strips of ground _____ feet in width as shown on this plat and marked "Easement", reserved for the use of utilities for the installation of water and sewer mains, surface drainage, poles, ducts, lines and wires, subject at all times to the proper authorities and to the easement herein reserved. No permanent or other structures are to be erected or maintained upon said strips of land, but owners of lots in this subdivision shall take their titles subject to the rights of the utilities. 
(Additional dedications and protective covenants, or private restrictions, would be inserted here upon the subdivider's initiative or upon the recommendation of the Commission. Important provisions are those specifying the use to be made of the property and, in the case of residential use, the minimum habitable floor area.) 
The foregoing covenants (or restrictions) are to run with the land and shall be binding on all parties and all persons claiming under them until January 1, 19__, (a twenty-five (25) year period is suggested), at which time said covenants (or restrictions), shall be automatically extended for successive periods of ten (10) years unless changed by vote or a majority of the then owners of the building sites covered by these covenants, or restrictions, in whole or in part. Invalidation of any one of the foregoing covenants or restrictions, by judgment or court order shall in no way affect any of the other covenants or restrictions, which shall remain in full force and effect. 
The right to enforce these provisions by injunction, together with the right to cause the removal, by due process of law, of any structure or part thereof erected, or maintained in violation hereof, is hereby dedicated to the public, and reserved to the several owners of the several lots in this subdivision and to their heirs and assigns." 
Witness our Hands and Seals this ____ day of ______________________, 19___. 
State of Indiana ) ______________________________ ) Signature County of Marshall) 
Signature 
Before me the undersigned Notary Public, in and for the County and State, personally appeared ________________________, _______________________, ____________________, _______________________ and each separately and severally acknowledged the execution of the foregoing instrument as his or her voluntary act and deed, for the purposes therein expressed. 
Witness my hand and notarial seal this ______ day of ______________, 19_____. 
Signature 
FORM 3 COMMISSION CERTIFICATE 
Under authority provided by Chapter 174 Acts of 1947, enacted by the general assembly of the State of Indiana and all acts amendatory thereto, and an ordinance adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Town of Bremen, Indian, this Plat was given approval as follows: 
Approved by the Town of Bremen Plan Commission at a meeting held _______________________, 19__. 
TOWN OF BREMEN PLAN COMMISSION 
President 
Secretary 
(SEAL) 
FORM 3A 
When all or any part of a subdivision is located in the unincorporated area of the county, the following certificate shall be shown on the final plat: 
COUNTY COMMISSIONERS CERTIFICATE 
UNDER AUTHORITY PROVIDED BY CHAPTER 47, ACTS OF 1951, OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY, STATE OF INDIANA, THIS PLAT WAS GIVEN APPROVAL BY THE BOARD OF COUNTY COMMISSIONERS OF MARSHALL COUNTY, INDIANA, AT A MEETING HELD ON THE ____________ DAY OF _________________, 19____ . 
BOARD OF COUNTY COMMISSIONERS 
ATTEST: ______________________________ CHAPTER 157 THOROUGHFARE PLAN 
____________________________  ______________________________  
COUNTY AUDITOR  
______________________________  
(SEAL)  

157.01 DEFINITION 
Thoroughfare Plan. A comprehensive plan to direct transportation infrastructure development is hereby established, and it will be known as the "The Town of Bremen Thoroughfare Plan." The Thoroughfare Plan shall consist of the written text in this chapter and the Official Thoroughfare Plan Map for the Town of Bremen. The Thoroughfare Plan shall be utilized in the review of subdivision plats and any other development that connects into the existing transportation network. The Official Thoroughfare Plan Map shall be prepared by the Town Engineer and shall be available for public review at the Town Hall office. 

157.02 PURPOSE. 
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a comprehensive Thoroughfare Plan that will maximize the effectiveness and safety of existing and future streets and circulation patterns in and around the town. The comprehensive nature of the plan will ensure that future street construction and development will effectively connect and extend existing streets, circulation patterns and traffic routes to create a transportation network that will accommodate orderly growth and development of residential and business areas while efficiently utilizing land for that purpose. 

157.03 APPLICABILITY AND CONFORMANCE. 
(A)All subdivision development, planned unit developments, existing street paving, extending or widening, and new street construction shall conform to the provisions of this chapter. No future development, whether independent or an extension of an existing development, shall encroach upon the areas designated as transportation routes in the Thoroughfare Plan. 
(B)All subdivision development, planned unit developments, existing street paving, widening, or extending and new street construction shall conform to the standards set forth in the "Town of Bremen Construction and Design Standards" Ordinance. 
(C)All new development will provide for the implementation of the Thoroughfare Plan. All future street extensions identified in the plan shall be designed to standards set forth in this Ordinance and utilized and incorporated into any development plan that is applied to the area around the locations of the specified future street extensions. 
(D)The exception to this rule is for subdivisions platted, approved and recorded prior to the adoption of this Ordinance. Those exceptions shall be allowed to be completed, even if the development encroaches upon land designated in the plan as a transportation route. In that event, the Plan Commission shall amend the Thoroughfare Plan to accommodate to new development while still making every effort to fulfill the intent of the plan for that area. 

157.04 CONSULTATION REQUIRED. 
In order to promote the greatest opportunity for proper development, it shall be required of all proposed street construction that the developer consult with the Superintendent of Streets and/or the Building Commissioner prior to development of construction design prints to ensure that the proposed infrastructure conform to the Thoroughfare Plan. Nonconformance to the Thoroughfare Plan is grounds for subdivision denial by the Plan Commission, so it is recommended that the subdivider work closely with all relevant local officials to coordinate on compliance with the design requirements. 

157.05 EXTENSIONS OF EXISTING STREETS. 
All extensions of existing streets shall be constructed in a proper fashion to conform to the construction standards and guidelines for the classification designated for that particular street. 

157.06 AMENDMENTS TO THOROUGHFARE PLAN. 
Amendments to the Thoroughfare Plan shall be submitted to the Plan Commission for consideration, will require a public hearing, and all necessary public notice requirements must be met to approve the amendment. 

157.07 LOCATION OF STREETS. 
(A)Whenever the location of a street is indicated in the Official Thoroughfare Plan as following an existing road or street, or a section or half-section or other established property line, the location of the street shall conform to such location; however, a street lying solely and completely within a subdivision, and not designated as following an existing road or established property line, may be varied in its alignment when such variance promotes the plan of a neighborhood development unit in accordance with good site planning principals, and if such alignment provides for the continuity of traffic movements. 
(B)Wherever the location of a street is indicated in the Official Plan as following an irregular alignment, or a revised alignment or is not referenced to an established line, it shall follow the alignment shown in the Official Thoroughfare Plan. Such alignment shall be subject to a detailed survey which shall be provided by the owners of land to be subdivided if required by the Commission. The survey for such street shall be subject to the approval of the Commission prior to the dedication of the street. 

157.08 CONSIDERATION BY PUBLIC AGENCIES. 
(A)The Plan Commission and Town Council shall be guided by and give consideration to the general policy and pattern of street development set out in the Thoroughfare Plan in the authorization, construction, widening, alteration, relocation or abandonment of the public streets, highways and related structures. 
(B)No public way shall be abandoned or vacated until the Commission shall have first given notice and held public hearing on vacation or abandonment of such public way. The Commission shall forward its recommendation to the Town Council for final consideration. 

157.09 CONTINUING AUTHORITY OF COMMISSION. 
Subsequent to the passage of this Ordinance, the Commission may determine lines for new, extended, widened, or narrowed thoroughfares in any portion of the area within the jurisdiction of the Town of Bremen, and forward to the Town Council the recommended amended or additional plan under the same procedure as established for the certification and approval of the Official Thoroughfare Plan. 

157.10 ISSUANCE OF PERMITS. 
Any permits authorized by the Town Council including but not limited to Improvement Location Permits, permitting the erection, alteration, or relocation of structures, buildings or other improvements within the jurisdiction of the Town of Bremen, shall be issued only if, in addition to satisfying the requirements of other Ordinances, the proposed street right-of-way as set forth in this Ordinance will be protected from encroachment. In this instance, the proposed street right-of-way lines will be considered as the front line of lots and tracts bordering such street. 

157.11 CLASSIFICATION OF STREETS. 
The thoroughfares comprising the Thoroughfare Plan Map are hereby classified on the basis of type, in accordance with their proposed function, as follows: 
Type of Street 	Function 
* 
Arterial: Streets that carry traffic in and out of town 
and to the surrounding areas. 


* 
Collector: Streets which consolidate and direct local 
traffic to arterial streets. 


* 
Local: Streets which provide access to adjoining 
properties in residential or local business areas. 




157.12 DESIGNATION OF STREETS. 
The thoroughfares compromising the Thoroughfare Plan Map are hereby designated as follows: 
Type of Street 	Name of Street 
Arterials: 	Bowen Avenue (North and South) 
Plymouth Street ( East and West) 

U.S. 
106 East (106 on curve) 

U.S. 
6 (By-Pass) 


Street Designations cont' 
Collectors: 	Birkey Street (North and South) Center Street (North and South) Dewey Street(Bowen West through Industrial Park) Grant Street (West from Center St. to end) High Road (East from Bowen Ave. to Center St.) Hope Boulevard (South from Plymouth St.) Industrial Drive (South from Dewey St. to Plymouth St.) Liberty Street (South from Plymouth St. to South St.) Marshall Street (South from Plymouth Street to Grant St.) North Street (West from Bowen Ave. to Birkey St.) Second Street (East from Center St. to U.S. 106 East) Stewart Street (South from Plymouth St. to South St.) South Street (East from Liberty St. to Stewart St.) Woodies lane (South from Plymouth St. to end) 
Local 	All other streets not specifically named in this section shall be known to be local streets, and shall conform to all requirements applicable to that designation. 
157.13 SPECIFICATION FOR STREET CONSTRUCTION. The specification for street construction are set out in the Engineering Standards 

157.14 THOROUGHFARE PLAN MAP: CORPORATE LIMITS 
157.15 THOROUGHFARE PLAN MAP: JURISDICTIONAL AREA CHAPTER 159 -UNSAFE BUILDINGS RULES AND REGULATIONS 
159.01 
Under the provisions of Indiana Code 36-7-9, there is hereby established the Bremen Unsafe Building Law. 
159.02 
Indiana Code 36-7-9 through 36-7-9-28 is hereby adopted by reference as the Bremen Unsafe Building Law. All proceedings within the Town of Bremen for the inspection, repair, and removal of unsafe buildings shall be governed by said law and the provisions of this ordinance. In the event the provisions of this ordinance conflict with the provisions of Indiana Code 36-7-9 through 36-7-9-28, then the provisions of the State statue shall control. 
159.03 
All buildings or portions thereof within the Town of Bremen which are determined after inspection by the Building Commissioner to be unsafe as defined in this ordinance are hereby declared to be public nuisances and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition, or removal. 
159.04 
The Bremen Building Inspector, as chief administrative officer of the Bremen Board of Zoning Appeals, shall be authorized to administer and to proceed under the provisions of said law in ordering the repair or removal of any buildings found to be unsafe as specified therein or as specified thereafter. 
159.05 
The Bremen Board of Zoning Appeals in hereby designated the hearing authority for the implementation of this ordinance. 
159.06 
Wherever in the building regulations of Bremen or the Bremen Unsafe Building Law it is provided that anything must be done to the approval of or subject to the direction of the Building Commissioner, or any other officer of the Town, this shall be construed to give such officer only the discretion to determine whether the rules and standards established by ordinance have been complied with; and no such provisions shall be construed as giving any officer discretionary powers as to what such regulations or standards shall be, power to require conditions not prescribed by ordinance, or to enforce ordinance provisions in an arbitrary or discretionary manner. 
159.07 
The description of an unsafe building contained in Indiana Code 36-7-9-4 is hereby supplemented to provide minimum standards for building condition or maintenance in the Town of Bremen, Indiana by adding the following definition: 
UNSAFE BUILDING: Any building or structure which has any or all of the conditions or defects hereinafter described shall be deemed to be an unsafe building, provided that such conditions or defects exist to the extent that life, health, property, or safety of the public or its occupants are endangered. 
a.  Whenever any door, aisle, passageway, or other means of exit is not sufficient width or size or is not so arranged as to provide safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic.  
b.  Whenever the stress in any materials, member, or portion thereof, due to all dead and live loads, is more than one and one-half times the working stress or stresses allowed for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location.  
c.  Whenever any portion thereof has been damaged by fire, earthquake, wind, flood, or by any other cause, to such an extent that the structural strength or stability thereof is materially less than it was before such catastrophe and is less than the minimum requirements for new buildings or similar structure, purpose or location.  

d. 	
Whenever any portion, member, or appurtenance thereof is likely to fail, to become detached or dislodged, or to collapse and thereby injure persons or damage property. 

e. 	
Whenever any portion of a building, or any member, appurtenance, ornamentation or the exterior thereof is not of sufficient strength or stability or is not so anchored, attached, or fastened in place so as to be capable of resisting a wind pressure of one-half of that specified for new buildings or similar structure, purpose or location without exceeding the working stresses permitted for such buildings. 

f. 	
Whenever any portion thereof has wreaked, warped, buckled or settled to such an extent that walls or other structural portions have materially less resistance to winds or earthquake than is required in the case of similar new construction. 

g. 	
Whenever the building or structure, or any portion thereof, because of (a) dilapidation, deterioration, or decay, (b) faulty construction, (c) the removal, movement or instability of any portion of the ground necessary for the purpose of supporting such building, (d) the deterioration, decay or inadequacy of its foundation, or (e) any other cause, is likely to partially or completely collapse. 

h. 	
Whenever, for any reason, the building or structure, or any portion thereof, is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is being used. 

i. 	
Whenever the exterior walls or other vertical structural members list, lean, or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the center of gravity does not fall inside the middle one-third of the base. 

j. 	
Whenever the building or structure, exclusive of the foundation, shows thirty-three percent (33%) or more damage or deterioration of its supporting member or members, of fifty percent (50%) damage or deterioration of its non-supporting members, enclosing or outside walls or coverings. 

k. 	
Whenever the building or structure has been so damaged by fire, wind, earthquake or flood or has become so dilapidated or deteriorated so as to become (a) an attractive nuisance to children, or (b) freely accessible to persons for the purpose of committing unlawful acts. 

o. 	
Whenever any building or structure, because of obsolescence, dilapidated condition, deterioration, damage, inadequate exits, lack of sufficient fire-resistive construction, faulty electric wiring, gas connections, or heating apparatus, or other cause, is determined by the Fire Official to be a fire hazard. 

p. 	
Whenever any portion of a building or structure remains on a site after the demolition or destruction of the building or structure or whenever any building or structure is abandoned for a period of excess of six (6) months so as to constitute such building or portion thereof an attractive nuisance or hazard to the public. 

r. 	
All work for the reconstruction, alteration, repair or demolition of buildings and other structures shall be performed in a good workmanlike manner according to the accepted standards and practices in the trade. The provisions of the rules pertaining to construction, plumbing, electrical, mechanical and one and two family dwellings promulgated by the Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission of Indiana shall be considered standard and acceptable practice for all matters covered by this ordinance or orders issued pursuant to this ordinance by the Building Commissioner of the Town of Bremen, Indiana. 

s. 	
An Unsafe Building Fund is hereby designated and established in the operating budget of the Board of Zoning Appeals in accordance with the provisions of I.C. 36-7-914. 

t. 	
No person, firm or corporation, whether as owner, lessee, sublessee or occupant shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or premises, or cause or permit the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of this ordinance or any order issued by the Building Commissioner. Any persons violating the provisions of this ordinance or I.C. 36-7-9-28 shall commit a Class C infraction for any day such violation continues. 

u. 	
Should any section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this ordinance be declared unconstitutional or invalid for any reasons, the remainder of said ordinance shall not be affected thereby. 


l.  Whenever  any  building  or  structure  has  been  constructed,  exists  or  is  
maintained in violation of any specific requirement or prohibition applicable to  
such building or structure provided by the building regulations of the Town, or of  
any law or ordinance of this State or Town relating to the condition, location or  
structure of buildings.  
m.  Whenever any building or structure which, whether or not erected in accordance  
with all applicable laws and ordinances has in any non-supporting part, member  
or portion less than fifty percent (50%), or in any support part, member or  
portion less than sixty-six percent (66%) or the (a) strength, (b) fire-resisting  
qualities or characteristics, or (c) weather-resisting qualities or characteristics  
required by law in the case of a newly constructed building of like area, height  
and occupancy in the same location.  
n.  Whenever a building or structure, used or intended to be used for dwelling  
purposes, because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, decay, damage,  
faulty construction or arrangements, inadequate light, air or sanitation facilities,  
or otherwise, is determined by the Building Commissioner to be unsanitary, unfit  
for human habitation, or in such a condition that is likely to cause sickness or  
disease.  


CHAPTER 162.00 -NONCONFORMING USES 
162.01 	Specifications. The lawful use of a building or premises, existing at the time of the effective date of these regulations, may be continued although such use does not conform to all the provisions thereof, except as hereinafter provided. 
162.02 	A nonconforming use may be extended throughout a building provided no structural alterations are made therein, except those required by law. 
162.03 	A nonconforming use may be changed to another nonconforming use of the same or greater restrictions, provided no structural changes are made in the building. Whenever a nonconforming use has been changed to a conforming use or to a use permitted in a District of greater restrictions, it shall not thereafter be changed to a nonconforming use of a less restricted District. 
162.04  No building shall be erected upon any premises devoted to a  
nonconforming use, except in conformance  with these regulations.  
162.05  The Board may authorize, by written permit, in a residentially- 

zoned District for a period of not more than one (1) year from the date of such permit, a temporary building for commercial or industrial use incidental to the residential construction and development of said District. 
162.06 	Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the plans, construction or designated use of a building for which a building permit has been heretofore issued, and the construction of which has been diligently prosecuted within ninety (90) days of the date of such permit, and which entire building shall be completed according to such plans filed within two (2) years from the effective date of these regulations. 
162.07 	In the event that a nonconforming use of any building or premises is discontinued for a period of one (1) year, the use of the same shall thereafter conform to the uses permitted in the District in which it is located if the building is adaptable to a permitted use. 
162.08 	When a building containing a nonconforming use is damaged by fire, explosion, act of God or the public enemy to the extent of more than fifty (50) per cent of its assessed value it shall not be restored except in conformity with the regulations of the District within which it is located. 
162.09 	These provisions apply in the same manner to a use which may become a nonconforming use due to a later amendment to these regulations. 
CHAPTER 163 -CONSTRUCTION AND DESIGN STANDARDS 
INTRODUCTION: The Streets and infrastructure in the Town of Bremen, as well as all other municipalities, represents a considerable investment of resources and is typically one of the major financial assets of a community. Because of this major asset, town personnel continually strive to insure the construction of these facilities meets minimum acceptable standards. Quality construction of these facilities results in reduced maintenance, increased longevity, and less financial burden to the residents of the community. This publication is provided as a guide to aid owners, developers, government officials, and others, by providing minimum standards for the design and construction of municipal streets and utility systems. They are intended to provide a minimum standard of quality for the types of materials and construction techniques to maintain consistency with existing facilities. 
Each individual situation or construction project is unique with its own set of circumstances. Therefore, owners and developers are encouraged to enlist the aid of qualified consultants, engineers, contractors, etc. to analyze site conditions and to efficiently design each project within the minimum standards presented herein. Alternate materials and methods of construction will be considered on a case by case basis. 
These standards are divided into the following three Articles: 
Article I 
163.01 	General Information and Guidelines This section provides general information which sets forth the basic guidelines for various items of construction. This section should be reviewed for each project to determine the standards that apply to the proposed work. Once the applicable standards have been identified, Article II -Standard Specifications and Article III -Standard Drawings, should be consulted for specific details of materials and methods of construction. 
Article II 
163.02 	Standard Specifications This Article contains a compilation of selected specification for various items of municipal utility and street construction. The section headings and numbering system conforms to the Construction Specifications Institute's MASTERFORMAT. This system is utilized throughout the construction industry to provide uniformity of information. The section numbers are not consecutive since all section of the MASTERFORMAT are not applicable to these standards. Each section is subdivided into three parts. The first part is a general section providing references and general information. The second part provides detailed specifications on the projects to be utilized during the construction. The third part is titled EXECUTION and defines the methods of construction. One or more of the specification sections may be applicable for each project. 
Number Section Name 
02090 Reference Standards 
01410 Testing Laboratory Services 
01570 Traffic Regulation 
02110 Site Clearing 
02205 Soil Materials 
02207 Aggregate Materials 

02222 Excavating 02223 Backfilling 02225 Trenching 02231 Aggregate Base Course 02275 Riprap 02510 Asphaltic Concrete Paving 02521 Portland Cement Concrete for, Sidewalks, Curbs 
and Gutters 02607 Manholes and Covers 02609 Pipe Culverts 02667 Water Lines 02675 Disinfection of Water Distribution System 02722 Storm Drainage System 02732 Sanitary Sewer System 02923 Landscape Grading 02936 Seeding 03200 Concrete Reinforcement 03300 Cast-In-Place Concrete 
Article III 
163.03 	Standard Drawings This Article presents a compilation of standard drawings showing acceptable minimum standards for various items of construction. 
The key to implementation of these construction and design standards is cooperation and communication between the Town of Bremen and the owners, engineers, developers, contractors, etc. responsible for the actual construction. The Town of Bremen can only provide assistance if they are properly notified of the impending construction project. Therefore, you are requested to notify the Town of Bremen of an impending project at the earliest possible date, preferable during the preliminary or design phase of the project. Notification and inquires should be directed to: 
Bremen Building Commissioner, 
Bremen Town Hall 
104 W. Plymouth St. 
Bremen, IN 46506 (219) 546-2044 

Item 	Sheet No. 
Streets 
Specifications S1 
Cross-Section, Thickness, Misc. Details S2 
Cul-de-Sac S3 
Curb and Gutter S3 
Sidewalk, Residential S4 
Sidewalk, Commercial S5 
Curb Ramps S6 

Water Pipe Specifications W1 Restraint Methods W2 Restraint Fastener Details W3 Restraint Blocking W4 Restraint Blocking W5 
Restraint Blocking  W6  
Restraint Design Criteria  W7  
Wastewater  
Pipe Specifications  WW1  
Manholes  WW2  
Service Connections  WW3  
Cleanout  WW4  
Pipe Bedding  WW5  
Storm Drainage  
Design Criteria  D1  
Rainfall Chart  D2  
Pipe  D3  
Inlets  D4  
Drywell  D5  
Pipe Bedding  D6  
Culvert End Sections  D7  
Culvert End Sections  D8  






