1
TOWN OF CUMBERLAND, INDIANA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2
TOWN OF CUMBERLAND, INDIANA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
This Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through June 30, 2016
3
TOWN OFFICIALS
Joe Siefker, Council President
Anna Pea, Council Vice President
Mark Reynold, Council Member
Brian Gritter, Council Member
Nicole Bell, Council Member
Erica Salmon, Clerk-Treasurer
4
CUMBERLAND, INDIANA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Chapter
TITLE 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS ON CODE AND PENALTY
10. General Provision on Code and Penalty
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
30. Town Council
31. Town Officials
32. Town Policies
33. Police Department
34. Boards and Commissions
35. Funds.
36. Ordinance Violations Bureau
37. Town Court
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
50. Sanitary Sewer Services
51. Storm Water Management
52. Street Lights
53. Water Utility
Appendix A: Utility Fee Schedule
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
70. Traffic Rules
71. Parking
72. Traffic Schedules
73. Parking Schedules
74. Wayfinding Destination Sign Policy
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
90. Abandoned and Illegally Stored Vehicles
91. Animals
92. Fire Prevention
93. Nuisances
94. Parks and Recreation
95. Streets; Sidewalks; Bridges
96. Weeds and Vegetation
97. Alarms
98. No Smoking
99. Water Conservation
5
100. Unsafe Building Regulations and Remediation
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
110. Peddlers and Solicitors
111. Amusement Devices
112. Tax Abatement
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
130. General Offenses
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
Chapter
150. Building Code
151. Trailers and Trailers Parks
152. Flood Damage Prevention
153. Zoning Code
154. Public Health, Safety and General Welfare Relative to Construction
Activity
155. Fees
156. Permit Application, Inspection and Completion Requirements
157. Subdivision Control Ordinance
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
Table
I. Annexations
II. Contracts
III. Zoning Map Changes
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Indiana Code
References to 1995 Code
References to Ordinances
INDEX
6
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS ON CODE AND PENALTY
Chapter
10. GENERAL PROVISIONS ON CODE AND PENALTY
7
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS ON CODE AND PENALTY
Section
00-01-10-01 Title of Code
00-01-10-02 Interpretation
00-01-10-03 Application to future ordinances
00-01-10-04 Construction of code
00-01-10-05 Rules of interpretation; definitions
00-01-10-06 Severability
00-01-10-07 Reference to other sections
00-01-10-08 Reference to offices; name designations
00-01-10-09 Errors and omissions
00-01-10-10 Reasonable time
00-01-10-11 Repeal or medication of code section
00-01-10-12 Limitation periods
00-01-10-13 Ordinances unaffected
00-01-10-14 Ordinances which amend or supplement code
00-01-10-15 Sections histories; statutory references
00-01-10-16 Preservation of penalties, offenses, rights and liabilities
00-01-10-17 Distribution of the code
00-01-10-99 General Penalty
§ 00-01-10-01 TITLE OF CODE.
All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the town, as revised, codified, rearranged, renumbered, and consolidated into component codes, titles, chapters, and sections, shall be known and designated as the “Cumberland Town Code,” for which designation “Code of Ordinances,” “Codified Ordinances,” or “Code” may be substituted. Code title, chapter, and section headings do not constitute any part of the law as contained in the code.
§ 00-01-10-02 INTERPRETATION.
Unless otherwise provide herein, or by law or implication required, the same rules of construction, definition, and application shall govern the interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state law.
§ 00-01-10-03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall apply to ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code unless otherwise specifically provided.
8
§ 00-01-10-04 CONSTRUCTION OF CODE.
(A) (1) This code is a codification of previously existing laws, amendments thereto, and newly enacted laws.
(2) Any previously existing law or amendment thereto reenacted by this code shall continue in operation and effect, as if it had not been repealed by this code. All rules and regulations adopted under laws reenacted in this code shall remain in full force and effect, unless repealed or amended subsequent to the enactment of this code.
(B) Any appropriation repealed and reenacted by this code is continued only for the period designated in the original enactment of that appropriation.
(C) The numerical order and position of sections in this code does not r3esolved a conflict between two or more sections.
(D) Any irreconcilable conflict between sections shall be resolved by reference to the dates that the sections were originally enacted. The section most recently enacted supersedes any conflicting section or division.
(E) All references within a section of this code to any section of previously existing laws refer to the numbers in the original enactment.
(F) (1) (a) The numerical designations and descriptive headings assigned to the various titles, chapters, subchapters, or sections of this code, as originally enacted, or as added by amendment, are not law, and may be altered b the compilers of this or any subsequent codification, in any official publication, to more clearly indicate its content.
(b) These descriptive headings are for organizational purposes only, and do not affect the meaning, application, or construction of the law they precede.
(2) Each note following a section of this code is for reference purposes only, and is not a part of the section.
(G) All references to any section of this code refer to all subsequent amendments to that section, unless otherwise provided.
(I.C. 1-1-1-5)
§ 00-01-10-05 RULES OF INTERPRETATION; DEFINITIONS.
(A) Rules of interpretation. This code shall be construed b the following rules unless the construction is plainly repugnant to the legislative intent or context of the provision.
(1) Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain, ordinary, and usual sense. Technical words and phrases having a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to their technical import.
(2) Words imputing joint authority to three or more persons shall be construed as imputing authority to a majority of such persons, unless otherwise declared in the section giving the authority.
9
(3) Where a section requires an act to be done which, by law, any agent or deputy may perform in addition to the principal, the performance of the act by an authorized deputy or agent is valid.
(4) Words denoting the masculine gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders; words in the singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall include the singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include the future, if applicable.
(B) Definitions. For the purpose of this code of ordinances, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
CLERK-TREASURER. The Clerk-Treasurer of the Town Council.
COUNCIL. The Town Council.
COUNTY. Marion County and/or Hancock County.
HIGHWAY. Includes bridges, roads, and streets, unless otherwise expressly provided.
MONTH. One calendar month.
PERSON. Extends to and includes person, persons, firm, corporation, copartnership, trustee, lessee, or receiver. Whenever used in any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER, as applied to any unincorporated entity, shall mean the partners or members thereof, and, as applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.
PRECEDING and FOLLOWING. When referring to sections or divisions in this code, refer to the sections or division next following or next preceding that in which the words occur, unless some other sections is designated.
TOWN HALL. The Cumberland Municipal Building.
TOWN MANAGER. The individual appointed by the Town Council to be the chief administrative officer of the town government.
TOWN MARSHAL, POLICE CHIEF and CHIEF OF POLICE. These are interchangeable titles for the person appointed by the Town Council under the authority of I.C. 36-5-7 to be the chief police officer of the won and head of the police department.
TOWNSHIP. The township or townships in which the town is located.
WRITTEN and IN WRITING. Include printing, lithographing, or other modes of representing words and letters. Where the written signature of a person is required, the terms mean the proper handwriting of the person, or the person’s mark.
YEAR. One calendar year, unless otherwise expressly provided.
(I.C. 1-1-4-5)
(Ord. 2001-7, passed 4-4-2001)
10
§ 00-01-10-06 SEVERABILITY.
(A) If any section or this code now enacted or subsequently amended, or its application to any person or circumstances, is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect other sections that can be given effect without the invalid section or application.
(B) Except in the case of a section or amendment to this code containing a nonseverability provision, each division or part of every section is severable. If any portion or application of a section is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect the remainder of the section, unless:
(1) The remainder is so essentially and inseparably connected with and so dependent upon the invalid provision or application that it cannot be presumed that the remainder would have been enacted without the invalid provision or application; or
(2) The remainder is incomplete and incapable of being executed in accordance with the legislative intent without the invalid provision or application.
(C) This section applies to every section of this code, regardless of whether a section was enacted before or after the passage of this code.
(I.C. 1-1-1-8)
§ 00-01-10-07 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
Whenever, in one section, reference is made to another section hereof, the reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered, unless the subject matter is changed or materially altered by the amendments or revision.
§ 00-01-10-08 REFERENCE TO OFFICES; NAME DESIGNATIONS.
(A) Reference to offices. Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any office, officer, or employee of this municipality exercising the powers, duties, or functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
(B) Name designations. Whenever any ordinance or resolution of the Council refers to any board bureau, commission, division, department, officer, agency, authority, or instrumentality of any government, and that name designation is incorrectly stated, or, at the time of the effective date of that ordinance or subsequent thereto, the rights, powers, duties, or liabilities placed with that entity are or were transferred to a different entity, then the named board, bureau, commission, department, division, officer, agency, authority, or instrumentality, whether correctly named in the ordinance at its effective date or not, means that correctly named entity, or the entity to which the duties, liabilities, powers, and rights were transferred.
(I.C. 1-1-6-1)
11
§ 00-01-10-09 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention of the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can be attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was clearly intended to express such intent, the spelling shall be corrected and the word or words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with the manifest intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the correct words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of such error.
§ 00-01-10-10 REASONABLE TIME.
(A) In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time or notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt performance of the act or the giving of the notice.
(B) The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last.
§ 00-01-10-11 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF CODE SECTION.
When a section of this code is repealed which repealed a former section or law adopted prior to the enactment of this code, the former section or law is not revived, unless it so expressly provides The repeal of any section shall not extinguish or release any penalty, forfeiture, or liability incurred under the section, unless the repealing section so expressly provides. The section shall be treated as still remaining in force for the purposes of sustaining any proper action or prosecution for the enforcement of the penalty, forfeiture, or liability.
(I.C. 1-1-5-1)
§ 00-01-10-12 LIMITATION PERIODS.
The running of any period of limitations or any requirement of notice contained in any law, whether applicable to civil causes or proceedings, or to the prosecution of offenses, or for the recovery of penalties and forfeitures, contained in a law repealed and reenacted by this code shall not be affected by the repeal and reenactment; but all suits, proceedings, and prosecutions for causes arising or acts committed prior to the effective date of this code may be commenced and prosecuted with the same effect as if this code had not been enacted.
Statutory reference:
Periods of limitation, see I.C. 1-1-1-7
§ 00-01-10-13 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in full force and effect, unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
12
§ 00-01-10-14 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a new chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of this code, the proper number of the chapter or section. In addition to such indication thereof as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a caption or title shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.
§ 00-01010-15 SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.
(A) As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage date of the original ordinance, and any amending ordinances, are listed following the text of the code section. Example: (Ord. 10, passed 5-13-1960; Am. Ord. 15, passed 1-1-1970; Am. Ord. 20, passed 1-1-1980; Am. Ord. 25, passed 1-1-1985)
(B) (1) If a statutory cite is include in the history, this indicates that the text of the section reads substantially the same as the statues. Example: (I.C. 36-5-2-2) (Ord. 10, passed 1-17-1980; Am. Ord. 20, passed -11-1985)
(2) If a statutory cite is set forth as a “statutory reference” following the text of the section, this indicates that the reader should refer to that statue for further information. Example:
§ 00-03-39-02 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
The municipality shall make available to any person for inspection or copying all public records, unless otherwise exempted by state law.
Statutory reference:
The inspection of public records, see I.C. 5-14-3-1 et seq.
§ 00-01-10-16 PRESERVATION OF PENALTIES, OFFENSES, RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES.
(A) All offenses committed under laws in force prior to the effective date of this code shall be prosecuted and remain punishable as provided by those laws.
(B) This code does not affect any rights or liabilities accrued, penalties incurred, or proceedings begun prior to the effective date of this code. The liabilities, proceedings, and rights are continued; punishments, penalties, or forfeitures shall be enforced and imposed as if this code had not been enacted.
(C) In particular, any agreement granting permission to utilize highway right-of-ways, contacts entered into or franchises granted, the acceptance, establishment or vacation of ay highway, and the election of corporate officers shall remain valid in all respect, as if this coded had not been enacted.
13
§ 00-01-10-17 DISTRIBUTION OF THE CODE.
(A) When this code is published, printed copies of it shall be delivered to the Clerk-Treasurer, who shall deliver one copy to each of the following:
(1) Each member of the Town Council;
(2) The head of each department of the town;
(3) The Town Attorney;
(4) Any library in the town serving a significant number of town residents; and
(5) Any court in which town ordinances are regularly prosecuted.
(B) The Council, in its discretion, may provide copies of this code, without charge, to any other public officials or employees or governmental agencies that it determines should have a copy of its code.
(C) Any additional copies of this code shall be kept by the Clerk-Treasurer and shall be sold by him or her to anyone, upon request, at a price determined by the Council.
(Ord. 2001-7, passed 4-4-2001)
§ 00-01010-99 GENERAL PENALTY.
Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this code for which another penalty is not specifically provided shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine not exceeding $2,500. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during which a violation occurs or continues.
Statutory reference:
Power to prescribe fines up to $2,500 granted, see I.C. 36-1-3-8(a)(10)
14
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
Chapter
30. TOWN COUNCIL
31. TOWN OFFICIALS
32. TOWN POLICIES
33. POLICE DEPARTMENT
34. BOARDS AND COMMISSION
35. FUNDS
36. ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS BUREAU
37. TOWN COURT
15
CHAPTER 30: TOWN COUNCIL
Section
General Provisions
00-03-30-01 Terms
00-03-30-02 Duties; compensation; oath
00-03-30-03 Bond
00-03-30-04 President and Vice President
00-03-30-05 Appointments
00-03-30-06 Authority to revoke licenses
00-03-30-07 Town Council districts
Meetings
00-03-30-20 Date, time, and place of regular meetings
00-03-30-21 All meetings open to public, exception
00-03-30-22 Special meetings
00-03-30-23 Emergency meetings
00-03-30-24 Rules of procedure
Town Seal
00-03-30-35 Town seal
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 00-03-30-01 TERMS.
The elected officials for the town shall be the Town Council, who shall be elected to office for a four-year term, and the Clerk-Treasurer, who shall be elected for a four-year term, in the method provided by statute.
(1995 Code, § 00-03-30-01)
§ 00-03-30-02 DUTIES; COMPENSATION; OATH.
(A) Town Council members shall perform the duties and have the powers designated by statute and shall receive compensation as may, from time to time, be established by regulation ordinance of the Council.
(B) Town Council members shall be administered the oath of office as provided by statue.
(1995 Code, § 0003-30-02)
16
§ 00-03-30-03 BOND.
Elected and appointed officials of the town shall give surety bonds to ensure the town of the proper performance of their respective duties. The bonds shall be in the amounts required by statue.
(1995 Code, § 00-03-30-03)
§ 00-03-30-04 PRESIDENT AND VICE PRESIDENT.
(A) A Council President and Vice President shall be elected by the Council from among its members at the first regular meeting of the Council in January each year. If the Council chooses, it may elect a First Vice President and Second Vice President. If a First and a Second Vice President have been elected, any reference in this code simply to the Council Vice President shall generally be considered as a reference to either or both the First and Second Vice Presidents, except the First Vice President shall be the first of the two to assume the responsibilities of the President, as President Pro Tempore, during the President’s absence or disability.
(B) The Council President and Vice President shall be elected to one-year terms.
(C) A Council member serving as either President or Vice President may be removed and replaced by another Council member in the position by a majority vote of the Council.
(D) The President shall be the presiding officer at all Council meetings, unless he or she is absent or otherwise unable to serve as presiding officer. If the President is unable to preside at a Council meeting, the Vice President shall be the presiding officer. If neither the President nor Vice President are able to serve as presiding officer at a Council meeting, the remaining Council member shall choose who shall be presiding officer for the meeting.
(E) The President shall be responsible for the preparation of the agendas for Council meetings.
(F) When the Council is not meeting, the President shall serve as the primary Council contact for the Town Manager and the Town Attorney and for any outside entities, including representatives of the media, who seek information from or business with the Town Council.
(G) The President and Vice President may have any other additional powers delegated to them by the Council, by its written rules or by specific directive of the Council.
(H) The President shall have any and all powers provided to this position by state statutes.
(I) The President may, with notice given to other Council members, delegate his or her authority with respect to a specific matter to the Vice President or other member of the Town Council.
(Ord. 2001-7, passed 4-4-2001)
17
§ 00-03-30-05 APPOINTMENTS.
The Town council may appoint officials and employees as necessary to perform the service needed by the Town.
(1995 Code, § 00-03-30-05)
§ 00-03-30-06 AUTHORITY TO REVOKE LICENSES.
The President of the Town Council may revoke or suspend any license issued by the town, if the person holding the license has violated the terms and conditions of the license or of the law under which it was issued, pursuant to I.C. 36-5-4-11.
(1995 Code, § 00-03-30-06)
§ 00-03-30-07 TOWN COUNCIL DISTRICTS.
(A) The town is hereby divided into five Town Council districts as identified on Exhibit A (this is a map of the town on file in the office of the Clerk-Treasurer and described as follows:
(1) District One shall consist of the area of the town in Marion County that is bounded by the centerlines of East Washington Street (U.S. 40), North German Church Road, East 10th Street and North Woodlark Drive.
(2) District Two shall consist of the area of the Town in Marion County that is bounded by the centerlines of East Washington Street (U.S. 40), North Woodlark Drive, East 10th Street and North Muessing Street; and the area of the Town in Marion County that is bounded by the centerlines of East Washington Street (U.S. 40), North Muessing Street, East Welland Street and North Starter Street; and the area of the town in Marion County described by the following boundary description: beginning at the intersection of the centerlines of East 10th Street and North Muessing Street (point of beginning),then south along the centerline of North Muessing Street to the centerline of East 9th Street, then east along the centerline of East 9th Street to the centerline of Cumberland Creek, then north along the centerline of Cumberland Creek approximately 120.0 feet, then northeasterly to the southwest corner of Lot Number 118 of the Hartman Farms subdivision (also known as 944 Washington Cove Lane), then north along the west property line of the Lot Number 118 to the centerline of East 10th Street, then west along the centerline of East 10th Street to the point of beginning.
(3) District Three shall consist of the area of the town in Hancock County that is north of the centerline of East Washington Street (West U.S. 40) and east of the centerline of North Buck Creek Road.
(4) District Four shall consist of the area of the town in Marion County that is bounded by the centerlines of East Washington Street, South German Church Road, South Carroll Road and the south corporate boundary lines of the town; and the area of the town in Marion County described by the following boundary description: Beginning at the intersection of the centerline of East Washington Street (U.S. 40) and the Hancock – Marion County Line (point of beginning), then west along the centerline of East Washington Street (U.S. 40) to the centerline of North Starter Street, then north along the centerline of North Starter Street to the centerline of East Welland Street, then west along the centerline of East Welland Street to the centerline of North Muessing Street, then north along the centerline of North Muessing Street to the centerline of East 9th Street, then east along the centerline of East 9th Street to the centerline
18
of Cumberland Creek, then north along the centerline of Cumberland Creek approximately 120.0 feet, then northeasterly to the southwest corner of Lot Number 118 of the Hartman Farms subdivision (also known as 944 Washington Cove Lane), then north along the west property line of the Lot Number 118 to the centerline of East 10th Street, then east along the centerline of East 10th Street to the centerline of Washington Cove Lane, then south along the centerline of Washington Cove Lane to the north property lines of Lot Numbers 143 through 150 of the Hartman Farms subdivision, then east along the north property lines to the Hancock – Marion County Line, then south along the Hancock – Marion County Line to the Point of Beginning; and the area of the town in Hancock County that is bounded by the centerlines of East Washington Street (U.S. 40) and North Buck Creek Road, the north boundary line of the Harvest Glen subdivision, and the Hancock – Marion County Line.
(5) District Five shall consist of the area of the town in Hancock County that is north of the north boundary line of the Harvest Glen subdivision and west of the centerline of North Buck Creek Road.
(B) The voters of each district shall elect a resident of that district to be the Town Council member representing that district.
(Ord. 2002-21, passed 10-16-2002; Am. Ord. 2003-4, passed 9-22-2—3; Am. Ord. 2004-05, passed 6-2-2004)
MEETINGS
§ 00-03-30-20 DATE, TIME AND PLACE OF REGULAR MEETINGS.
(A) Unless the Town Council votes to change its meeting schedule, regular Council meetings shall be held on the first and third Wednesday of each month; no notice of these meetings shall be required. The meeting place shall be the Cumberland Municipal Building.
(B) (1) A majority of all the elected members of the Town Council constitutes a quorum.
(I.C. 36-5-2-9.2)
(2) A majority vote of the Town Council is required to pass an ordinance, unless a greater vote is required by statute.
(I.C. 36-5-2-9.6)
(3) A two-thirds vote, with unanimous consent of the members present, is required to pass an ordinance of the Town Council on the same day or at the same meeting at which it is introduced.
(I.C. 36-5-1-9.8)
(1995 Code, § 00-03-30-20)
§ 00-03-30-21 ALL MEETINGS OPEN TO PUBLIC; EXCEPTION.
All public agency meetings shall comply with the requirements of the Indiana Open Door Law, I.C. 5-14-1l.5-1 et seq. All meetings of the town boards and commissions shall be open to the public, except for executive sessions, as defined in I.C. 5-14-1.5-6.
(1995 Code, § 00-03-30-21)
19
§ 00-03-30-22 SPECIAL MEETINGS.
(A) Special meetings or executive sessions of any town board or commission may be called by the presiding officer or by written request of any two members, submitted to the Secretary or presiding officer of the body.
(B) Special meetings of the Town Council may be called by the Council, by the President pro tempore in the President’s absence, or by a majority of all the members of the Council upon written request to the presiding officer.
(C) Forty-eight hours advance notice of any special meeting must be provided to all members of the board or commission. This requirement does not apply to a reconvened meeting when announcement of the date, time, and place of it is made at the original meeting and there is no change in the agenda.
(D) Public notice in compliance with I.C. 5-14-1.5 shall be posted on the bulletin board of the Town Hall and, if the meeting is to be held elsewhere, at the building where the meeting is to be held. Written notice shall be mailed to all members of the news media which file a written request for it by January 1 each year.
(1995 Code, § 00-03-30-22)
§ 00-03-30-23 EMERGENCY MEETINGS.
(A) No time requirements apply to notice for an emergency meeting if it is called to deal with actual or threatened injury to person or property or disruption of any governmental activity.
(B) Members of the news media who have requested notice shall be given the same notice as is given to members of the public body calling the meeting.
(C) Public notice shall be posted on the bulletin board in the Town Hall and, if the meeting is to be held elsewhere, at the building where the meeting is to be held.
(1995 Code, § 00-03-30-23)
§ 00-03-30-24 RULES OF PROCEDURE.
The Town Council may adopt written rules for carrying out its responsibilities, including procedural rules that may govern how the Town Council handles mattes in the course of its meetings or in other circumstances. To the extent that the Town Council has not adopted its own specific rules to govern its deliberations, the most recent version of Robert’s Rules of Order shall serve as the rules of procedure for Town Council meetings, and for the meetings of other board of the town, except when in conflict with this code or state law Any rule of meeting procedure, other than those required by statute, may be suspended at any time by the consent of all the members of the Town Council, or of another board, present at any of its meetings.
(Ord. 2001-7, passed 4-4-2001)
20
TOWN SEAL
§ 00-03-30-35 TOWN SEAL.
The town seal of the Town of Cumberland is described as follows: The seal shall be circular in shape, the outer circle inscribed with the words, “Town of Cumberland, State of Indiana,” the inner circle shall contain the word “Seal.”
(1996 Code, § 00-01-11-01)
21
CHAPTER 31: TOWN OFFICIALS
Section
Officials
00-03-31-01 Clerk-Treasurer
00-03-31-02 Town Manager
00-03-31-03 Town Marshal
00-03-31-04 Town Attorney
OFFICIALS
§ 00-03-31-01 CLERK-TREASURER.
(A) The Clerk-Treasurer is an elected official who serves as both the Clerk of the town and the town’s fiscal officer. The powers of the Clerk-Treasurer include:
(1) Receiving and caring for all town monies and paying them out upon order of the Town Council
(2) Keeping accounts of all town monies:
(3) Managing the finances and accounts of the town and making investments of town monies;
(4) Maintaining the records of the Council;
(5) Attending the meetings of the Council and recording its proceedings;
(6) Administering oaths; and
(7) Performing all other duties prescribed by state law.
(B) The Clerk-Treasurer may appoint deputies and employees needed for the effective operation of the Office of the Clerk-Treasurer, but limited to the number of the positions authorized by the Council. The Clerk-Treasurer’s deputies and employees serve at the pleasure of the Clerk-Treasurer.
§ 00-03-31-02 TOWN MANAGER.
(A) (1) The Town Manager is the chief administrative officer of the town. The Town Council delegates to the Town Manager all authority needed for the Town Manger to effectively exercise the duties assigned to the Town Manager by this doe and any ordinance, contract, or other of the Town Council.
(2) The person the Town Council appoints this position shall become a town employee and shall be subject to those town policies applicable to other town employees not
22
inconsistent with this code or any ordinance or contract provision specifically applicable to the Town Manager. Subject to any requirements for notice in advance of termination contained in a written contract between the Town Council and the Town Manager, the Town Manager serves at the pleasure of the Town Council.
(B) (1) Unless the Town Council, subsequent to the adoption of this section, adopts an ordinance or a written order that provides otherwise, the Town Manager shall:
(a) Attend the meetings of the Town council and other boards of the town, including the Plan Commission, Board of Zoning Appeals, and Parks Board, and recommend actions that he or she considers advisable; keep the Town Council informed on town activities, projects, and issues which the Town Manager is involved; and see that Town Council facilitators are kept informed of all important matters relating to their areas of responsibility.
(b) Hire town employees, other than those in the town Police Department and Clerk-Treasurer’s office, according to the pay schedules and standards fixed by the Town Council or by statute;
(c) Discipline, suspend, discharge, remove, or transfer town employees, other than those in the town Police Department and Clerk-Treasurer’s office, pursuant to the policies and procedure of the town;
(d) Administer and enforce all ordinances, orders, and resolutions of the Town Council;
(e) See that all statutes that are required to be administered by the Town Council, or a town employee subject to the control of the Town Council, are faithfully administered;
(f) Prepare budget estimates and develop multi-year capital improvement plans in cooperation with the town’s Clerk-Treasurer, the town’s financial consultant, and the town’s boards and department heads and submit them to the Town Council when required;
(g) Execute contracts on behalf of the town for materials, supplies, services, or improvements after receiving any required approval from the Town Council and the completion of any applicable appropriation, notice, or competitive bidding process required by statute:
(h) Formulate and administer policies regarding the areas for which he or she is responsible;
(i) Serve as the town’s primary contact person with the news media, except for issues involving the town’s Police Department;
(j) Work with neighborhood associations, local civic groups, and other community organizations to help address their concerns relations to the town;
(k) Oversee the management and maintenance of all town property;
(l) To the extent that the performance of his or her administrative duties may affect matters that are the responsibilities of the town Clerk-Treasurer or the Town Marshal, he or she shall coordinate and cooperate with those other town officials so as to not infringe on
23
their statutory authority or otherwise interfere with their performance of their responsibilities; and
(m) Perform such other duties as may be required by the Town Council that could reasonably be considered to be responsibilities of the administrative head of a governmental entity, provided that such other duties are not inconsistent with any law, ordinance, town policy or contract.
(2) Unless the Town Council, subsequent to the adoption of this section, adopts an ordinance or written order that provides otherwise, the Town Manager may:
(a) Delegate any of his or her powers to employees responsible to him or her;
(b) Receive service of summons on behalf of the town;
(c) Approve expenditures and additional funding requests from department heads to the extent authorized by the written rules of the Town Council; and/or
(d) Participate in organizations to advance his or her professional development to the extent that such activities do not interfere with his or her duties as Town Manager.
(C) The Town Manager shall be paid a salary as determined by the Town Council in conformance with the town’s salary ordinance. Any other compensation and benefits shall be specified in the Town Mangers’ contract with the Town Council or shall be as provided by the town’s employee policies.
(D) The Town Manager shall, in the manner prescribed by I.C. 5-4-1, execute a bond for the faithful performance of his or her duties. The cost of this bond shall be paid by the Town.
(Ord. 2001-7, passed 4-4-2001)
§ 00-03-31-03 POLICE CHIEF.
(A) The Chief of the Town of Cumberland Police Department is the executive head of the police department. All members of the police department shall serve subject to the orders of the Police Chief.
(B) The Police Chief shall have the powers and duties prescribed by statute and town ordinance, including statutory disciplinary powers.
(C) The Police Chief shall keep records and make reports concerning the activity of the police department as may be required by the Town Council or by statute.”
(Ord. 2015-18, passed 12-2-15)
24
§ 00-03-31-04 TOWN ATTORNEY.
The Town Council shall appoint a Town Attorney whose terms of service and compensation shall be prescribed by a contract between the attorney and the Town Council. The Town Attorney serves at the pleasure of the Town Council.
(Ord. 2001-7, passed 4-4-2001)
CHAPTER 32: TOWN POLICIES
Section
Employee Policies
00-03-32-01 Employee Handbook
00-03-32-02 Nepotism Policy
00-03-32-03 Bond Policy
00-03-32-04 Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 Policy
00-03-32-05 Americans with Disabilities Act Policy
00-03-32-06 Internal Control Standards
00-03-32-07 Materiality Policy
00-03-32-08 General Retention Schedule
Town Fees
00-03-32-15 Public records; general copy fees
00-03-32-16 Vehicle accident reports
00-03-32-17 Criminal history reports
00-03-32-18 Park facilities fees
00-03-32-19 Police Department copy fees
00-03-32-20 Firearms training fund
00-03-32-21 Cash Policy
00-03-32-22 Cumulative Capital Development Fund Establishment
Purchasing
00-03-32-30 Purchasing policy
00-03-32-31 Purchasing rules
00-03-32-32 Travel policies
00-03-32-33 Credit card rules
Use of Town Facilities
00-03-32-40 Use of town facilities
H1N1 Policy
00-03-32-50 H1N1 Policy
00-03-32-51 Communicable disease response
00-03-32-52 Definitions
00-03-32-53 Communication and education
25
00-03-32-54 Employees with H1Ni
00-03-32-55 Employees caring for family members with H1N1
00-03-32-56 Severe outbreaks
00-03-32-57 Essential town employees and services
00-03-32-58 Public safety; police department
00-03-32-59 General guidelines
00-03-32-60 Assumptions
00-03-32-61 Responsibilities
00-03-32-62 Reports; incidents
00-03-32-63 Equipment
00-03-32-64 Staffing for the Cumberland Police Department
00-03-32-65 Leave; mutual aid
00-03-32-66 Responding to calls
00-03-32-67 Protocols
EMPLOYEE POLICIES
§ 00-03-32-01 EMPLOYEE HANDBOOK.
(A) The Town of Cumberland Employee Handbook shall serve as the town’s primary rules for the town’s employees. A copy of the Handbook is contained in Appendix A to Ordinance 2015-20 and is adopted by reference as if fully set forth herein.
(B) All salaries, wages, and other compensation paid to the elected and appointed officials and employees of the town, and all other benefits provided, shall conform with the provisions of the town’s salary ordinance and with the town’s Employee Handbook.
(Ord. 2001-7, passed 4-4-2001; Am. Ord. 2007-05, passed 9-5-2007; Am. Ord. 2010-1, passed 2-3-2010; Am. Ord. 2015-20, passed 12-__-2015; Am Ord. 2016-2, 3 passed 4-6-2016)
§ 00-03-32-02 NEPOTISM POLICY
(A) Definitions: The following definitions apply to the Town’s Nepotism Policy:
(1) Direct Line of Supervision: The phrase “direct line of supervision” means an elected officer or employee who is in a position to affect the terms and conditions of another individuals’ employment, including making decision about work assignments, compensation, grievance, advancement, or performance evaluation. The phrase does not include the responsibilities of the Town Council to make decision regarding salary ordinances, budgets or personnel policies of the Town;
(2) Employed: The term “employed” means an individual who is employed by the Town on a full-time, part-time, temporary, intermittent, or hourly basis. The term does not include an individual who holds only an elected office. The term includes an individual who is party to an employment contract with the Town;
(3) Relative: The term “relative” means any of the following:
(a) a spouse;
(b) a parent or stepparent; and,
26
(c) a child, an adopted child or stepchild;
(d) a brother, sister stepbrother, stepsister, or a brother or sister by the half blood;
(e) a niece or nephew;
(f) an aunt or uncle; and,
(g) a daughter-in-law or son-in-law.
(B) Nepotism Prohibited: The Town may not employ individuals who are relatives, as defined in § 00-03-32-02(A)(3), in a position that results in one relative being in the direct line of supervision of the other relative.
(C) Application of Policy to Relatives of Elected Officials: Unless a specific exemption applies, this policy applies to an individual who is employed by the Town on the date the individual’s relative begins serving a term of an elected officer of the Town. When the elected official begins serving a term of elected office, the relative employed by the Town m ay remain employed by the Town and maintain his or her position or rank. However, the relative of the elected official may not be promoted to a position that results in one relative being in the direct line of supervision of the other relative. For an individual who is a member of a merit police department, the individual may not be promoted to a position that is not within the merit ranks if the promotion would result in the individual being in the direct line of supervision of the other relative. This policy does not abrogate or affect an employment contract with the Town that an individual is a party to and is in effect on the date the individual’s relative begins serving a term of an elected office of the Town.
(D) Exceptions: The following exceptions apply to the Town’s Nepotism Policy:
(1) Employees on July 1, 2012: an individual who is employed by the Town on or before July 1, 2012 is not subject to the nepotism prohibition unless after July 1, 2012 the individual has a break in employment with the Town. The following are not considered to be a break in employment with the Town:
(a) the individual is absent from the workplace while on paid or unpaid leave, including vacation, sick, or family medical leave or worker’s compensation;
(b) the individual’s employment with the Town is terminated followed by the immediate reemployment with the Town, without loss of payroll time;
(2) Precinct Election Officers: the performance of duties of a precinct election officer as defined by Indiana Code § 3-5-2-40.1, that are imposed by Title 3 is not considered employment by the Town;
(3) Volunteer Firefighters: the performance of duties of a volunteer firefighter is not considered employment by the Town;
27
(E) Annual Reports: Each year, the following officials must file the following annual reports:
(1) The President of the Town council will file with the annual report filed by the Town with the State Board of Accounts under Indiana Code § 5-11-13-1 a statement that the Town has implemented a Nepotism Policy under Indiana Code § 36-1-20.2 and § 36-1-21.
(2) Each elected official of the Town will annual certify in writing, subject to the penalties of perjury, that the officer has not violated Indiana Code § 36-1-20.2. This certification will be submitted to the President of the Town Council not later than December 31 of each year;
(3) Each Town Council member shall annually certify in writing, subject to the penalties for perjury, that the officer has not violated Indiana Code § 36-1-21. This certification shall be submitted to the President of the Won Council not later than December 31 of each year.
(F) Contracting With the Town: The Town may enter into a contract or renew a contract for the procurement of goods and services or a contract for public works with an individual who is a relative of a Town Council member or a business entity that is wholly or partially owned by a relative of a Town Council member only if the requirements of the Town’s policy are satisfied and the Town Council member does not violate the Indiana Conflicts of Interest rules are contained in Indiana Code § 35-44-1-3.
(1) Disclosure: The Town may enter into a contract or renew a contract with an individual or business described in Section 00-32-32-02(F) if:
(a) The Town Council member files with the Clerk-Treasurer at a public meeting of the Town Council prior to final action on the contract or purchase a full disclosure which must:
(i) be in writing;
(ii) describe the contract or purchase to be made by the Town;
(iii) describe the relationship that the Town Council Member has to the individual or business entity that contracts or purchases:
(iv) be affirmed under the penalty for perjury;
(v) be filed, not later than fifteen (15) days after final action on the contract or purchase, with the State Board of Accounts and the Clerk of the Circuit Court of the County;
(b) The appropriate Town agency makes a certified statement that the contract amount or purchase price was the lowest amount or price bid or offered or makes a certified statement of the reason why the vendor or contractor was selected;
(c) The Town Council accepts in a public meeting the disclosure prior to final action on the contract or purchase;
(d) The Town satisfies any other requirements under the public purchasing an bidding laws contained in Indiana Code § 5-22 or § 36-1-12;
28
(e) The Town Council member must also comply with the disclosure laws of Indiana Code § 35-44-1-3, if applicable.
(2) Existing Contracts: These rules do not affect the initial term of a contract in existence at the term of office of the Town Council Members begins.
(Ord. 2012-15, passed 6-20-2012)
§00-03-32-03 BOND POLICY
(A) Authorization: The Town may purchase individual bonds, blanket bonds, or crime insurance policies endorsed to cover the faithful performance of all employees, commission members, and persons acting on behalf of the local government unit, including Town judges and clerk-treasurers and those employees required by law or directed to file an individual bond.
(B) Clerk-Treasurer Bond: The Town of Cumberland’s fixes the amount of a bond for
the Clerk-Treasurer at $30,000 for each $1,000,000 of receipts of the officer’s office during the last complete fiscal year before the purchase of a blanket bond, provided that this amount may not be less than $30,000 nor more than $300,000. The Town Council must approve the bond if sufficient.
(C) Other Officials, Appointees and Employees: Every elected or appointed officer,
official, deputy, employee, or contractor of the Town of Cumberland who is required to file a bond for the faithful performance of their duty, must file the bond in the office of the Clerk-Treasurer and the County Recorder. Bonds must be filed with the Recorder within 10 days of their issuance.
(D) Filing With State Board of Accounts: The Clerk-Treasurer must file a copy of the
bonds with the state board of accounts contemporaneously with the filing of the Town’s annual financial report and electrically in the manner prescribed by I.C. § 5-14-3.8-7.
(E) Time of Bonding: An officer required to give a bond must give the bond
before the commencement of his or her term of office. The officer may not take office until the policy is given.
(F) Payee: All bonds must be payable to the state of Indiana. Every such bond shall be obligatory to such state, upon the principal and sureties, for the faithful discharge of all duties required of such officer by any law, then or subsequently in force, for the use of any person injured by any breach of the condition thereof.
(G) Validity of Bonds: No policy shall be void on a first recovery, but suits may be
instituted thereon, from time to time, until the penalty thereof is exhausted. No bond shall be void because of defects in form or substance or in the approval and filing thereof, but, upon the suggestions of such defects, such policy shall be obligatory as is property executed, filed and approved.
(H) Forms: The commissioner of insurance shall prescribe the form of the bonds as
29
required by I.C. § 5-4-1-18, in consultation with the Indiana archives and records administration under I.C. § 5-15-5.1-6.
(I) Effectiveness: Unless the bond is canceled, the bond must continue in force
for the terms of office of the individual who files the bond or policy. The aggregate liability of the surety or insurer is the amount specified in the bond.
(J) Intent to Comply: It is the policy of the Town of Cumberland to comply with all
provisions of the Indiana Code. If a policy of the Town and a provision of the Indiana Code regarding bonds under I.C. § 5-4-1 conflict, the Indiana Code will be deemed to be the policy of the Town and will be enforceable as if specifically written in this policy.
(Ord. 2015-22, passed 12-2-2015)
§00-03-32-04 TITLE VI OF THE CIVIL RIGHTS ACT OF 1964 POLICY
(A) Policy Against Discrimination: It is the policy of the Town of Cumberland that no person shall, on the ground of race, color, or national origin, be excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be subjected to discrimination under any program or activity receiving Federal financial assistance;
(B) Intention to Comply with Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964: It is the policy of
the Town of Cumberland to comply with Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964. If a policy of the Town and a provision of Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 conflict, the Title VI provision will be deemed to be the policy of the Town and will be enforceable as if specifically written in this policy;
(C) Importance of Equal Treatment: The Town of Cumberland recognizes that it is
important to expel all racial discrimination and to ensure that public funds are not spent in a way which encourages, subsidizes, or results in racial discrimination;
(D) Notice of Rights: The Town of Cumberland has and will continue to disseminate
sufficient information to applicants, participants, beneficiaries, and other interested persons to inform them of their rights and protections afforded by Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964;
(E) Grievance Procedure: The Town of Cumberland has adopted and implemented a
grievance procedure for complaints under this section, and this procedure is attached as Exhibit A. The grievance procedure was established to meet the requirements of Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964. It may be used by anyone who wishes to file a complaint alleging the Town of Cumberland discriminated on the basis of race, color, or national origin regarding the exclusion from participation in, being denied the benefits of, or being subjected to discrimination under any program or activity receiving Federal financial assistance.
(Ord. 2015-16, passed 12-2-2015)
§ 00-03-32-05 AMERICANS WITH DISABILITIES ACT POLICY
(A) Policy Against Discrimination: It is the policy of the Town of Cumberland that it will not discriminate against persons with disabilities in access to jobs, public accommodations, and government programs, public transportation and telecommunications;
30
(B) Intention To Comply with ADA: It is the policy of the Town of Cumberland to comply with the Americans With Disabilities Act of 1990 (ADA). If a policy of the Town and a provision of the ADA conflict, the ADA provision will be deemed to be the policy of the Town and will be enforceable as if specifically written in this policy;
(C) Importance of Accessibility: the Town of Cumberland recognizes that it is important for its facilities, programs and services to be available to all of its citizens and to the general public;
(D) Transition Plan: the Town of Cumberland understands that some of its facilities,
programs and services comply with the ADA and that some may not now, or may not in the future, comply with the ADA because the standards of compliance have or will be revised, changed or added. In order to comply with the ADA, the Town Council has already developed an ADA Transition Plan which now guides future planning and implementation of accessibility improvements. The Town of Cumberland is committed to implementing the Transition Plan as soon as possible, administratively, physically and financially. The Town of Cumberland will, as it works toward reducing accessibility barriers within Town-owned facilities, infrastructure, programming and services, be guided by public and/or employee requests and its initial or revised prioritization of the Transition Plan items. The Town of Cumberland will strive to include annual budget appropriations to remove accessibility barriers such that its facilities, programs and services will be accessible as is reasonably possible.
(E) Alternate Access: To the extent the Town of Cumberland cannot provide access to its facilities, programs and services, it will provide alternate means for the same opportunities to persons with disabilities;
(F) Notice of Rights: The Town of Cumberland has and will continue to disseminate
sufficient information to applicants, participants, beneficiaries, and other interested persons to inform them of their rights and protections afforded by the ADA and the regulations promulgated thereunder;
(G) ADA Coordinator: the Town of Cumberland has designated Christine Owens as the ADA Coordinator, and she is responsible for the development and implementation of the ADA Transition Plan and for overall compliance with the ADA;
(H) Accommodation Requests and Grievance Procedures: The Town of Cumberland has established procedures for requests for accommodation, issued annual reports regarding implementation of the Transition Plan, requests for reasonable accommodation and grievances, and adopted and implemented a grievance procedure, all as required by the ADA. The grievance procedure was established to meet the requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990. It may be used by anyone who wishes to file a complaint alleging discrimination on the basis of disability in the provision of services, activities, programs or benefits by the Town of Cumberland.
(1) The complaint should be in writing and contain information about the alleged discrimination such as name, address, phone number of complainant and location, date and description of the problem. Alternative complaints, such as personal interviews, or tape recordings of the complaint, will be made available for persons with disabilities upon request
(2) The complaint should be submitted by the grievant or his/her designee as
soon as possible but no later than 60 calendar days after the alleged violation to:
31
Christine Owens (317) 894 - 6203
ADA Grievance Coordinator planner@town-cumberland.com
Town of Cumberland, Town Hall
11501 E. Washington St.
Cumberland, IN 46229
(3) Within 15 calendar days after receipt of the complaint, Christine Owens or
her designee will meet with the complainant to discuss the complaint and the possible resolutions. Within 15 calendar days of the meeting, Christine Owens or her designee will respond in writing and where appropriate in a format accessible to the complainant. The response will explain the position of the Town of Cumberland and offer options for substantive resolution of the complaint.
(4) If the response of Christine Owens or her designee does not satisfactory resolve the issue, the complainant or his/her designee may appeal the decision within 15 calendar days after receipt of the response to the Cumberland Town Council.
(5) Within 15 calendar days after receipt of the appeal, the Cumberland Town Council will meet with the complainant to discuss the complaint and possible resolutions. Within 15 calendar days after that meeting, the Cumberland Town Council will respond in writing and where appropriate, in a format accessible to the complainant, with a final resolution of the complaint.
(6) All written complaints received by Christine Owens or her designee, appeals to the Cumberland Town Council and responses from these two offices will be retained by the Town of Cumberland for at least three years.
(I) Other Power-Driven Mobility Devices: It is the policy of the Town of Cumberland that Other Power-Driven Mobility Devices (OPDMD) are allowed on Town Roads and in Town-Owned Facilities to the same extent as members of the public are allowed.
(1) Definition of OPDMD: Other Power-Driven Mobility Device is any mobility
device powered by battery, fuel or other engines that is used by an individual with a disability for the purpose of locomotion, including but not limited to golf cars, electric scooters, electronic personal assistance mobility devices, such as Segway ®, or any mobility device designed to operate in areas without defined pedestrian routes.
(2) OPDMDs Authorized: OPDMDs are allowed in all areas where members of the
public are allowed, unless a particular OPDMD cannot be accommodated because of legitimate safety requirements.
(3) Alternate Accommodation: If OPDMDs. are not allowed in certain areas
because of legitimate safety requirements, the Town of Cumberland will provide alternative service if possible.
(4) No Exclusion From Town Roads: OPDMDs will not be excluded from Town
Roads because of legitimate safety requirements or any other reason. Section 00-07-70-37, Section 00-07-70-46, and other applicable provisions of the Town Code will not be construed to exclude OPDMDs from Town roads.
(Ord. 2015-17, passed 12-2-2015)
32
§00-03-32-06 INTERNAL CONTROLS STANDARDS
(A) Policy for Internal Controls. The Town of Cumberland adopts as policy the
internal control standard as set forth by the Indiana State Board of Accounts Uniform Internal Control Standards for Indiana Political Subdivisions manual as expressly written and published by the Indiana State Board of Accounts in September 2015, as amended from time to time.
(B) Oversight Committee. In order to implement these standards, there is established
an Internal Control Standards Oversight Committee. This Committee will consist of a Town Council member selected by the Town Council, the Clerk-Treasurer, Town Manager, Police Chief, Utilities Director, Director of Planning and Development, Streets Department Director and Town Attorney. This Committee will develop policies and procedures to implement the Internal Control Standards and train employees regarding these standards.
(C) Compliance Required. All officers, elected officials and employees are required to
comply with the policy. Employees who fail to comply with this policy are subject to discipline, including but not limited to termination of their employment.
(Ord. 2016-01, passed 4-6-16)
§00-03-32-07 MATERIALITY POLICY
The following is the Towns policy regarding account variances, losses, shortages, or thefts of cash or other assets:
(A) Reporting to Clerk-Treasurer: Any irregular variances, loses, shortages, or thefts of
cash or other assets shall be immediately reported to the Clerk-Treasurer.
(B) Procedure: Upon receipt of a report of an irregular variance, loss, shortage, or theft,
the Clerk-Treasurer must:
a. Log all reports into a spreadsheet that is permanently maintained by the Town of
Cumberland;
b. Confirm the dollar amount of the variance, loss, shortage, or theft;
c. Evaluate the report against the established dollar thresholds. Upon receipt of a
report of a variance, loss, shortage, or theft of cash which exceeds $0.00, the Clerk-Treasurer must report the incident to the State Board of Accounts. Upon receipt of a report of a variance, loss, shortage, or theft of any other (non-cash) asset which exceeds $0.00, the Clerk-Treasurer must report the incident to the State Board of Accounts.
d. Investigate the cause of any variance, loss, shortage, or theft and document all
findings;
33
e. Document and implement corrective actions or internal control procedures to
correct the causes of the variance, loss, shortage, or theft; and
f. Maintain copies of all relevant documentation, resolution of incidents, and any
report to the State Board of Accounts in a centralized folder.
(C) Public Officials: All public officials who have actual knowledge of, or reasonable
cause to believe, there has been a misappropriation of public funds must immediately send written notice of the misappropriation to the State Board of Accounts and the prosecuting attorney pursuant to Indiana Code § 5-11-1-27(I).
(Ord. 2016-04, passed 4-6-16).
§ 00-03-32-08 GENERAL RETENTION SCHEDULE
RECORD SERIES
TITLE/DESCRIPTION
RETENTION PERIOD
ADMINISTRATIVE
GEN 10-1
MINUTES
Official minutes of any county/local agency, board, commission, or of any division. THIS IS A CRITICAL RECORD.
[IC 5-15-6-2.5]; [IC 5-15-5.1-12]
PERMANENT. MICROFILM according to 60 IAC 2 STANDARDS. Original may be retained in office, transferred to the County Archives pursuant to IC 5-15-6-6 at such time as record no longer has official value but has historical value.
GEN 10-2
LOCAL AGENCY, BOARD OR COMMISSION
MEETING RECORDINGS
For offices, boards or commissions that record their meetings and used the recordings to complete the minutes of the meetings.
ERASE or DESTROY after official minutes derived from them are approved.
34
GEN 10-3
POLICY FILES – OFFICE HOLDERS, DEPUTIES, AND DIVISION DIRECTORS.
These office files document substantive actions of the county or local government unit and constitute the official record of the unit’s performance of its functions and the formation of policy and program initiatives. This series may include various types of records such as correspondence, memos, and reports concerning policy and procedures, organization, program development and reviews. THIS IS A CRITICAL RECORD. Disclosure of these records may be affected by the discretion of a public agency, IC 5-14-3-4(b)
(6).
[IC 5-15-6-2.5]; [IC 5-15-5.1-12]
PERMANENT. MICROFILM according to 60 IAC 2 STANDARDS. Original may be retained in office, transferred to the County Archives pursuant to IC 5-15-6-6 at such time as record no longer has official value but has historical value.
GEN 10-4
GENERAL FILES
Office records that are not related to policy implementation. This series includes correspondence, memos, and routine staff files.
DESTROY after three (3) calendar years.
GEN 10-5
LEGAL FILES
(Also called Litigation Files)
All records pertaining to litigation with the county/local government and all supporting documentation. This includes the Notice of Tort Claim for Property Damage and/or Personal Injury,
SF 54668, if a claim is brought against the political subdivision. (See
GEN 14-1 if no claim is brought.)
RETAIN in office five (5) calendar years after adjudication of litigation. Evaluate and transfer to
Indiana State Archives, pursuant to IC 5-15-6-6, only those files that have been determined to have historical significance.
35
Disclosure of these records may be affected by IC 5-14-3-4(a) (1),
(3), and (8), and also by the discretion of a public agency, IC 5-143-4(b) (6).
Retention consistent with IC 34-11-2-6, IC 35-41-4-2(a), and IC 34-11-2-4
GEN 10-6
ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS
Includes records created by a county/local agency related to the legislature’s review of proposed laws or adoption of administrative rule(s). THIS IS A CRITICAL RECORD. Disclosure of these records may be affected by the discretion of a public agency, IC 5-14-3-4(b)(6).
PERMANENT. MICROFILM according to 60 IAC 2 STANDARDS. Original may be retained in office, transferred to the Indiana State Archives pursuant to IC 5-15-6-6 at such time as record no longer has official value but has historical value
GEN 10-8
DISASTER RECOVERY AND CONTINUITY PLANS
The copy of all Disaster Recovery/Continuity Plans, including those for electronic systems, as well as supporting documentation used in the development of the plans.
Disclosure of these records may be affected by the discretion of a public agency, IC 5-14-3-4(b)(19).
TRANSFER one copy of each plan to the STATE ARCHIVES DIVISION for permanent archival retention, upon its approval by the county/local agency. DESTROY remaining copies when outdated or replaced.
DESTROY supporting documentation three (3) years after current plan is outdated or replaced.
GEN 10-9
NOTICES & CERTIFICATES
DESTROY after three (3) calendar years and after receipt of STATE BOARD
36
Excludes Form 100R – Certified Report of Names, Addresses,
Duties and Compensation of Employees [PERMANENT]
OF ACCOUNTS Audit Report and satisfaction of unsettled charges.
GEN 14-1
NOTICE OF TORT CLAIM FOR PROPERTY DAMAGE AND/OR
PERSONAL INJURY, SF 54668
This form is included in GEN 10-5, Legal Files, if a claim is brought against the political subdivision.
Retention based on IC 34-11-2-4
DESTROY after three (3) calendar years if a claim is not brought against the political subdivision within the statute of limitations.
Gen 14-2
CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURES
Includes records related to the disclosure of potential conflict of interest. May be referred to as and/or include Uniform Conflict of Interest Ethics Disclosure Statement, economic statement of interest, or similar records.
TRANSFER to the Indiana State Archives for evaluation, sampling, or weeding pursuant to archival principles ten (10) years after the year of filing with the political subdivision.
ACCOUNTING & FINANCE
GEN 10-10
RECEIPTS/QUIETUS/RECEIPT REGISTER/QUIETUS REGISTER
Retention based on IC 34-11-2-6
DESTROY after six (6) calendar years and after receipt of STATE BOARD OF ACCOUNTS Audit Report and satisfaction of unsettled charges.
GEN 10-11
VOUCHERS/CLAIMS & PURCHASE ORDERS
Includes all claims and requisitions submitted by all county offices and departments, including all supporting documentation. Supporting documentation may include all documentation that provided the basis for payment of the claim,
DESTROY after ten (10) calendar years and after receipt of STATE BOARD OF ACCOUNTS Audit
37
including but not limited to: invoices, bank or credit card statements, and any additional documentation that is attached to the claim when submitted for payment.
Retention based on IC 34-11-1-2
Report and satisfaction of unsettled charges.
GEN 10-12
POOR RELIEF VOUCHERS/CLAIMS
Retention based on IC 34-11-1-2
DESTROY after ten (10) calendar years and after receipt of STATE BOARD OF ACCOUNTS Audit Report and satisfaction of unsettled charges.
GEN 10-13
REGISTER OF POOR RELIEF CLAIMS
DESTROY after three (3) calendar years and after receipt of STATE BOARD OF ACCOUNTS Audit Report and satisfaction of unsettled charges.
GEN 10-14
CANCELLED CHECKS/WARRANTS
Retention based on IC 34-11-1-2
DESTROY after ten (10) calendar years and after receipt of STATE BOARD OF ACCOUNTS Audit Report and satisfaction of unsettled charges.
-OR-
DESTROY after three (3) calendar years and after receipt of STATE BOARD OF ACCOUNTS Audit Report and satisfaction of unsettled charges if GEN 10-19, Bank Statements, includes scanned copies
38
of checks and bank retains physical check copies for ten (10) or more calendar years.
GEN 10-15
CHECK REGISTER/WARRANT REGISTER
Retention based on IC 34-11-1-2
DESTROY after ten (10) calendar years and after receipt of STATE BOARD OF ACCOUNTS Audit Report and satisfaction of unsettled charges.
GEN 10-16
PAYROLL RECORDS
Applies to Forms 99A, 99B and 99C
PERMANENT. MICROFILM according to 60 IAC 2 STANDARDS. Original may be retained in office, transferred to the Indiana State Archives pursuant to IC 5-15-6-6 at such time as original record no longer has official value but has historical value. If microfilmed, original may be destroyed upon receipt of written approval from the county commissioner of public record and Indiana Archives and Record Administration.
39
GEN 10-17
TIME CARDS
Includes Weekly Earning Record, work period.
Retention based on IC 34-11-2-1
DESTROY after three (3) calendar years and after receipt of STATE BOARD OF ACCOUNTS Audit Report and satisfaction of unsettled charges.
GEN 10-18
BANK RECONCILIATION RECORDS AND REPORTS
DESTROY after six (6) calendar years and after receipt of STATE BOARD OF ACCOUNTS Audit Report and satisfaction of unsettled charges.
GEN 10-19
BANK STATEMENTS, DEPOSIT TICKETS, RECORD OF DEPOSITORY BALANCES
DESTROY after three (3) calendar years and after receipt of STATE BOARD OF ACCOUNTS Audit Report and satisfaction of unsettled charges
GEN 10-20
FEE BOOK
DESTROY after six (6) calendar years and after receipt of STATE BOARD OF ACCOUNTS Audit Report and satisfaction of unsettled charges.
GEN 10-21
ACCOUNTS PAYABLE JOURNAL
DESTROY after six (6) calendar years and after receipt of STATE BOARD OF ACCOUNTS Audit Report and satisfaction of unsettled charges.
GEN 10-22
ACCOUNTS PAYABLE VOUCHER REGISTER
DESTROY after three (3) calendar years and after receipt of STATE BOARD
40
OF ACCOUNTS Audit Report and satisfaction of unsettled charges.
GEN 10-23
TRANSMITTALS
Retention based on IC 34-11-2-6
DESTROY after six (6) calendar years and after receipt of STATE BOARD OF ACCOUNTS Audit Report and satisfaction of unsettled charges.
GEN 10-24
INVESTMENTS/INSURANCE REGISTER
Form 350 – Register of Investments
Form 351 – Register of Insurance
PERMANENT. May MICROFILM according to 60 IAC 2 STANDARDS. Original may be retained in office, transferred to the Indian State Archives pursuant to IC 5-15-6-6 at such time as original record no longer has official value but has historical value. If microfilmed, original may be destroyed upon receipt of written approval from the COUNTY COMMISSION of public records and Indiana Archives and Records Administration.
GEN 10-25
BONDS, BIDS, CONTRACTS AND LEASES
All contracts with vendors or other units of government to provide goods or services. Files also include working papers and similar attachments used by the agency in this process.
DESTROY ten (10) years after expiration of the contract and after receipt of STATE BOARD OF ACCOUNTS Audit Report and satisfaction of unsettled charges.
41
This record series also applies to an administrative entity receiving revenue through a contract or lease.
Retention based on IC 34-13-1-1
GEN 10-26
AS-SUBMITTED BUDGETS
Includes new programs requested, justifications, breakdown of money requested, estimates, reports, and public notice
DESTROY after five (5) calendar years.
GEN 12-1
PAPER CHECKS & REMOTE-CAPTURE CHECKS
Checks deposited with a bank by a governmental entity through the regular deposit process or the digital remote-capture process.
Disclosure of these records may be affected by IC 5-14-3-4(a)(5) and IC 5-14-3-4(a)(12)
Retention based on IC 34-11-2-6
DESTROY paper upon receipt of deposit report from bank acknowledging the bank’s acceptance. RETAIN digital image locally or through bank-provided access for six (6) years and until receipt of STATE BOARD OF ACCOUNTS audit report and satisfaction of unsettled charges.
GEN 15-2
INTERNAL REVENUE SERVICE FORMS
Includes the governmental entity’s original copy of forms filed with the Internal Revenue Service.
RETAIN for period required by federal law, but for not less than six (6) years. DESTROY upon fulfillment of this retention period.
PERSONNEL
GEN 10-27
PERSONNEL FILES
Personnel records containing documentation of the employee’s working career and application for
DESTROY 75 years after employee is no longer employed by the
42
employment with the county/local government unit. Employment application shall include examination records.
Personnel files shall be created and maintained for full-time, part-time, and temporary employees, as well as paid and unpaid interns.
Disclosure of these records may be affected by the discretion of a public agency, IC 5-14-3-4(b)(2)(3)(4) and (6), and IC 5-14-3-4(b)(8).
county/local government unit.
GEN 10-28
EMPLOYEE MEDICAL RECORDS
Typical record series could include Employer's Report of Injury, Report of Attending Physician, other medical information used to document work-related illnesses or injuries, and drug test results. Pursuant to United States Equal Opportunity Commission rules, this information "...shall be collected and maintained...in separate medical files..."
Disclosure of these records may be affected by IC 5-14-3-4(a)(9) and the discretion of a public agency per IC 5-14-3-4(b)(8) and 29 CFR 1630.14(b)(1).
DESTROY seven (7) years after the employee leaves county/local government.
GEN 10-29
INMATE MEDICAL RECORDS
Disclosure of these records may be affected by IC 5-14-3-4(a)(9) and the discretion of a public agency per IC 5-14-3-4(b)(8) and 29 CFR 1630.14(b)(1).
DESTROY seven (7) years after the inmate is released from the jail facility.
43
GEN 10-30
FAMILY AND MEDICAL LEAVE ACT OF 1993 RECORDS
Records may contain applications for Family and Medical Leave (State Form 48370 or its equivalent), and any information related to use the Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA).
Disclosure of these records may be affected by 29 CFR 825.500(g).
Retention based on 29 CFR 825.400(b).
DESTROY records after three (3) calendar years if no other Record Series with a longer retention period applies to them. If records are part of another Record Series with a longer retention, follow the retention instruction for that Record Series.
GEN 10-31
EMPLOYMENT APPLICATIONS-NOT HIRED
Series includes applications from persons seeking employment who are not hired. Series also contains vacancy notices, job information bulletins, unsolicited resumes, rejection correspondence, examination material, drug test results, and other related materials.
Disclosure of these records may be affected by the discretion of a public agency per IC 5-14-3-4 (b)(8)(b).
Retention based on IC 4-15-2-15 (b)(4).
DESTROY three (3) calendar years after the decision not to hire.
GEN 10-32
EMPLOYEE HAZARDOUS EXPOSURE RECORDS
Typical records could include employee exposure records and/or analyses using exposure or medical records. Disclosure of these records may be affected by IC 5-14-3-4(a) (9).
DESTROY Thirty-five (35) calendar years after employee termination.
GEN 10-33
LOG OF WORK-RELATED INJURIES AND ILLNESSES, OSHA
FORM 300 (REVISED 01/2004)
In accordance with 29 CFR 1904.0, et seq., every private and public employer with more than ten
DESTROY five (5) years after the end of the calendar year that the records cover.
44
(10) employees must confidentially record every work-related death and work-related injury and illness meeting specific recording criteria in this federal rule. Electronic (computer) maintenance and retention is permitted.
Any medical information attached or included with the OSHA form and record is also confidential and must be retained with the OSHA form and record for the same time period. Disclosure of these records may be affected by 29 CFR 1904.29 and IC 5-14-3-4(a)(3). Retention based on 29 CFR 1904.33
SUMMARY OF WORK-RELATED INJURIES AND ILLNESSES, OSHA FORM 300A (REVISED 01/2004)
All establishments covered by 29 CFR 1904.33.
INJURY AND ILLNESS INCIDENT REPORT, OSHA FORM 301
This Injury and Illness Incident Report is completed when a recordable work-related injury or illness has occurred. Electronic, computer, maintenance and retention is permitted. Any medical information attached or included with the OSHA form and recorded for the same time period. Disclosure of these records may be affect by 29 CFR 1904.29 and IC 5-14-3-4(a)(3). Retention based on 29 CFR 1904.33
45
Publications & Reports
GEN 10-34
OVERSIGHT COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC RECORDS APPROVED RECORDS RETENTION AND DISPOSITION SCHEDULES
Contains a description of all record maintained by a county/local office, and specifies when and how they may dispose of their records.
DESTROY after replaced by revised schedule.
GEN 10-35
STATUTE AND ADMINISTRATIVE RULE RECORDS
Documents created by a county/local government entity related to the State Legislature’s review of proposed laws, amendments to existing statutes, or adoption of administrative rules.
DESTROY two (2) calendar years after amendments, adoptions, or proposal of final administrative rule was published in the Indiana Registrar.
GEN 10-36
MATERIAL SAFETY DATA SHEETS (MSDS)
These reports and data sheets are supplied by the manufacturer of hazardous chemicals and submitted to businesses and other organizations receiving and using the substances. One (1) report or MSDS is submitted for each chemical in accordance with federal OSHA requirements. General information, ingredients, physical data, fire and explosion hazard data and other precautions are listed to inform and protect individuals who use or are exposed to these substances and chemicals. Disclosure of these records may be affected by 29 CFR 1910.1020(f)(1)
DESTROY thirty (30) years after the year of conclusion of the worker’s employment.
46
and (f)(2), and IC 5-14-3-4(a)(4). Retention is based on 29 CFR 1910.1020(d)(1)(ii)(B).
GEN 10-37
STATE BOARD OF ACCOUNTS AUDIT REPORTS
PERMANENT. May microfilm according to 60 IAC 2 STANDARDS. Original may be retained in office, transferred to the Indian State Archives pursuant to IC 5-15-6-6 at such time as original record no longer has official value but has historical value. If microfilmed, original may be destroyed upon receipt of written approval from the COUNTY COMMISSION of public records and Indiana Archives and Records Administration.
GEN 10-38
REPORTS
Excludes Form 100R – Certified Report of Names, Addresses, Duties and Compensation of Employees (PERMANENT)
DESTROY after six (6) calendar years and after
receipt of STATE BOARD OF ACCOUNTS Audit Report
and satisfaction of unsettled charges.
GEN 10-39
INDIANA PUBLIC RETIREMENT SYSTEM (INPRS) QUARTERLY
REPORT
PERMANENT. May microfilm according to 60 IAC 2
standards. Original may be retained in office or
transferred to the Indiana State Archives pursuant to
IC 5-15-6-6 at such time as original record no longer
has official value but has historical value. If
47
microfilmed, original may be destroyed upon receipt
of written approval from the county commission of
public records and Indiana Archives and Records
Administration.
GEN 15-1
Ambulance Run Reports
Retention based on 836 IAC 1-1-5(c).
DESTROY after seven (7) years.
AUDIO, VIDEO & GENERAL MEDIA
GEN 10-40
MICROFILM DOCUMENTATION FILE
A written documentation list created and maintained for the
microfilm based on the approved retention schedule (60 IAC 2-2-
3). See 60 IAC 2 for required contents of the file.
PERMANENT. Transfer copy to the Indiana State
Archives.
GEN 10-41
PHOTOGRAPHS, VIDEO RECORDINGS, FILMS
Typically consists of photographs of special events and activities of
the office, general circulation or special purpose periodicals, intraoffice
news, or other still photographs.
TRANSFER to the Indiana State Archives for
evaluation, sampling, or weeding pursuant to
archival principles one (1) calendar year after the
date of the event or activity.
48
GEN 10-43
ROUTINE SURVEILLANCE RECORDINGS
Disclosure of these records may be affected by IC 5-14-3-4(a) and
the discretion of a public agency per IC 5-14-3-4(b) (1) & (6).
DESTROY after 30 days without the necessity of filing
a Notice of Destruction unless one of the following
conditions occurs before that time period elapses:
(1) If the agency receives notice, actual or
constructive, that evidence of illegal activity was
captured, TRANSFER records to Record Series GEN
16-1 and follow the appropriate listed retention.
(2) If the agency receives notice, actual or
constructive, that evidence was captured resulting in
a timely notice of tort claim under IC 34-13-3-8,
DESTROY three (3) calendar years after action
accrues.
(3) If litigation occurs for which the record is
admitted into evidence, the record becomes the
responsibility of the court and is subject to Indiana
Rules of Court, Administrative Rule 7.
GEN 16-1
LAW ENFORCEMENT RECORDINGS
Includes vehicle dash camera and body camera footage from law
enforcement agencies or divisions, as well as footage from any
agency that is found to depict illegal activity.
DESTROY after 190 days unless one of the following
conditions occurs before that time period elapses:
(1) If an eligible party under IC 5.1(a) has requested
a longer retention, or a complaint regarding a law
49
enforcement activity depicted in the footage has
been made, DESTROY after two (2) years.
(2) If the agency receives notice, actual or
constructive, that evidence was captured resulting in
a timely notice of tort claim under IC 34-13-3-8,
DESTROY three (3) calendar years after action
accrues.
(3) If litigation occurs for which the record is
admitted into evidence, the record becomes the
responsibility of the court and is subject to Indiana
Rules of Court, Administrative Rule 7.
GEN 10-46
PROTECTED CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE INFORMATION
Information received by the County and/or local Emergency
Management Agency and/or partner agencies including public
safety, health, fire and emergency medical services, from the
Indiana Department of Homeland Security and/or the US
Department of Homeland Security pursuant to 6 USC 131-135 and
6 CFR 29 regarding the security of critical infrastructure and
protected systems, analysis, warning, interdependency study,
recovery, reconstitution, and related purposes. Records include
correspondence, reports, assessments, strategies, grant
applications, drawings, specifications, plans, and risk planning
documents in paper or electronic form. Disclosure of these records
is affected by 6 USC 133(a)(1)(A)-(E) and 6 CFR 29.8. Retention
DESTROY when outdated or replaced by subsequent
records received from the Indiana Department of
Homeland Security and/or the US Department of
Homeland Security.
50
period is based on high security-level of information and its
duplicate existence at the Federal level.
GEN 10-47
CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE INFORMATION
Homeland security and counterterrorism records which may be intra-agency or interagency advisory or deliberative material (including material developed by a private contractor under a contract with a public agency). These may be expressions of
opinion or of a speculative nature, and include: 1) administrative or technical information that would jeopardize a record keeping or security system, 2) computer programs, codes, filing systems, and
other software, 3) portions of electronic maps entrusted to a public agency by a utility, and 4) school safety and security measures, plans, and systems, including emergency preparedness plans developed under 511 IAC 6.1-2-2.5. Records may include
correspondence, reports, assessments, strategies, grant applications, drawings, specifications, plans, and risk planning
documents in paper or electronic form, as further described in IC 5-14-3-4(b)(6), (10), (11), (18) and 19. Disclosure of these records
may be affected by the previously listed statutes. Retention is based on a reasonable likelihood of threatening public safety by
exposing a vulnerability to terrorist attack should records be improperly disclosed.
DESTROY when outdated or replaced.
Obsolete Records
51
GEN 10-44
PERMANENT OBSOLETE RECORDS
Chattel Mortgage Record [to 6/30/1935]
Index to Chattel Mortgage Record [to 6/30/1935]
Sire Lien Record [1889-1984]
Stock Mark Record
Apprentice Indenture Record
County Newspapers [1 RS 1852, ch. 75; repealed Acts 1980, ch.
211, sec. 5]
PR-6 (Township Trustee ONLY) – Register of Poor Relief Claims
Twp. PR-7 – Poor Relief Statistical Report
Twp. Form 369 – General Fixed Asset Account Group
SD Form 309A/B – Cash Journal, Municipal Sewage Utility (short &
long forms)
SD Form 329A/B – Sewage Utility Voucher Register (short & long
forms)
County Clerk’s copy of Coroner’s Inquest Verdict and Written
Report of Death (copy sent to County Clerk prior to 7/1/1994)
PERMANENT. DO NOT LAMINATE. May microfilm according to 60 IAC 2 standards. Original may be retained in office or transferred to the Indiana State Archives pursuant to IC 5-15-6-6 at such time as original record no longer has official value but has historical value. If microfilmed, original may be destroyed upon receipt of written approval from the county commission of public records and Indiana Archives and Records Administration.
GEN 10-45
NON-PERMANENT OBSOLETE RECORDS
Chattel Mortgage Minute Book [1 July 1935 – 30June 1964]
Index to Chattel Mortgage Receipts [1 July 1935 – 30 June 1964]
Chattel Mortgage Receipts [1 July 1935 – 30 June 1964]
Entry Book of Old-Age Pensions [1936-1945]
Inheritance Tax Record [1913-1931]
Fee Docket
Premarital Examination Certificate [Confidential and NOT open to
public inspection]
Hunting and Fishing Report
Twp. PR-1 – Application for Township Assistance
Twp. PR-1A – Notice of Poor Relief Action
Twp. PR-1B – Application for Additional or Continuing Township
Assistance
Twp. PR-2 – Purchase Order for Medical Relief
Twp. PR-3 – General Purchase Order for Poor Relief
Twp. PR-4 – Report of Medical Aid Rendered
DESTROY.
52
Twp. PR-7M – Mileage Claim for Poor Relief Investigation
Twp. Form 7 – Estimate of Poor Relief Requirements
Twp. PR-8 – Quarterly Poor Relief Report of Actual and Estimated
Receipts
(Ord. 2016-21, passed 9-21-16)
53
TOWN FEES
§ 00-03-32-15 PUBLIC RECORDS GENERAL COPY FEES
(A) Fees reflecting the actual cost of photocopying, or reproducing public records through other means, shall be charged to all persons requesting copies of public records, except for:
(1) Town officials and employees seeking copies of records in the course of performing the responsibilities of their public office or municipal employment; and
(2) Requests for only one or two photocopied sides on 8.5 inch by 11 inch sheets of paper, as long as the person making the request did not make a prior non-chargeable copy request within the previous 24 hours.
(B) Except for public record described in division (D) below, fees which reflect the actual cost of photocopying public records that shall be charged are as follows:
(1) Each photocopied side on an 8.5 inch by 11 inch sheet of paper: $.10.
(2) Each photocopied side on an 8.5 inch by 14 inch sheet of paper: $.12.
(C) Except for public records described in division (D) below, fees which reflect the actual cost of printing records maintained on the town’s computer system that shall be charged are as follows: Each sheet of computer paper (as determined by perforations in continuous feed paper, generally 15 inch by 11 inch) that is used to produce the information requested: $.12.
(D) Any public record for which a state statute prescribes a specific charge for document reproduction or photocopying shall be provided for the fee prescribed by the statute. Any documents published by the town in a bound manual or binder, produced in quantities sufficient for and intended to be offered for public purchase, shall be provided for the fee the town has determined as reflecting the cost of publication.
(E) Since the town does not have the means for creating duplicates of cassette tapes used to copy recordings of the meetings of the Town Council and other boards and commissions in a format compatible with conventional tape players, fees in the amount of the actual cost to the town of having an outside business make copies of cassette tapes of the town shall be charged.
(Ord. 2002-7, passed 4-4-2002)
§ 00-03-32-16 VEHICLE ACCIDENT REPORTS.
A fee of $10 shall be charged for furnishing duplicates of a motor vehicle accident report prepared by the Police Department. This fee shall be deposited into the Local Law Enforcement Continuing Education Fund and used for education and training of law enforcement officers as provided for by Indiana law.
(Am. Ord. 2005-06, passed 8-3-2005; Am. Ord. 2007-03, passed 6-20-2007; Am. Ord. 2011-15, passed 12-7-2011)
54
§ 00-03-32-17 CRIMINAL HISTORY REPORTS.
(A) The town Police Department is hereby authorized to obtain for a fee of $7, payable in cash or the equivalent thereof, an individual’s personal criminal history, and to provide a true and accurate copy thereof to the individual requesting his or her own personal criminal history.
(B) The Chief of Police/Town Marshal shall establish procedures to accurately determine the proper identity of the person requesting his or her criminal history, and the Chief is further authorized and empowered to create or obtain an authorization form to be signed by any person requesting his or her personal criminal history prior to the furnishing of a history to the person so requesting same, and an authorization form shall include a disclaimer and release of liability in favor of the town and its agents, servants, employees, and police officers from any and all claims which might arise from the furnishing of the criminal history.
(1996 Code, § 00-03-33-09) (Ord. 1995-8, passed 5-3-1995)
Editor’s Note:
There are numerous other fees charged for town services, including, but not limited to: public works fees, set forth in Title V of this code; business regulation fees, set forth in Title XI of this code; land use regulation fees, set forth in the town’s land usage ordinances which are separate from this code; fees established by state statutes, e.g., the handgun license application fee of $10 established by I.C. 35-7; and fees for the use of municipal facilities. A schedule of these fees is available at the Clerk-Treasurer’s office.
§ 00-03-32-18 PARK FACILITIES FEES.
(A) Park facilities fees.
Cumberland Park Facilities
Rental Fee Charged
Whole park grounds
$150 per day
Small shelter house
$ 55 per day
Large shelter house
$ 70 per day
Baseball field
$ 30 per event
Volleyball court
$ 30 per event
Tennis court
$ 15 per event
Basketball court
$ 15 per event
(B) In addition to the above applicable rental fee, applicable state sales tax shall be charged and a damage deposit equal to the amount of the rental fee shall be provided. If the facility rented is found to be damaged or in need of clean-up as a result of the rental use, all or part of the damage deposit will be forfeited to pay for the cost of the needed repairs or clean-up.
(Ord. 2006-03, passed 7-19-2007)
55
§ 00-03-32-19 POLICE DEPARTMENT COPY FEES
(A) The following fees are authorized to be charged by the Police Department for copy fees, unless Indiana law provides otherwise:
ITEM FEE
Photographs $0.31 per photograph
Video tape, other than $5.00 per video tape
Law Enforcement Recordings
as defined by Ind. Code
§ 5-14-3-2
Law Enforcement Recordings $150.00 per copy
Audio tape $5.00 per audio tape
Incident Report $0.10 per page
Accident Reproof $10.00 per report
Reports over 50 pages $0.04 per page
Finger prints* $5.00 per card
Vehicle Identification Check $5.00
Criminal History Check $7.00
Notary Service $2.00
Other copying $0.10 per page
*There shall be no fee for finger prints of children less than 18 years old
Requested by a parent or guardian for purposes of child safety and identification.
(B) These fees shall be deposited as follows:
(1) Policy Copy Fee Funds: All fees charged for photographs, video tapes, audio tape, incident reports, reports over 50 pages, fingerprints, criminal history check, notary services, and other copying shall be deposited into the Police Copy Fee Fund. These funds shall be used to pay or supplies, charges, services, and equipment used to provide these services.
(2) Local Law Enforcement Continuing Education Fund. All fees charged for accident reports and vehicle identification checks shall be deposited into the Local Law Enforcement Continuing Education Fund. These funds
56
shall be used for education and training of law enforcement officers as provided by Indiana law.
(3) Law Enforcement Recordings Fee Fund. All fees charged for copying Law Enforcement Recordings shall be deposited into the Law Enforcement Recordings Fee Fund. These funds shall be used to purchase cameras and other equipment for use in connection with the Chief of Police’s law enforcement recording program, for training on law enforcement recordings, and to defray the expenses of storing, producing, and copying law enforcement recordings.
(Ord. 2008-02, passed 2-20-2008; Am. Ord. 2011-15, passed12/7/2011; Am. Ord. 2013-16, passed 1/8/2014; Amd. Ord 2016-19, passed 9-21-16)
§ 00-03-32-20 FIREARMS TRAINING FUND
(A) Handgun Registration Fees: The following fees are authorized for handgun registration:
4-year license $10.00
Lifetime License $50.00
Lifetime with valid license $40.00
(B) Firearms Training Fund. All fees charged for handgun registration shall be deposited into the Firearms Training Fund. These funds shall be used for the purchase of firearms, ammunition, training supplies and body armor.
(Ord. 2011-15, passed 12/7/2011)
§00-03-32-21 CASH TRANSACTIONS FOR TOWN FEES
(A) The Town of Cumberland will not accept cash as an acceptable method
of payment for any transaction totaling an amount greater than $5.00. For transactions totaling an amount greater than $5.00, the Town of Cumberland will only accept money order, credit/debit card, and personal checks and other cash equivalents.
(B) For transactions $5.00 or less, the Town of Cumberland may accept cash. All Town
employees shall follow the cash handling procedure designated in the Employee Handbook for every transaction involving cash.
(Ord. 2016-5, adopted 4-20-2016)
§00-03-32-22 CUMULATIVE CAPITAL DEVELOPMENT FUND
(A) Cumulative Capital Development Fund Establishment. The Cumberland Town Council
hereby establishes the Cumulative Capital Development (CCD) Fund pursuant to Indiana Code § 6-1.1-41, to be used for the purposes allowed and set forth in Indiana Code § 36-9-15.5, and now establishes the rate to be $0.0167 per $100 assessed valuation on all taxable real property in Cumberland, Indiana.
57
(B) Tax Rate. The Cumberland Town Council now levies a property tax to provide
funds to the CCD Fund. The property tax will not exceed $0.0167 per $100 of assessed valuation. This tax rate will be levied beginning with taxes for 2016 and payable in 2017.
(C) DLGF Approval. The Cumberland Town Council directs the Town of Cumberland Clerk-
Treasurer to submit, to the Indiana Department of Local Government Finance, all proofs of publication of the notices to affected taxpayers and the Council’s public hearing held on July 20, 2016 and a certified copy of this ordinance, as provided by Indiana Code § 6-1.1-41-4, as the Town’s proposal for establishing the CCD Fund and imposing a tax levy by the Town to be approved by the Department of Local Government Finance. This proposal must be submitted to the Indiana Department of Local Government Finance by August 1, 2016, in accordance with Indiana Code § 6-1.1-41-5.
(D) Publication of Notice of Adoption. The Clerk-Treasurer shall publish notice of adoption
of this ordinance within 30 days of the adoption of this ordinance.
(E) Advertisement. The Clerk-Treasurer shall annually advertise this tax levy in
the same manner as other tax levies are advertised.
(F) Repeal of Conflicting Ordinances. The provisions of all other Town
ordinances in conflict with the provisions hereof, if any, are of no further force or effect and are hereby repealed.
(G) Duration and Effective Date. The provisions of this Ordinance shall become effective
immediately and remain in full force and effect until repealed by ordinance.
(Ord. 2016-12, passed 7-20-16)
PURCHASING
§ 00-03-32-30 PURCHASING POLICY
(A) Purchasing Agency: The Town Council will serve as the purchasing agency for the Town.
(B) Powers and Duties of Purchasing Agency: The Town Council, as the Town’s purchasing agency, will have all powers and duties under Indiana Code §5-22, as amended, as may be supplemented from time to time by ordinance and policies adopted by the Town Council.
(C) Authority: The Town Council will act as the purchasing agency for every agency, board, office, branch, bureau, commission, council, department, or other establishment of the Town.
(D) Designation of Purchasing Agents: The Town Council designates the Cumberland Clerk-Treasurer, Town Manager, Director of Utilities, and Police Chief, Street Commissioner, and any Special Project Administrator as designated by the Town Council as purchasing agents for the Town, subject to any and all limitations of their authority as established by statue or established by policy or procedure of the Town.
58
(E) Limitations on Authority of Purchasing Agents: Subject to the policies and procedures of the Town, purchasing agents may purchase supplies with an estimated cost of less than $5,000 on the open market without inviting or receiving quotes. The Street Commissioner may purchase supplies with an estimated cost of less than $2,500 on the open market without inviting or receiving quotes. A Special Project Administrator may purchase supplies with an estimated cost of less than $3,000.00 on the open market without inviting or receiving quotes.
(F) Duty of Purchasing Agents to Comply with Law and Policies:
Designated purchasing agents must comply with all provisions of Indian law and Town policy and procedure when purchasing supplies with an estimated value of $5,000 or more.
(Ord. 1998-5, passed 6-3-1998; Am. Ord. 2013-10, passed 8/21/2013; Am. Ord. 2016-14, passed 8-3-16; Am. Ord 2016-22, passed 10-5-16)
§ 00-03-32-31 PURCHASING RULES.
Supplies manufactured in the United States shall be specified for all town purchases and shall be purchased, unless the purchasing agent determines that:
(A) The supplies are not manufactured in the United States in reasonably available quantities:
(B) The prices of the supplies manufactured in the United States exceed by an unreasonable amount the price of available and comparable supplies manufactured elsewhere;
(C) The quality of the supplies manufactured in the United States is substantially less than the quality of comparably priced available supplies manufactured elsewhere; or
(D) The purchase of supplies manufactured in the United States is not in the public interest.
(Ord. 5, passed 6- --1998)
§ 00-03-32-32 TRAVEL POLICIES
The following policies shall be used in providing or reimbursing for Town Council members, Clerk-Treasurer, member of commissions and boards, appointed officials and employees for travel accommodations when such travel has been authorized by the Town Council and budgeted:
(A) Reimbursement for actual expenses. Officials and employees traveling on official town business may claim reimbursement for actual expenses incurred by submitting to the Clerk-Treasurer receipts or their meals, tax on meals, gratuities and other incidental expenses. The Clerk-Treasurer shall pay all properly submitted claims. The maximum amounts for reimbursement for meals, tax on meals and gratuities shall be $10 for breakfast, $15 for lunch, and $25 for dinner. If meals are provided as part of conference registration fees, officials and employees attending conferences shall not be allowed reimbursements for meal expenses incurred during the conference.
59
(B) Travel to Conferences. All travel to conferences shall be approved by the Town Council President, and he or she may approve travel to conferences a day before the conference begins and the day following the conference if, in his or her discretion, such travel is necessitated because of the schedule of the conference.
(Ord. 1007-06, passed 11-7-1-2007; Am. Ord. 2011-16, passed 12-7-2011)
§ 00-03-32-33 CREDIT CARDS RULES
(A) The issuance and use of credit cards by the various departments and other units of the town that are subject to the Town Council’s oversight is hereby authorized and allowed.
(B) At the Clerk-Treasurer’s discretion and on such terms as he or she deems advisable, the Clerk-Treasurer of the town is hereby authorized to negotiate with banks and other financial institutions and with suppliers and service providers to the town to obtain credit cards and purchasing cards (collectively “credit cards”) for the use and benefit of any and all department and other operating units of the town that may require them to operate efficiently. The Clerk-Treasurer is further authorized and empowered to apply for and execute on behalf of the town credit applications and any other documentation required to obtain those cards for those departments and operating units. The Clerk-Treasurer is further authorized to pay all annual fees assessed for the use of these credit cards. For purposes of this section, annual fees includes, but is not limited to, membership fees, service fees, and renewal fees.
(C) Unless a higher limit is authorized by this Town Council for the appropriate fiscal body for that department or operating unit, the credit limit for such cards shall be $5,000 per department.
(D) The regulation and usage of credit cards shall be the responsibility of the directors, chief, superintendent, or other department head of each of the various departments and operating units of the town, and that person shall be the custodian and any departmental credit card(s). No employee shall use a card issued to another employee.
(E) Departmental credit cards may be used only for lawful charges of expenses related to and necessary for the effective operation of that department. Such uses include but are limited to:
(1) Purchasing of supplies and equipment for the use and benefit of the department;
(2) Travel and lodging expenses of departmental personnel while traveling on approved municipal business;
(3) Meal expenses of departmental personnel while traveling on approved municipal business, provided that any such expense may not exceed any authorized per diem for meal. Reasonable tips or gratuities are allowed as meal expenses if service is provided as part of the meal.
(4) Approved training and education costs for departmental personnel; and
60
(5) Any other use required for the efficient operation of the department when use of vouchers, checks, or other means of credit are not possible, provided that said use had been approved by the department head.
(F) When the purpose for which credit has been used is accomplished, the card must be returned to the authorized custodian of the card.
(G) The authorized custodian of any credit cards must maintain an accounting system concerning their use, which shall include the names of the individuals requesting and using the cards, their positions, the estimated amount and purpose of any charges, and the date and time the card is taken return. The custodian shall also obtain and keep all charge receipts and other documentation supporting the charges.
(H) (1) Within seven days of use of a town credit card, the employee using the credit card shall deliver to the authorized custodian of the car the following documents:
(a) A claim form for the charges made signed by the employee;
(b) Original receipts and/or invoices for the charges; and
(c) Any other documentation requested by the town which supports the claim.
(2) IF the employee loses the original receipt and/or invoice, the employee shall provide a duplicate receipt and/or invoice or an affidavit of lost receipt.
(I) Within seven days of receiving the required documentation, the authorized custodian shall deliver the documentation to the Clerk-Treasurer for processing.
(J) Any interest, late charges, or other fees resulting from the tardy submission of credit card receipts by any officer or employee shall be the personal responsibility of that officer or employee to pay.
(K) The credit cards may not be used for the following.
(1) Personal use:
(2) Purchase of alcohol:
(3) Any illegal purpose:
(4) To bypass, the town’s accounting system or purchasing policies.
(L) Any misuse of a Town credit card may result in disciplinary action up to and including termination.
(M) Any Town credit card must be surrendered immediately at separation from employment.”
(Ord. 2009-15, passed ______-2015)
61
USE OF TOWN FACILITIES
§ 00-03-32-40 USE OF TOWN FACILITIES
(A) The primary function of the Town Hall facility is to serve as the site of government operations for the Town of Cumberland. Therefore, first priority for the use of the Town Hall shall be given to the Town’s boards, commission, and other bodies for the conduct of government business and to the staff for the discharge of its duties.
(B) When the Council chambers is not scheduled to be used by one of the Town’s boards, commissions or other bodies, or by the Town staff, the chambers may be used by residents of the Town or organization based in the Cumberland community which benefit the citizens of Cumberland, subject to the restrictions contained in this policy.
(C) When other land or facilities owned by the Town are available for use and such use would not disrupt the government operations or public enjoyment of such land or facilities, residents of the Town or organizations based in the Cumberland community which benefit the citizens of Cumberland may use the land and facilities, subject to the restrictions contained in this policy.
(D) Residents of the Town or organizations based in the Cumberland community which benefit the citizens of Cumberland may apply for the right to use the Town’s facilities by completing an application for use. This application is available in the Office of the Town Manager, and it should be provided to the Town Manager for processing.
(E) The Town Manager shall be responsible for determining if residents or organization applying for use are eligible to use the facilities under the terms and conditions of this policy and for administering this policy.
(F) If the Town Manager determines that the applicant is eligible, he or she shall require the applicant to execute a facilities use agreement which obligates the applicant to follow the rules for use, provides for fines and penalties for violation of the rules, requires the applicant to obtain or provide proof of insurance and indemnify the Town for any loss or damages which occur during the use, provides for responsibility for damage to the Town’s property and makes other conditions consistent with the Town’s policies.
(G) The following activities are prohibited:
(1) activities which violate federal, state or local law;
(2) activities which are intended to profit individuals or private business;
(3) formal religious services;
(4) activities which risk damage to the Town’s facilities;
(5) activities which threaten the security of government offices;
(6) the possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages;
(7) smoking inside any building;
(8) any other activity which would violate any rule or regulation of the Town.
(Ord. 2010-18, passed 9/15/2010)
62
H1N1 POLICY
§ 00-03-32-50 H1N1 POLICY.
The H1N1 influenza (a.k.a swine flu) became a public health threat I the Spring of 2009. During the latter half of 2009 the town established an emergency management planning committee to establish a policy to address the H1N1 influenza. In preparation for a potential outbreak in town or I the case of employees coming down with H1N1 or seasonal influenza, the following policy has been adopted.
(Ord. 2010-04, passed 4-21-2010)
§ 00-03-32-51 COMMUNICABLE DISEASE RESPONSE.
(A) Purpose. The purpose of this subchapter is to establish procedures for quarantining, isolating or evacuating areas in response to an infectious disease outbreak. It is the purpose of the Police Department to take into consideration all federal, state and municipal medical procedures and standards when dealing with an incident.
(B) Policy. It is the goal of the Police Department to minimize risk to the officers and town employees during an outbreak while as the same time making every effort to provide a safe and secure environment to all persons who may be combined within a contaminated area or facility.
(Ord. 2010-04, passed 4.21.2010)
§ 00-03-32-52 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
COMMUNICABLE DISEASES. An illness caused by a specific infectious agent or its toxic products that arises through transmission of an agent or its products from an infected person, animal or inanimate source to a susceptible host, either directly or indirectly through an intermediate plant or animal host, vector or the inanimate environment. A single case of disease long absent from a population may require immediate investigation (Control of Communicable Diseases Manual 18th Edition.)
CONTAGIOUS/QUARANTINABLE DISEASES. Cholera; diphtheria; infectious tuberculosis; plague; smallpox; yellow fever; and viral hemorrhagic fevers (lassa, Marburg, ebola, and acute respiratory syndrome (SARS). May include viral influenza during a pandemic or other novel and highly infectious diseases (presidential executive order 13295, and 25-1-650, C.R.S.)
EPIDEMIC. Cases of an illness or condition, communicable or non-communicable, ceased by bioterrorism, pandemic influenza, novel and highly fatal infectious agents or biological toxins (24-32-2103, C.R.S.) Local, regional or statewide event.
HEALTH AUTHORITY. Marion/Hancock County Health Department, Indiana State Health Department, CDC or other recognized entity.
63
ISOLATION. The separation of persons who have a specific infectious disease from those who are healthy, and the restriction of their movement to stop the spread of disease (CDC).
PANDEMIC. An epidemic occurring over a very wide area (several countries or continents) and usually affecting a large population (CDC) statewide, national region, national or larger event.
PANDEMIC INFLUENZA. A widespread epidemic of influenza caused by a highly virulent strain of the influenza virus (24-32-2103, C.R.S.).
PATIENT. Any person identified as being infected or possibly infected until cleared by medial staff.
QUARANTINE. Quarantine refers to the separation and restriction of movement of persons who while not yet ill have been exposed to an infectious agent and therefore may become infectious (CDC).
(Ord. 2010-04, passed 4-21-2010)
§ 00-03-32-53 COMMUNICATION AND EDUCATION.
(A) When an epidemic or pandemic has been confirmed in the Indianapolis Metro area by a health authority, consultation will be made with the Town Manager and/or Chief of Police, the departments’ medical provider or other health authority to determine what additional medical screening processes may need to be implemented in an effort to identify employees who display signs or symptoms consistent with the declared epidemic or pandemic.
(B) The departments’ health care provider will meet with the department’s command staff, the appointed incident commander, and others identified by the Town Manager or designee to determine a proposed course of action for the evaluation, diagnosis and treatment of town personnel creation of informational material for employees that includes basic information about the contagion, transmission routes, precautions to limit transmission, signs and symptoms to look for (self screening) and other information as may be appropriate. Appropriate personal protective equipment will be identified, procures and issued as necessary and appropriate to town employees.
(C) Educational material should be read in briefings for town personnel.
(D) During cold and flu season, staff should be encouraged to obtain flu shots or take advantage or other means shown to reduce the livelihood of infection from seasonal cold/flu.
(Ord. 2010-04, passed 4-21-2010)
§ 00-03-32-54 EMPLOYEES WITH H1N1.
(A) Employees that become ill with flu-like symptoms may be asked to go home. Employees may use earned sick or vacation time.
(B) Employees that have H1N1 or flu-like symptoms will not be permitted to return to work until they have been without a fever for 24-hours and without fever reducing mediation, like Tylenol.
64
(C) Employees with H1N1 or flu-like symptoms may use earned sick or vacation time for the work missed. If an employee does not have earned sick or vacation time to utilize, the employee will be permitted to stay home without penalty, but it will be unpaid time off.
(D) Employees that see a doctor for an initial diagnosis shall bring in a doctor’s note. Employees that have flu-like symptoms and stay home from work will be excused for no more than five consecutive days without a doctor’s notice.
(Ord. 2010-04, passed 4-21-2010)
§ 00-03-32-55 EMPLOYEES CARING FOR FAMILY MEMBERS WITH H1N1.
(A) Employees caring for family members affected by H1N1 will be excused from work without a doctor’s note. If a doctor is consulted, a note stating the family member’s illness shall be presented to the employee’s supervisor upon return to work.
(B) Employees should monitor their health upon returning to work.
(C) Employees caring for ill family members may use earned sick or vacation time.
(Ord. 2010-4, passed 4-21-2010)
§ 00-03-32-56 SEVERE OUTBREAKS.
In the event of a severe outbreak of H1N1:
(A) If schools or childcare centers close:
(1) In the event local schools and/or childcare centers close, parents of a student may stay home to care for the child (children);
(2) An employee may be permitted to telecommute from home if approved by the employee’s department head and if the employee has access to adequate infrastructure to complete said work. Employees that work in the field will not be permitted to telecommute.
(3) Employees may use earned vacation or sick time during their absence.
(B) Multiple absences within a Town Department.
(1) The Town Council President shall be made aware of the absences.
(2) Town Departments will remain operational as long as there is at least one individual on site to represent the department.
(3) In the event that service delivery will be delayed, each department will be responsible for posting notice as to essential services that will be delayed due to an outbreak of H1N1.
(C) Town Hall closure.
65
(1) The Town Manager shall consult with the Town Council President upon making determinations to close Town Hall or operate under essential personnel and services only.
(2) Town Hall will remain open and operate on essential personnel and services only I the event of a severe outbreak of H1N1.
(3) The Town Manager will notify all department heads of the operation for essential personnel and services only. Department heads are responsible for contacting their employees.
(4) The Town manager may close the Town Hal if there is a severe public health risk in keeping the building open. Normal building closure policies shall govern the closure of the building.
(Ord. 2010-04, passed 4-21-2010)
66
§ 00-03-32-57 ESSENTIAL TOWN EMPLOYEES AND SERVICES.
(A) Essential personnel. Essential personnel are the Town Manager, Superintendent of Streets and Parks, Streets and Parks Department employees, all sworn police officers, Clerk-Treasurer, and Director of Planning and Development.
(B) Reallocation of personnel.
(1) In the absence of the Town Manager. The Town Manager’s designee and or the Town Council President will step in to fulfill the responsibilities of the Town Manager. At the Town Council President’s designation or in the Town Council President’s absence the Director of Planning and Development will step in to fulfill the responsibilities of the Town Manager. In the event that neither the Town Council President nor the Director of Planning and Development is able to fulfill the Town Manager’s role the Chief of Police will take responsibility for the Town Hall and town facilities.
(2) In the event that 30% of town staff is absent due to the flu or flu like symptoms the Town Manager will determine whether to reallocate personnel to fulfill necessary positions or to contact a temporary employment service to fulfill the positions. Staff members that may be asked to fill-in for another position in the event of absences shall be cross trained in these additional duties.
(3) In the event that 50% of town staff is absent due to the flu or flu like symptoms the Town Manager will determine whether to reallocate personnel to fulfill necessary positions, to contact a temporary employment service to fulfill the positions, or close the department/Town Hall. Staff members that may be asked to fill in for another position in the event of absences shall be cross-trained in these additional duties.
(4) In the event that all members of a department are absent due to illness the same procedures as above will apply. In the case where there is only one member of the staff and there are mutual aid agreements or on-call consultants available those organizations shall be contacted to fulfill the responsibilities.
(5) The Town Hall will continue to operate under normal business hours unless the Town Manager decides to close the building, quarantines are enforced or the town is operating under essential personnel only.
(C) Clerk Treasurer’s office.
(1) Payroll, claims, checks.
(a) The Deputy Clerk Treasurer issues all checks. In the event of the Deputy Clerk Treasurer’s absence the Clerk Treasurer will issue checks.
(b) The Clerk Treasurer and Deputy Clerk Treasurer are cross trained in all department functions.
(c) The Billing Coordinator/customer facilitators are cross trained on receipts and deposits to assist if needed.
67
(2) In the event that there are two or more absences in the Clerk Treasurer’s office, the office will be closed to the public for half of each day or the entire day at the discretion of the Clerk Treasurer. This will allow for the reallocation of staff within the department to carry out essential functions.
(3) Keystone receives and stores year-end date and it is kept for two years. Keystone also stores monthly/quarterly back-ups for the Clerk Treasurer.
(D) Department of Public Works.
(1) Department Chain-of-Command.
(a) In the absence of the Superintendent of Public Works, the Assistant Superintendent of Public Works shall be in charge.
(b) In the event neither individual is available then the Town Manager will designate from the staff of the department.
(2) In the event of a staff shortage, influenza outbreak or quarantine all services unless specified in this section will be suspended.
(a) Snow plowing.
1. In the event the town has a snow emergency or is short staffed and cannot handle the snow, H & H Construction should be called in to assist. Contact: Kent Haste: 375-0114 or cell 223-7332.
2. District Maps will be made available to all consultants assisting with snow plowing.
(b) In the event of large sink-holes, storm sewer collapse or large chuck holes that cannot be taped or barricaded until a later date Russell Excavating will provide services. Contact: Rodger Russell 697-1020.
(E) Department of Planning and Development. Building permits/inspections.
(1) The Building Commissioner and/or Director of Planning and Development will e responsible for meeting all deadlines for new permit applications. Both individuals will be permitted to telecommute in the event it is necessary.
(2) The Building Inspector will continue to conduct building inspections unless ill. Then the Building Commissioner and/or Director of Planning and Development will fulfill the duties.
(3) The Director of Planning and Development will establish mutual aid agreements with Hancock County and/or McCordsville to assist with building inspections I the event of a sever H1N1 outbreak. These agreements should be reviewed on an annual basis. The Director of Planning and Development m ay contract with qualified companies to provide on-call services in lieu of or addition to mutual aid agreements.
(4) Permits must be issued/denied within 15 days of submission.
68
(5) The Director of Planning and Development will invoke the mutual aid agreements in the event necessary. If the Director is ill then the Town Manager will invoke the mutual aid agreements.
(F) Plan Commission/Board of Zoning Appeals petitions.
(1) Director of Planning and Development will be responsible from meeting all deadlines established by code for petitions before the Plan Commission and/or Board of Zoning Appeals in the event of a sever outbreak.
(2) In the event the Director is unable to be in the office, the Directors may telecommute to complete these taxes.
(3) In the event the Director is ill then the Town Manager will contact the organizations in which the town has mutual aid agreements with to compete all tasks related to the Plan Commission and Board of Zoning Appeals case administration.
(4) The Director of Planning and Development will also have a Planning Consultant on contract as on call hourly services I the event Hancock County and/or McCordsville are affected similarly by the H1N1/Pandemic Influenza.
(G) Regular Board and Commission meetings will be suspended in the event of a severe outbreak and if Town Hall is closed.
(1) Town Council.
(2) Plan Commission.
(3) Board of Zoning Appeals.
(4) Parks Advisory Council.
(5) Redevelopment Commission.
(6) Stormwater Utility Board.
(7) Sanitary Sewer Utility Board.
(Ord. 2010-04, passed 4-21-2010)
§ 00-03-32-58 PUBLIC SAFETY; POLICE DEPARTMENT.
(A) Mission statement. The Cumberland Police Department operational mission is to ensure a safe environment for all members of the community, employees, and persons I our custody during this event, while protecting life and property by prioritizing calls and responses.
(B) Specific goals will be to:
(1) Limit the number of illnesses and deaths within our community.
(2) Preserve continuity of essential government functions.
69
(3) Minimize fiscal impact on the town.
(C) This plan will be coordinated with other preparedness plans of the community, state and federal agencies.
Ord. 2010-04, passed 4-21-2010)
§ 00-03-32-59 GENERAL GUIDELINES.
(A) The Cumberland Police Department will work I cooperation with the County Health Departments, the Indiana State Board of Health, the CDC, County Emergency Management Agency and the Indiana Department of Homeland Security during a pandemic event.
(B) The Cumberland Police Department will ensure notification of communications to appropriate state and federal agencies.
(C) The Cumberland Police Department will utilize the National Incident Management System (NIMS) as the organization basis for response to health emergencies.
(D) The appointed Incident Commander will retain the role until the threat to public safety is abated or the incident command is transferred to the appropriate state or federal agency.
(E) Appropriate information will be shared with the public through the Public Information Officer (P.I.O.) as designated by the Chief of Police.
(F) The Cumberland Police Department will adhere to appropriate medical ethics and practice when allocating resources.
(G) Information will be shared with Marion/Hancock County health and emergency management agencies at appropriate levels.
(H) Cumberland Police Personnel will have a working knowledge of this plan.
(I) All Cumberland Police Personnel will follow established safety and health guidelines.
(Ord. 2010-04, passed 4-21-2010)
§ 00-03-32-60 ASSUMPTIONS.
(A) The current influenza outbreak may result in widespread infection globally causing simultaneous impacts to the community, state and federal agencies.
(B) The World Health Organization and the Center for Disease Control have heightened global, national and local surveillance.
(C) The Town may not be able to rely on mutual aid resources, local, state or federal assistance to support local response efforts.
(D) A vaccine for the swine flu is currently unavailable.
(E) Antivirals may be in short supply and prioritized by the Marion/Hancock Health Departments for use in hospitalized patients.
70
(F) The number of infected patients could overwhelm area hospitals.
Ord. 2010-04, passed 4-21-2010.
§ 00-03-32-61 RESPONSIBILITIES.
(A) To provide for the safety of all residents of the town.
(B) To provide for the safety of the Cumberland Police Department Personnel (first responders).
(C) To enforce quarantine as directed in order to stabilize the outbreak.
(D) To provide security as needed.
(Ord.2010-04, passed 4-21-2010)
§ 00-03-32-62 REPORTS; INCIDENTS.
(A) Reports. The Operations Section Chief or designee will be responsible for completing an after action report in full pandemic on a daily basis.
(B) Incidents. Any unusual activity related specifically to the pandemic event will be reported to the command post or supervision.
(Ord. 2010-04, passed 4-21-2010)
§ 00-03-32-63 EQUIPMENT.
(A) Incident Command will assist in the procurement and dissemination of PPE. Staff will receive items such as masks, gloves, gowns and eye shields before reporting to their pos.
(B) It is estimated that the following items may be needed to sustain the Department Personnel in a pandemic event.
(1) N95 masks.
(2) Paper gowns (for staff working with ISO/Quarantine).
(3) Gloves.
(4) Eye shields (reusable protective eyewear).
(Ord. 2010-04, passed 4-21-2010)
§ 00-03-32-64 STAFFING FOR THE CUMBERLAND POLICE DEPARTMENT.
(A) Alternate staffing strategies. The Cumberland Police Department must be able to staff shift operations 24 hours a day, seven days a week without exception to fulfill our duty to the public. We must balance the needs of the public with the needs of the employees to be successful in meeting service demands.
71
(B) Essential/non-essential employees. All sworn employees are deemed essential employees. Non-sworn essential employees would be civilian employees.
(C) Staffing. The preferred minimum staffing would be one officer per eight hour shift as normal, however it is recognized that in an emergency operational situation the preferred minimum number of officers would be one officer per 12 hour shift, this may be the best alternative due to absenteeism.
(D) Roll calls.
(1) Reporting times will be held in the Multiple Purpose Room (M.P.R.) unless advised otherwise. Supervisor (if available) may wish to hold equipment and uniform inspections, (each office should have the respirator available). Alternative roll call sites must be available.
(2) If 12-hour shifts are necessary the hours would be as follows and be instituted as quickly as possible.
(a) First Shift: 0600-1800.
(b) Second Shift: 1800-0600.
(E) Authority to authorize alternative shifts and scheduling.
(1) The Chief of Police will have the authority to authorize alternative staffing. Should the Chief not be available the Captain of Police in conjunction with the Town Manager and President of the Town Council will have this authority.
(2) All supervisors/command officers scheduled for this event will meet at operations (Town Hall) at 0520 hours and 1720 hours to brief with the Incident Commander and discus any last minute changes/issues for the day; this is for information exchange between the ID and the section captains.
(F) Overtime. The above shift scheduling will necessitate the use of overtime. All sworn employees are deemed essential employees and will be eligible for overtime compensation as needed and at a premium rate of pay.
(G) Administrative staff (sworn). Administrative sworn staff (Chief of Police, Captain and Detective) will be available for shift staffing as needed. When absentee rate is high enough, the Captain and Detective will be reassigned to a 123 hour shift on patrol.
(H) Administrative staff (non-sworn). Non-sworn administrative staff may work from home.
(Ord. 2010-04, passed 4-21-2010)
§ 00-03-32-65 LEAVE; MUTUAL AID.
(A) Vacation. Vacation and compensatory leave time will be cancelled as the absenteeism rate increase or as otherwise directed by the Chief of Police to ensure minimum staffing levels.
72
(B) Mutual aid. Mutual aid agreements exist among all neighboring jurisdictions and we will ask for or provide assistance as needed or available. However, internal staffing plans will be made with the assumption that neighboring agencies are experiencing similar staffing issues and will not be able to provide any additional resources.
(Ord. 2010-04, passed 4-21-2010)
§ 00-03-32-66 RESPONDING TO CALLS.
In any situation where manpower is hampered reports can be taken over the phone.
(A) Pandemic Severity Index Category 1. Respond as available for routine calls.
(B) Pandemic Severity Index Category 2-3. Respond only if necessary for an officer to make personal contact with complainant. Reports can be taken over the phone. Non-injury auto accidents reported at the police station.
(C) Emergency response only. Non-emergency calls handled by phone.
(Ord. 2010-04, passed 4-21-2010)
§ 00-03-32-67 PROTOCOLS.
(A) Protocol: Response to EMS calls with IFD and or BCTFD.
(1) Pandemic Severity Index Category 1. Respond to EMS calls when requested by IFD and/or BCTFD if dispatched to known problem areas.
(2) Pandemic Severity Index Category 2-3. Respond to known problem areas or when requested by IFD and/or BCTFD.
(3) Pandemic Severity Index Category 4-5. Respond to known problem areas or when requested by IFD and/or BCTFD.
(B) Protocol: office operations.
(1) Pandemic Severity Index Category 1. All personnel report as normal. Limited personal contact. Use walk up window only.
(2) Pandemic Severity Index Category 2-3. Essential personnel only. No public access to building. Must use outside phone.
(3) Pandemic Severity Index Category 4-5. Building restricted to emergency personnel only. Establish secure VPN connection for computer access off site. Telephones forwarded off site.
(C) Protocol: reporting.
(1) Pandemic Severity Index Category 1. Officers respond and take reports as needed.
73
(2) Pandemic Severity Index Category 2-3. Reports taken by telephone except for emergencies (telephone crime reporting).
(3) Pandemic Severity Index Category 4-5. Reports taken by telephone except for emergencies.
(D) Protocol; staffing.
(1) Pandemic Severity Index Category 1. Normal staffing or officers and shift assignments for patrol. All non-sick leave cancelled. Supplemental personnel (reserve officers and/or civilian volunteers).
(2) Pandemic Severity Index Category 2-3. Twelve-hour shifts as needed due to reduced staffing. All non-sick leave cancelled. Supplemental personnel (reserve officers and/or civilian volunteers).
(3) Pandemic Severity Index Category 4-5. Twelve-hour shifts as needed as well as necessary overtime to staff patrol operations. All non-sick leave cancelled. Supplemental personal (reserve officers and/or civilian volunteers) as needed.
(E) Protocol: arrest procedures.
(1) Pandemic Severity Index Category 1. Summons or citation in lieu of physical arrest. No prisoners at eh police station for processing.
(2) Pandemic Severity Index Category 2-3. Physical arrest as last resort. Transport directly to jail. No prisoners at eh police station for processing.
(3) Pandemic Severity Index Category 4-5. Physical arrest as last resort. Transport directly to jail. No prisoners at the police station for processing.
(Ord. 2010-04, passed 4-21-2010)
74
CHAPTER 33: POLICE DEPARTMENT
Section
00-03-33-01 Board of Metropolitan Police Commissioners established
00-03-33-02 Board Membership
00-03-33-03 Term
00-03-33-04 Powers and Duties
00-03-33-05 Oath and Bond
00-03-33-06 Salary
Cross-reference:
Ordinance Violations Bureau, see Chapter 36
Police Department Funds, see §§00-03-35-20 et seq.
Town Marshal, see § 00-03-31-03
Fees for deployment of police services for motor vehicle accidents, see § 00-03-32-18
§ 00-03-33-01 BOARD OF METROPOLITAN POLICE COMMISSIONERS ESTABLISHED.
There is hereby established a Board of Metropolitan Police Commissioners for the Town of Cumberland, Indiana, as provided in Indiana Code 36-8-9, and the office of Town Marshal is hereby abolished, effective January 1, 2016.
§ 00-03-33-02 BOARD MEMBERSHIP.
A. The Board of Metropolitan Police Commissioners shall consist of 3 members appointed by the Town Council. The members must be of good moral character and legal residents of the town. Not more than 2 members may be members of the same political party, if individuals who satisfy this requirement can be found to serve on the board with reasonable and diligent efforts. Neither members of the town’s police department nor members of the Town Council may be appointed to serve on the Board.
B. The Town Council may, by ordinance, increase the number of board members to 5, provided that the amended ordinance and the appointment of board members satisfy all the requirements of Indiana Code 36-8-9-3.1(a) and all other applicable statutes.
§ 00-03-33-03 TERM.
The board members’ terms shall be 3 years, expiring on January 1 of the third year after the member’s appointment. However, to establish staggered terms, one initial member shall be appointed for a one-year term, one initial member shall be appointed for a two-year term, and one initial member shall be appointed for a three-year term. Each member serves at the pleasure of the Town Council and may be removed by the Town Council for any cause that it considers sufficient.
75
§ 00-03-33-04 POWERS AND DUTIES.
A. As provided in I.C. §36-8-9-4, the Board shall have the following powers and duties:
1. Appointment of Members. The Board shall appoint persons to serve in the town’s police department, subject to the qualifications for employment determined by the Board and approved by the Town Council.
2. Appointment of Police Chief. The Board shall appoint one person to serve as the police chief.
3. Appointment of civilian employees. The Board may appoint other employees that are necessary to carry on the work of the police department.
4. Recommendations for Compensation. The Board may recommend and the Town Council shall determine the compensation to be paid to members of the police department.
5. Safety Board. The Board constitutes the town’s safety board for purposes of the suspension, demotion, or dismissal of any member of the police department. Proceedings for the suspension, demotion, or dismissal of police department members shall be conducted in the manner prescribed by I.C. §36-8-3-4. The disciplinary provisions of I.C. §36-8-3-4.1 also apply to the safety board and the police chief.
6. Adoption of Rules and Orders. The Board may make general and special rules for the government and discipline of the police department and may make special and general orders to the department through the police chief, who is the executive head of the department.
B. The Board shall have all other powers and duties as provided by Indiana law or town ordinances.
C. The Board shall adopt and maintain rules governing the conduct of its business, including but not limited to rules concerning its meetings, the selection and appointment of persons to be employed as members of the police department, promotions and demotions of department members, and the discipline or dismissal of department members.
§ 00-03-33-05. OATH AND BOND.
Before performing any function of a board member, each person appointed to serve as a member shall:
A. Take and subscribe before the Clerk of the Marion County Circuit Court an oath or affirmation of office and an oath or affirmation that in each appointment or removal made by the Board to or from the town’s police department, the member will not appoint or remove a member of the town police department because of the political affiliation of the person or for another cause or reason other than that of the person’s fitness; and
B. Give bond in the penal sum of $5,000, payable to the state and conditioned upon the faithful and honest discharge of the member’s duties. The bond must be approved by the Town Council.
§ 00-03-33-08. SALARY.
The members’ salaries shall be set by the Town Council.
(Ord. 2015-18, passed 12-2-15)
76
CHAPTER 34: BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
Section
Parks Advisory Council
00-03-34-01 Creation
00-03-34-02 Membership
00-03-34-03 Regular and special meetings
00-03-34-04 Powers and duties
Plan Commission
00-03-34-15 Established
00-03-34-16 Appointment of members
00-03-34-17 Budget
Board of Zoning Appeals
00-03-34-30 Established
00-03-34-31 Appointment and number of members
Redevelopment Commission
00-03-34-40 Established
00-03-34-41 Organization of Commission
00-03-34-42 Term of office and removal
00-03-34-43 Oath and bond
00-03-34-44 Compensation
00-03-34-45 Purpose, duties and powers
00-03-34-46 Organization meeting and election of officers
00-03-34-47 No pecuniary interests
Police Pension
00-03-34-50 Establishment of Police Pension Board
77
PARKS ADVISORY COUNCIL.
§ 00-03-34-01 CREATION.
An advisory parks and recreation council is established to be known as the Cumberland Parks Advisory Council. The Cumberland Parks Advisory Council shall report to the Town Council. The Council shall serve as the “Park Authority,” as defined by I.C. 36-10-5-2.
(1995 Code, § 00-03-31-01) (Ord. 1992-13, passed 8-5-1992; Am. Ord. 2009-01, passed 2-17-2009)
§ 00-03-34-02 MEMBERSHIP.
(A) The Parks Advisory Council shall consist of five to ten members as follows:
(1) Each Town Council member may nominate one person who resides in their council district to the Council President for appointment to the Council. In addition to appointing the persons nominated by Council members by district, the Council President may appoint up to five other persons to serve on the Council.
(2) Board members shall serve for a term of one year at the pleasure of the Council. The term of each member shall expire on the day following the first regular meeting of the Town Council each calendar year.
(3) The Chairperson of the Council shall be selected by a majority of the Council members.
(B) The Secretary for the Council, responsible for the preparation of the minutes of Council meetings, shall be designated by the Park Authority. The Secretary shall be entitled to compensation only to the extent the Park Authority expressly allows.
(1995 Code, § 00-03-31-02) (Ord. 1992-13, passed 8-5-1992; Am. Ord. 97-1, passed 3-5-197; Am. Ord. 2009-01, passed 2-17-2009)
§ 00-03-34-03 REGULAR AND SPECIAL MEETINGS
(A) The Council shall fix the time and place of its regular meetings, but shall hold regular meetings at least quarterly.
(B) Special meetings of the Council may be called by the Chairperson or by any two members of the Council, if advance permission is obtained from the Park Authority. Unless the special meeting is called at a Council meeting, the Secretary shall provide written notice to all Council members, at least 48 hours I advance of the special meeting, indicating the time, place, and purpose of the meeting.
(C) Public notice must be given for all Council meetings. All meetings of the Council shall be open to the public, unless the subject matter to be addressed in the meeting necessitates an executive session. Executive sessions may be held only if pursuant to state law and with the advance permission of the Park Authority.
(Ord. 97-1, passed 3-5-1997; Am. Ord. 2009-01, passed 2-17-2009)
78
§ 00-03-34-04 POWERS AND DUTIES.
(A) The Council shall:
(1) In cooperation with the Town Council and Town Plan Commission, develop long-term plans for the town’s parks and recreational programs and facilities:
(2) Prepare an annual report on the town’s parks and recreational programs and facilities, including recommendations on capital improvements, and present that report to the park Authority at its April Council meeting.
(3) Recommend rules on the use of the town’s parks and recreational facilities for consideration and adoption by the Park Authority; and
(4) Provide that the town’s parks and recreational programs and facilities are kept safe by alerting the town Police Department or other appropriate town officers or employees when situations or conditions develop that present a danger to the public or to public property.
(B) The Council may:
(1) Seek donations for the town’s parks and recreational programs and facilities;
(2) Recommend to the Park Authority fees to be charged for the use of the town’s parks and recreational programs and facilitates;
(3) Recommend contracts or leases to the Park Authority that involve the use or management of the town’s parks and recreational programs and facilities.
(4) Recommend that the Park Authority acquire or dispose of real or personal park property; or
(5) Make any other recommendations to the Park Authority pertaining to the use or management of the town’s parks and recreational programs and facilities.
(Ord. 97-1, passed 3-5-1997; Am. Ord. 2009-01, passed 2-17-2009)
PLAN COMMISSION
§ 00-03-34-15 ESTABLISHED.
(A) A Plan Commission is established for the town. The Commission shall have the powers and duties set forth for it in the Cumberland Zoning Code and Subdivision Control Ordinances(which are separate documents from the Town Code), consistent with I.C. 36-7-4.
(1995 Code, § 00-03-31-35) (Ord. 1987-1, passed 1-7-1987)
79
§ 00-03-34-16 APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS.
(A) The Plan Commission shall have seven members. The Town Council shall appoint three members from town government and the President of the Town Council shall appoint four citizen members, of whom no more than two may be of the same political party.
(B) The terms of office of the members of the Plan Commission shall be as follows:
(1) The term of each municipal representative member of the Commission shall be one year unless he municipal member ceases to hold other town office or Town employment.
(2) When an initial term of office of a citizen member expires, each new appointment of a citizen member shall be for a term of four years.
(3) A member serves until his or her successor is appointed and qualified; any member is eligible for reappointment.
(C) If a vacancy occurs, the appointing authority shall appoint a member for the unexpired term of the vacating member. Missing meetings of the Commission may be grounds for cause to remove a member. The Commission President shall report to the Town Council any situation where a member has missed three consecutive regular meetings of the Commission.
(1995 Code, § 00-03-31-37) (Ord. 1987-1, passed 1-7-1987)
§ 00-03-34-17 BUDGET.
(A) The Town Council may make appropriations to carry out the duties of the Plan Commission.
(B) The Commission will supervise the fiscal affairs of the Commission and prepare and submit a budget to the Council for approval of annual operations.
(1995 Code, § 00-03-31-42) (Ord. 1987-1, passed 1-7-1987)
BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS.
§ 00-03-34-30 ESTABLISHED.
A Board of Zoning Appeals is established for the town. The Board shall have the powers and duties set forth for it in the Cumberland Zoning Code Ordinance, consistent with I.C. 36-7-4.
§ 00-03-34-31 APPOINTMENT AND NUMBER OF MEMBERS.
(A) The Board of Zoning Appeals shall consist of five members, as follows:
(1) Three citizen members appointed by the Town Council President, of whom one must be a member of the Plan Commission and two must not be members of the Commission;
80
(2) One citizen member appointed by the Council who must not be a member of the Plan Commission; and
(3) One citizen member appointed by the Commission, who must be a member of the Commission other than the member appointed under division (A)(1) above.
(1995 Code, § 00-03-31-61) (Ord. 1987-1, passed 1-7-1987)
(B) Missing meetings of the Board may be grounds for cause to remove a member. The Board President shall report to the Town Council any situation where a member has missed three consecutive regular meetings of the Board.
(C) A Board member serves until his or her successor is appointed and qualified. A member is eligible for reappointment.
REDEVELOPMENT COMMISSION
§ 00-03-34-40 ESTABLISHED.
A Department of Redevelopment is established for the town. The Department will be controlled by a board of five members to be known as the Cumberland Redevelopment Commission.
(Ord. 2008-05, passed 4-16-2008)
§ 00-03-34-41 ORGANIZATION OF COMMISSION.
(A) The Redevelopment Commission shall consist of five members; appointed as follows:
(1) Three members shall be appointed by the Town Council President; and
(2) Two members shall be appointed by the Town Council.
(B) In order to be eligible for appointment, a person must be at least 18 years of age and be a resident of the town. If a Commissioner ceases to be a resident after his or her appointment, the Commission forfeits his office.
(C) Nonvoting Adviser. The Town Council President shall also appoint one (1) person
to serve as a non-voting adviser to the Redevelopment Commission. This person must be a school board member of either the Warren Township Schools, Mt. Vernon Community Schools or Southern Hancock Community Schools, or an individual recommended by either Warren Township Schools, Mt. Vernon Community Schools or Southern Hancock Community Schools. This adviser is not considered a member of the Commission but is entitled to attend and participate in the proceedings of all Commission meetings. The non-voting adviser is not entitled to a salary, per diem, or reimbursement of expenses. The adviser serves a term of two (2) years and until a successor is appointed, and serves at the pleasure of the Town Council President.
(Ord. 2008-05, passed 4-16-2008, Amd. Ord 2016-18, passed 9-21-16)
§ 00-03-34-42 TERM OF OFFICE AND REMOVAL.
81
(A) Each Commissioner shall serve a term of one year, commencing January 1 of his or her appointment and ending the following January 1.
(B) The Commissioners serve at the pleasure of the appointing authority and may be removed from the Redevelopment Commission by the appointing authority at any time.
(C) If vacancy occur because of ineligibility, resignation, removal, or any other reason, the appointing authority hall appoint a new Commissioner and notify the Clerk-Treasurer and Secretary of the Commission of the appointment. The new Commissioner shall serve the unexpired term of the Commissioner her or she replaced.
(Ord. 2008-05, passed 4-16-2008)
§ 00-03-34-43 OATH AND BOND.
(A) Before beginning his or her duties, each Commissioner shall take and subscribe an oath of office in the form used by the Clerk-Treasurer and file the oath with the Clerk-Treasurer.
(B) Before beginning his or her duties, each Commissioner shall execute a bond, payable to the state, with surety to be approved by the Town Council President, in the penal sum of $15,000. This bond must be conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties of the office of Commissioner and the accounting for all monies and property that may come into his or her hands or under his or her control. The cost of the bond shall be paid by the special taxing district.
(Ord. 2008-05, passed 4-16-2008)
§ 00-03-34-44 COMPENSATION.
Redevelopment Commissioners are not entitled to salaries, but they are entitled to reimbursement for expenses necessarily incurred by them in the performance of their duties.
(Ord. 1008-05, passed 4-16-2008)
§ 00-03-34-45 PURPOSE, DUTIES AND POWERS.
(A) The Redevelopment Commission and the Department of Redevelopment shall promote the interests of redevelopment as provided for in I.C. 36-7-14 et seq. by planning, re-planning, development and redevelopment of economic development areas, cleaning, re-planning and redevelopment of blighted areas, and taking all other action necessary to accomplish the purposes of I.C. 36-7-14 et seq.
(B) The Redevelopment Commission shall:
(1) Investigate, study and survey blighted areas within the corporate boundaries of the town;
(2) Investigate, study and determine, and, to the extent possible, combat the causes of blighted areas;
(3) Promote the use of land in the manner that best serves the interests of the town and its inhabitants;
82
(4) Cooperate with the departments and agencies of the town and other governmental units in the manner that best serves the purposes of I.C. 36-7-14 et seq.
(5) Make findings or reports of their activities under I.C. 36-7-14 et seq. and keep those reports open to inspection by the public at the office of the department;
(6) Select and acquire the blighted areas to be redeveloped under I.C. 36-7-14 et seq.; and
(7) Re-plan and dispose of the blighted areas in the manner that beset serves the social and economic interests of the town and its inhabitants.
(C) The Redevelopment Commission shall have all of the powers provided by I.C. 36-7-14-12.1 and by any other law, rule or ordinance.
(Ord. 2008-05, passed 4-16-2008)
§ 00-03-34-46 ORGANIZATIONAL MEETING AND ELECTION OF OFFICERS.
(A) The Redevelopment Commission shall hold a meeting for the purpose of organization not more than 30 days after the Commissioners are appointed. After the initial organization of the Commission, it shall reorganize each year in January.
(B) At its organizational meeting, the Commission shall choose one of their members as president, another member as vice president, and another member as secretary. These officers shall perform the duties usually pertaining to their office and shall serve from the date of their election until their successors are elected and qualified.
(C) The Redevelopment Commission may appoint a treasurer who need not be a member of the Commission.
(D) The Redevelopment Commission may adopt rules and bylaws they consider necessary for the proper conduct of their proceedings, the carrying out of their duties and the safeguarding of the money properly placed in its custody.
(E) Three members of the Redevelopment Commission constitutes a quorum, and the concurrence of three members of the Commission is necessary to authorize any action.
(Ord. 2008-05, passed 4-16-2008)
§ 00-03-34-47 NO PECUNIARY INTERESTS.
A member of the Redevelopment Commission may not have a pecuniary interest in any contract, employment, purchase or sale made under I.C. 36-7-14 et seq. However, any property required for redevelopment purposes in which a Commissioner has a pecuniary interest may be acquired by the Commission, but only by gift or condemnation.
(Ord. 2008-05, passed 4-16-2008)
Police Pension
§ 00-03-34-50 ESTABLISHMENT OF POLICE PENSION BOARD.
83
(A) Board Members. The Police Pension Board consists of 7 members, as follows:
(1) The President of the Town Council;
(2) The Town Clerk-Treasurer;
(3) The Police Chief;
(4) One retired member of the Town’s police department; and
(5) Three active members of the Town’s police department.
(B) Ex Officio Members. The Town Council President, the Clerk-Treasurer, and the
Police Chief are ex officio voting members of the Board.
(C) Election and Terms:
(1) Election of Board Members by Police Department Members. The
Board members who are the retired police department member and the three active department members shall be elected by the police department members. The initial election will be held at the police station within 30 days of the effective date of this ordinance. Thereafter, the elections shall occur at a meeting of the department members held at the police station on the second Monday in February of each year. The initial members of the Board who are active members of the Police Department will serve staggered terms, with one serving a one-year term, one serving a two-year term, and one serving a three-year term, as determined by the Board. Thereafter, these Board members are elected for terms of three years, succeeding those Board members whose terms of office expire on that date. These members hold their offices until their successors are elected and qualified.
(2) Terms of Other Board Members. The terms of the President of the Town
Council, Clerk-Treasurer and Police Chief will be the same as the term of their respective offices.
(3) Vacancies. If a vacancy occurs on the Board among the members elected by
the department members, the police department members shall hold a special meeting upon the call of the Town Council President and elect a successor for the remainder of the vacating member’s term.
(4) Notices. Notice of a meeting at which an election will be held by department
members must be given to all active police department members at least five days before the meeting.
(D) Officers. The Town Council President serves as president of the Board, the
Clerk-Treasurer serves as its treasurer, and the Board shall select one member to serve as secretary.
(E) Quorum. A majority of the Board’s members shall constitute a quorum for
84
transacting business.
(F) Powers and Duties. The Board shall have all powers and duties provided by
law.
(G) Compensation and Reimbursement. The Board members receive no pay
for their services and shall be paid only their necessary expenses. However, the Board members, the secretary, and each member of the police department selected by the Board shall be paid their necessary traveling expenses from the 1977 fund when acting upon matters pertaining to the fund.
(H) Bylaws and Rules. The Board may make all necessary bylaws or rules for it
meetings and all matters relating to the conduct of its business, and it shall keep and maintain records of its business.
(Ordinance 2016-11, passed 6-21-2016)
85
CHAPTER 35: FUNDS
Section
Special Purpose Funds
00-03-35-01 General Promotional Fund
00-03-35-02 Youth Activities Program Fund
00-03-35-03 Park Donation Fund
00-03-35-04 Funds for sewage works
00-03-35-05 Parks Recreational Equipment Fund
00-03-35-06 Fund for collection and remission of state sales tax
00-03-35-07 Rainy Day Fund
00-03-35-08 Economic Development Fund
00-03-35-09 Self-Insurance Fund
00-03-35-10 Trail Reimbursement Fund
00-03-35-11 LOIT Special Distribution Fund
Police Department Funds
00-03-35-20 Police Canine Expense Fund
00-03-35-21 Fund for fees received for police inspection of motor vehicle identification numbers
00-03-35-22 Police Scholarship Fund
00-03-35-23 Firearms Training Fund
00-03-35-24 Police Cops-Fast Grant Fund
00-03-35-25 Parking Fund
00-03-35-26 Crime Reward Fund
00-03-35-27 Criminal Investigation Purchase Money Fund
00-03-35-28 Police Pension Fund
00-03-35-29 Law Enforcement Recording Fee Fund
Editor’s Note:
There are numerous other funds the town is required to use that are established by state statute and thus not set forth in this town code, e.g., the town’s general fund.
SPECIAL PURPOSE FUNDS
§ 00-03-35-01 GENERAL PROMOTIONAL FUND
(A) The Town Council is authorized to budget and appropriate funds from the General Fund of the Town, to pay the expenses incurred in promoting the interest and betterment of the Town.
(B) Expenses from this fund may include, but are not limited to, the following:
86
(1) Membership dues in local, regional, state and national associations of a civic, educational or governmental nature, which have as their purpose the betterment and improvement of town operations;
(2) Direct Expenses for travel, meals, and lodging in conjunction with municipal business or meeting of organizations to which the town belongs.
(3) Expenses incurred in the promotion of economic or industrial development of the town, including meeting room rental, decorations, meals, travel, memorabilia, awards, expenses incurred in interviewing job applicants and expenses incurred in developing relations with other units of government.
(4) Flowers or other appropriate items, for the purpose of demonstrating the concern, sympathy, or support of town officials and/or employees in response to an individual’s death, illness, hospitalization, or other similar circumstance;
(5) Food, beverages, tableware, decorations, entertainment, or other items in connection with a town-sponsored event or program, or with work by employees outside of normal work hours; and
(6) Any other expenses of a civic or governmental nature deemed by the Town Council to be in the interest of the Town.
(1995 Code, § 00-03-34-01) (Am. Ord. 97-6, passed 7-9-1997; Am. Ord. 2012-07, passed 5-2-1-2012)
§ 00-03-35-02 YOUTH ACTIVITIES PROGRAM FUND.
(A) There is a created a Youth Activities Program Fund (“Fund”) to be maintained by the town Clerk-Treasurer on behalf of the Cumberland Youth Activities Program (“Program”).
(B) The Fund is to receive all payments to the Cumberland Youth Activities Program that have been provided as registration fees from Program participants, team sponsorship fees, and donations intended for use in paying expenses of any Program activity.
(C) Monies deposited I the Fund may be expended by the Youth Activities Program Director (“Director”) for any expense of the Program, subject to any conditions or restrictions imposed by the Town Council, Town Manager, or Park Board, including conditions contained in the Director’s contract, and any applicable requirement of town policies or procedure and state statutes or regulations. Written documentation shall be provide to the Clerk-Treasurer of all expenditures paid with monies from this Fund.
(D) Monies deposited in the Fund shall not revert or transfer to any other fund of the won at the end of each calendar or fiscal year, or any other time, without Town Council action specifically authorizing the reversion or transfer.
(Ord. 1998-4, passed 4-1-1998)
§ 00-03-35-03 PARK DONATION FUND.
(A) There is created a Park Donation Fund to be maintained by the town Clerk-Treasurer on behalf of the Park Department.
87
(B) The Park Donation Fund shall consist of individual and organizational donations, income from fundraisers, and other non-appropriated money.
(C) The Park Donation Fund may be used for Park Department purposes, including promotions and good will projects as recommended by the Parks Advisory Council and approved by the Town Council. (1995 Code, § 00-03-34-08) (Ord. 1993-13, passed 11-3-1993)
§ 00-03-35-04 FUNDS FOR SEWAGE WORKS.
(A)(1) There are established the following funds for the sewer works:
(a) Operating Fund;
(b) Depreciation Fund; and
(c) Sinking Fund.
(2) Within the Sinking Fund there shall be two accounts:
(a) Bond and Interest Account; and
(b) Bond and Interest Reserve Account.
(3) There shall be monthly transfer into the Bond and Interest Account and Bon and Interest Reserve Account money that may be required for the payment of:
(a) The interest on all bonds which, by their term, are payable from the revenues of the sewage works, as the interest shall fall due;
(b) The necessary fiscal agency charges for paying the bonds and interest;
(c) The principal of all bonds payable from the revenues of the sewage works, as the principal shall fall due; and/or
(d) A additional amount as a margin of safety and for the payment of premiums upon bonds redeemed by call or purchase, which margin, together with any unused surplus of the margin carried forward from the preceding year, shall equal 10% of all other amounts so required to be paid into the Bond and Interest Account for a margin of safety.
(4) Payments into the Bond and Interest Account shall be made monthly in an amount equal to at least half the amount required for bond principal payments, interest payments, fiscal charges, and the margin of safety during the next succeeding 12 calendar months, and shall contain any amount sufficient to pay all of the bonds then outstanding and payable within one year, together with the interested thereon to the dates of maturity thereof.
(5) In addition to the required monthly payments into the Bond and Interest Account, net revenue of the sewage works not used in making the payments shall be set aside and paid in the Bond and Interest Reserve Account monthly, if necessary, until there has been accumulated as a debt reserve payable from the Sinking Fund an amount equal to the maximum annual debt service on the bonds. The debt reserve invested ant an unrestricted yield never shall exceed the reserve requirement. The margin of safety shall be allocated according to the face amounts of
88
the 1966 bonds, the 1970 bonds, and the 1988 bonds. The amount of the monthly deposit into the Bond and Interest Reserve Account of the Sinking Fund shall be sufficient to accumulate the reserve requirement within five years from the date of delivery of the 1988 bonds.
(6) No part of the Sinking Fund shall be used in calling revenue bonds for redemption before maturity, except to the extent that the amount in the Sinking Fund exceeds the amount required to pay the principal of and interest on the revenue bonds during the 12 calendar months following the date of the redemption. Any excess funds above the required level also may be used in purchasing outstanding bonds at a price less than the then-applicable redemption price, if first approved by the Town Council. Money in the Sinking Fund shall not be used for any other purpose except as provided by ordinance.
(7) Any excess revenues, which remain after the accumulation in the Sinking Fund of an amount sufficient to meet the requirements of the Sinking Fund for the then-next succeeding 12-month period and after the accumulation of funds reserved in the Operating Fund for that period in an amount sufficient for operation, repair, and maintenance, may be transferred into the Depreciation Fund for extensions, betterments, and additions to the sewage works. However, no transfer shall be made which will interfere with the requirement monthly payments into the sinking Fund or with the operation of the sewage works.
(8) All funds of the sewage works not reasonably needed for its routine operation and maintenance and not required to be transferred pursuant to divisions (A)(2) through (A)(7) above, shall be transferred to the Depreciation Fund.
(9) Funds may be disbursed from the Depreciation Fund only as otherwise provided by law and consistent with divisions (A)(2) through (A)(7) above, solely for extensions, betterments, and additions to the sewage works.
(10) If, on the adoption of this section, any fund already shall exist, the creation of which is otherwise contemplated, that fund shall be used instead of a newly created fund.
(11) Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize the Clerk-Treasurer or any transfer agent to disburse funds to vendors, employees, or other payees, except by proper claim and warrant drawn pursuant thereto, or as otherwise permitted by statute.
(B) For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply, unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
PAYEE. Shall not include the sewage works itself.
(1995 Code, § 00-03-34-03) (Ord. 88-15-A, passed 12-7-1988)
§ 00-03-35-05 PARKS RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT FUND.
It has been determined that it is necessary to originate a fund for the parks recreational equipment.
(1995 Cod, § 00-03-34-04) (Ord. 1992-7, passed 6-3-1992)
§ 00-03-35-06 FUND FOR COLLECTION AND REMISSION OF STATE SALES TAX.
A separate fund is created for the collection and remission of state sales tax.
89
(1995 Code, § 00-03-34-05) (Ord. 10-1992, passed 7-1-1992)
§ 00-03-35-07 RAINY DAY FUND.
(A) There is established a “Rainy Day Fund” pursuant to the provisions of I.C. 36-1-8-5.1 to receive transfers of unused and unencumbered monies whenever the purposes of any tax through which the monies have been raised including those authorized by I.C. 6-3.5-1.1-21.1, 6-3.5-6-17.3, 6-3.5-7-17.3 and 36-1—8-5, have been fulfilled and an unused and unencumbered balance remains.
(B) Monies on deposit in the Rainy Day Fund may be used for the operation of the town and its various departments, when the town would otherwise not have sufficient monies to pay such costs, including, but not limited to, salaries and wages, services, supplies, equipment, capital improvements, repairs and similar expenses.
(C) The Town Council shall determine the amount, if any, of any unused and unencumbered monies available to be transferred to the Rainy Day Fund, which transfer may not exceed more than 10% of the town’s total annual budget for that fiscal year.
(D) The Town Council may authorize expenditure of monies for the Rainy Day Fund by appropriations made in the same manner as for other funds that receive tax monies, upon making a finding that the proposed use of the monies is consistent with the intent of the Fund.
(Ord. 2004-03, passed 5-5-2004)
§ 00-03-35-08 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT FUND.
(A) There is hereby created an Economic Development Fund to be maintained by the Town Clerk-Treasurer on behalf of receipts obtained from County Economic Development Income Tax. (CEDIT).
(B) Monies deposited in the Fund may be expended for any purpose authorized by I.C. 6-3.5-7-13.1, as amended, subject to any specific conditions or restrictions imposed by the Town Council and any applicable legal requirements.
(C) The Fund shall be a non-reverting fund and the money deposited in the Fund shall not transfer to any other fund of the town at any time, without Council action specifically authorizing such transfer.
(D) If this fund is to be terminated, disposition upon termination shall be made to the General Fund.
(Ord. 2010-16, passed 9-1-2010)
§ 00-03-35-09 SELF-INSURANCE FUND.
(A) Fund Establishment: There is hereby established and created a fund, called the Self-Insurance Fund (Fund 212), to be maintained by the Clerk-Treasurer.
90
(B) Source of Funds: This Fund shall be comprised of contributions for the Town’s self-funded health insurance plan from the Town and employees. The Clerk-Treasure will deposit these contributions in to the Fund.
(C) Use of Funds: Monies in the Fund will be used to pay proper claims under the Town’s self-funded health insurance plan.
(D) Non-Reverting Fund: This fund shall be a non-reverting fund.
(Ord. 2012-3, passed 2-2-2012)
§ 00-03-35-10 TRAIL REIMBURSEMENT FUND.
(A) There is created a Trail Reimbursement Fund to be maintained by the Clerk-Treasurer. The source of these funds shall be appropriations made by the Town Council for the purpose of reimbursing the Indiana Department of Transportation or the Federal Highway Administration for overpayments made to the Town for the Town’s share of right-of-way acquisition expenses relating to the Town’s trail system.
(B) The monies in this fund may be used only to reimburse the Indiana Department of Transportation or the Federal Highway Administration for overpayments made to the Town for the Town’s share of right-of-way acquisition expenses relating to the Town’s trail system.
(Ord. 2012-10, passed 6-6-2012)
§ 00-03-35-11 LOIT SPECIAL DISTRIBUTION FUND
(A) There is created a One-Time LOIT Special Distribution Fund to be maintained by the
Clerk-Treasurer. The source of these funds consists of monies allocated to the Town by a LOIT Special Distribution by the state of Indiana.
(B) Seventy-five (75) percent of these monies may only be used exclusively for
infrastructure as specified in Indiana Code § 6-3.6-9-17(h)(1)(A). This portion of the fund is non-reverting. Twenty-five (25) percent of these monies may be used for any legal purpose and will be allocated to the Town of Cumberland Rainy Day Fund.
(Ord. 2016-10, passed 6-21-16)
POLICE DEPARTMENT FUNDS
§ 00-03-35-20 POLICE CANINE EXPENSE FUND.
(A) There is created a Police Canine Expense Fund (“Fund”) to be maintained by the town Clerk-Treasurer on behalf of the Cumberland Police Department (“Department”).
(B)(1) The Fund is to receive all payments received:
(a) As contributions from individuals, companies, or other private entities; and/or
91
(b) As grants or other financial contributions from other governmental units or public agencies that have been designated by the contributor as being intended for the town’s Police Canine Program.
(2) No tax revenues or other monies generally distributed by the State of Indiana to the Town of Cumberland and other municipalities shall be deposited in this Fund.
(C)(1) Monies deposited in the Fund may be expended by the Town Marshal/Chief of Police (“Marshal”) for any item or activity listed in division (E) of this section without prior authorization of the Cumberland Town Council (“Council”), if the Marshal reasonably anticipates that the total expenditures from the Fund for the calendar year for that item or activity will not exceed $1,000.
(2) The member of the Police Department who is designated by the Marshal as the Canine Officer may make expenditures of up to $100 per month for routine expenses incurred in the care of the canine without the specific approval of the Marshal, subject to any restrictions or conditions imposed by the Marshal.
(3) Expenditures for items or activities in excess of $1,000 may be made by the Marshal if advance authorization is obtained from the Council or, in the case of an urgent funding needed, if authorization is obtained from the Town Manager and the Department liaison on the Council.
(4) In urgent situations involving the health and/or safety of the canine, the Marshal or the Canine Officer may make expenditures exceeding the above stated limits, subject to securing the approval otherwise needed as soon as possible after the event requiring the urgent expenditures commitment.
(5) Fully itemized invoices, bills, or receipts for all expenditures, or copies thereof, shall be delivered to the Clerk-Treasurer within 30 days of when the expense is incurred.
(D) Monies deposited in the Fund shall not revert or transfer to any other fund of the town at the end of each calendar or fiscal year, or at any other time, without Council action specifically authorizing such reversion or transfer.
(E) Monies deposited in the Fund may be used for:
(1) Payment of expenses incurred in caring for the police canine;
(2) Purchase or lease of equipment for the Police Canine Program;
(3) Training expenses of the canine and Canine Officer (including travel expenses);
(4) Payment of expenses incurred in public relations for the Police Canine Program or the Department; and/or
(5) Payment of any other expense related to the Police Canine Program that the Town Council specifically authorizes.
(F) This Fund shall be deemed to have been in effect January 1, 1998, and shall have all monies received from the sources identified in division (B) above and held in other funds immediately transferred to this Fund.
92
(Ord. 1998-1, passed 2-4-1998)
§ 00-03-35-21 FUND FOR FEES RECEIVED FOR POLICE INSPECTION OF MOTOR VEHICLE IDENTIFICATION NUMBERS.
A fund is established within the Police Department to be known as the VIN Inspection Fund, into which shall be placed all fees received by the Police Department for conducting examinations and making reports regarding motor vehicle identification numbers. The fund may be expended for Police Department training and equipment.
(1995 Code, § 00-03-34-06) (Ord. 1993-5, passed 3-3-1993)
§ 00-03-35-22 POLICE SCHOLARSHIP FUND.
(A) There is created a Police Scholarship Fund to be maintained by the town Clerk-Treasurer on behalf of the Police Department.
(B) The Police Scholarship Fund shall consist of individual and organization donations, income from fundraisers, and other non-appropriated money.
(C) The Police Scholarship Fund may be used for scholarships for students of the town to attend colleges and universities as recommended by the Safety Board and approved by the Town Council.
(1995 Code, § 00-03-34-07) (Ord. 1993-12, passed 11-3-1993)
§ 00-03-35-23 FIREARMS TRAINING FUND
(A) The Town Council establishes a Firearms Training Fund. Revenue of the Fund will be used for training law enforcement officers of the town in the proper use of firearms and other law enforcement duties.
(B) To provide revenue for the Fund, the handgun license application fee of $10, prescribed by I.C. 35-47-2-3(b), is to be deposited into the Fund for each application procured from the Police Department.
(1995 Code, § 00-03-34-02)
§ 00-03-35-24 POLICE COPS-FAST GRANT FUND.
(A) There is created a Police Cops-Fast Grant Fund to be maintained by the town Clerk-Treasurer on behalf of the Police Department.
(B) The Police Cops-Fast Grant Fund shall consist of federal monies awarded for a police officer’s salary at 85% the first year, 75% the second year, and 65% the third year.
(C) The balance of this police officer’s salary will be paid out of the Police-General Fund, as necessary to coordinate with the federal monies received.
(1995 Code, § 00-03-34-09) (Ord. 1995-10, passed 9-6-1995)
93
§ 00-03-35-25 PARKING FUND.
(A) All money collected from charges in the operation of any parking meter shall be deposited and kept in a special fund known as the Parking Fund. The Parking Fund shall be set up I a budget approved by the Town Council and shall be under the control, orders, and directions of the Council. Disbursements therefrom shall be made for the following purposes, unless otherwise authorized by any relevant statues or required by any contract:
(1) For the payment of the purchase price or rental fees and costs of installation, relocation, or removal of parking meters.
(2) For the payment of the costs of maintenance, operation, repair, and all other incidental costs and expenses included in the operation of parking meters and the collection of money deposited therein, including clerical, bookkeeping, supplies, records, and collection costs;
(3) For the payment of the costs of acquiring, installing, and maintain traffic signal devices and signs to guide and regulate traffic in the town; and for costs related to operation of tow-in trucks, snow plows, and trucks to keep parking places clear; and for the cost of the repair, reconstruction, and maintenance of any of the public highways or public places where parking meters are in use, and all other public streets, highways, or public places intersecting or connected therewith, in the town; and
(4) For off-street parking facilities and for any other uses, all as now or hereafter prescribed by statute thereon.
(B) The Council shall have the authority to expend the Fund for the purposes provided in this chapter, without additional appropriations therefore. A warrant for any such expenditures shall be drawn by the Clerk-Treasurer, upon receipt of a properly executed and completed claim as required by law. All money remaining in the town treasury to the credit of the Fund at the end of any calendar year shall remain in it and be available for all its uses, and shall not revert to the General Fund. The Council shall have the right to transfer any unneeded funds or parts thereof, as the end of any year, from the Parking Fund to the General Fund, or as otherwise provided by law.
(1995 Code, § 00-07-71-23)
§ 00-03-35-26 CRIME REWARD FUND.
(A) Established – There is hereby established and created a Crime Reward Fund (“Fund”) to be maintained by the Town Clerk-Treasurer on behalf of the Cumberland Police Department.
(B) Source of Fund – The revenue for deposit into the Fund shall be:
(1) All contributions specifically transferred, donated, devised, or bequeathed to this fund from individuals, companies or other private entities, and/or as grants or other financial contributions from other governmental units or public agencies that have been designated by the contributor as being intended for the crime reward program; and
(2) All Town funds appropriated by the Town Council to the Fund.
94
(C) Use of Funds – Monies in the Fund shall be used by the Chief of Police for the payment of rewards under this Section. This Chief of Police shall retain the sole and exclusive authority to determine when and the amount of any reward paid under this Section to any person or persons for information leading to:
(1) The arrest of a specified person or persons convicted of or charged with any criminal offense; or
(2) The arrest and conviction of a person or persons committing a specific criminal offense.
Expenditures may be made at the discretion of the Chief of Police and without prior authorization of the Cumberland Town Council by a proper claim form duly submitted to the town Clerk-Treasurer.
(D) Non-Reverting Fund – This is a non-reverting fund.
(Ord. 2012-4, passed 2-15-2012)
§ 00-03-35-27 CRIMINAL INVESTIGATION PURCHASE MONEY FUND
(A) Established – There is hereby established and created a Criminal Investigation Purchase Money Fund (“Fund”) to be maintained by the Town Clerk-Treasurer on behalf of the Cumberland Police Department.
(B) Source of Funds – The revenue for deposit into the Fund shall be:
(1) All contributions specifically transferred, donated, devised, or bequeathed to this fund from individuals, companies or other private entities, and/or as grants or other financial contributions from other governmental units or public agencies, including but not limited to equitably shared funds, that have been designated by the contributor as being intended for the Criminal Investigation Purchase Money program; and
(2) All Town funds appropriated by the Town Council to the Fund.
(C) Use of Funds – Funds withdrawn from said account shall be used only in official criminal investigations conducted by the Cumberland Police Department. Said funds may be used, with the approval of the Chief of Police, by undercover officers to establish a cover, to purchase drugs or stolen property, or may be used to pay informants for information that will lead to the arrest and conviction of criminals. Expenditures may be at the discretion of the Chief of Police and without prior authorization of the Cumberland Town Council by proper claim form duly submitted to the Town Clerk-Treasurer. A documentation procedure for recording and reporting of confidential expenditures will be followed by the Chief of Police.
(D) Before the end of the fiscal year in which the Criminal Investigation Purchase Money was taken out by the police department, the police department, under signature of the Chief of Police, shall return any unused funds and shall make written account for such funds.
(E) Non-Reverting Fund. This is a non-reverting fund.
(Ord. 2012-6, passed 3-7-2012)
95
§ 00-03-35-28 POLICE PENSION FUND
(A) Establishment of Fund. There is established and created the Cumberland Police
Pension Fund.
(B) Source of Funds. The source of money in this fund will be payroll deductions
for the employer’s share and employee’s share of pension benefits required by participation in the 1977 Police Pension Fund and any other money appropriated by the Town Council for this fund.
(C) Use of Funds. The money in this fund will be used only for the transfer of
money to the 1977 Police Officers’ and Firefighter Pension and Disability Fund and other lawful purposes.
(D) Non-Reverting Fund. This is a non-reverting fund.
(Ordinance 2016-11, passed 6-21-2016)
§ 00-03-35-29 LAW ENFORCEMENT RECORDING FEE FUND
(A) Source of Funds. The Cumberland Town Council hereby establishes the Law
Enforcement Recording Fee Fund. The fund shall consist of fees received by the Cumberland Police Department for copying law enforcement recordings.
(B) Use of Funds. All money deposited into the Law Enforcement Recording Fee Fund
will be used, without appropriation, to purchase cameras and other equipment for use in connection with the Chief of Police’s law enforcement recording program, for training on law enforcement recordings, and to defray the expenses of storing, producing, and copying law enforcement recordings.
(C) Non Reverting Fund. This is a non-reverting fund.
(Ord. 2016-20, passed 9-21-16)
96
CHAPTER 36: ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS BUREAU
Section
General Provisions
00-03-36-01 Creation
00-03-36-02 Administration; Clerk-Treasurer appointment
Procedure
00-03-36-20 Acceptance of written appearance, waivers of trial, and the like
00-03-36-21 Authority to issue complaints
00-03-36-22 Issuance of complaint; duty to appear or deliver
00-03-36-23 Acceptance of admission; late charge
00-03-36-24 Issuance of receipt
00-03-36-25 Legal proceedings; court costs
00-03-36-26 Challenges; legal proceedings
Violations
00-03-36-40 Other legal action; authority
00-03-36-41 Schedule
Cross-reference
Funds, see Chapter 35
Police Department, see Chapter 33
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 00-03-36-01 CREATION.
The Ordinance Violation Bureau (“Bureau”) is established pursuant to IC. 33-6-3.
§ 00-03-36-02 ADMINISTRATION; CLERK-TREASURER APPOINTMENT.
The Cumberland Clerk-Treasurer is appointed and shall serve as the Violations Clerk, who administers the Bureau.
(Ord. 2002-05, passed 2-6-2002)
97
PROCEDURE
§ 00-03-36-20 ACCEPTANCE OF WRITTEN APPEARANCE, WAIVERS OF TRIAL, AND THE LIKE.
The Clerk-Treasurer and his or her staff, as his or her agents, shall accept written appearances, waivers of trial, admissions of violations, and payment of civil penalties in the amount and for the violation as provided below at the Clerk-Treasurer’s office during the hours specific on the complaint or summons issued under authority of this chapter.
(Ord. 2002-5, passed 2-6-2002)
§ 00-03-36-21 AUTHORITY TO ISSUE COMPLAINTS.
Any Cumberland police officer, or other Cumberland official or employee authorized by an ordinance of the town or state law to issue complaints for violations of ordinances, may issue complaints for the violation of Bureau ordinances.
(Ord. 2002-5, passed 2-6-2002)
§ 00-03-36-33 ISSUANCE OF COMPLAINT; DUTY TO APPEAR OR DELIVER.
Any person upon whom a complaint and summons is issued pursuant to this chapter shall:
(A) Appear at the Clerk-Treasurer’s office to admit or deny the violation within seven days of the issuance of the complaint; or
(B) Have had delivered his or her admission and entire penalty payment or written denial to the Clerk-Treasurer’s office within seven days of the issuance of the complaint.
(Ord. 2002-5, passed 2-6-2002)
§ 00-03-36-23 ACCEPTANCE OF ADMISSION; LATE CHARGE.
If a person, upon whom a complaint and summons is issued pursuant to this chapter, does not bring an admission of violation and payment of the civil penalty, or if a complaint for a violation of a Bureau ordinance issued pursuant to his chapter is not properly responded to in writing within seven days of the issuance of the complaint, the Bureau shall add a late charge of $5 per violation to the amount otherwise payable under § 00-03-36-41. After 30 days of the issuance of the complaint, the Bureau shall not accept admission of a violation or payment of the civil penalty without the consent of the Town Manager, who may withhold that consent if the violation has been referred to the town’s Ordinance Prosecutor for judicial resolution.
(Ord. 2002-5, passed 2-6-2002)
§ 00-03-36-24 ISSUANCE OF RECEIPT.
Upon payment of any sum of money into the Ordinance Violations Bureau, as provided by this chapter, the Clerk-Treasurer shall issue a receipt to the person so paying. The Clerk-Treasurer shall keep a record of all payments and shall account for all sums paid to the Bureau
98
under this chapter as required by statute. The Clerk-Treasurer shall provide the Town Council with a monthly report of the Bureau’s activities, showing the total number of complaints and summonses issued pursuant to this chapter during the preceding monthly period, including their dates of issuance and the number of such cases referred to the town’s Ordinance Prosecutor.
(Ord. 2002-5, passed 2-6-2002)
§ 00-03-36-25 LEGAL PROCEEDINGS; COURT COSTS.
(A) If a person, upon whom a complaint and summons is issued pursuant to this chapter, fails to deny or admit a violation within 30 days, the town’s Ordinance Prosecutor may bring legal proceedings in a court of competent jurisdiction.
(B) Under such circumstances, if a judgment is rendered in favor of the town, court costs will be assessed in addition to any fine or other relief provided.
(Ord. 2002-5, passed 2-6-2002)
§ 00-03-36-26 CHALLENGES; LEGAL PROCEEDINGS.
(A) If a person, upon whom a complaint and summons is issued pursuant to this chapter, wants to challenge this ticket and assure that it will be kept under the jurisdiction of the Cumberland Ordinance Violations Bureau, he or she must go to the Clerk-Treasurer’s office and expressly deny the violation or send a signed, written statement indication of his or her denial to the Clerk-Treasurer within 30 days of the issuance of the complaint and summons.
(B) Under such circumstances, the town’s Ordinance Prosecutor will initiate legal proceedings in a court of competent jurisdiction for the alleged violation.
(Ord. 2002-5, passed 2-6-2002)
VIOLATIONS
§ 00-03-36-40 OTHER LEGAL ACTION; AUTHORITY.
The identification in § 00-03-36-41 of a Cumberland ordinance, or code of ordinance provisions as a Bureau ordinance, does not preclude the town from taking other legal action to enforce the ordinance or code provision, in lieu of issuing a complaint under the authority of this chapter seeking the civil penalty prescribed in § 00-03-36-41, if the Cumberland ordinance or code provision provides for other enforcement options, including, but not limited to, injunctive relief and recovery of abatement costs or of damages.
(Ord. 2002-5, passed 2-6-2002)
§ 00-03-36-41 SCHEDULE.
Cumberland’s ordinances and Code of Ordinances provisions identified in the schedule in this section (each hereinafter referred to as “Bureau ordinance”) shall be within the jurisdiction of the Bureau, subject to the civil penalties listed to the right of each Bureau ordinance. For some Bureau ordinances, second and any additional violations, admissions, or
99
judgment of violations of that ordinance, occurring within 12 months of any other violation, admission, or judgment of violation, will be subject to a greater civil penalty. Where applicable, those greater penalties for second and additional violations and admissions or judgments are listed to the right of the penalty that applies to the first violation, admission, or judgment of violation.
Ordinance or Code of Ordinance Provisions
Civil Penalty
Alarms
Excessive false alarms
$25/$50
Prolonged externally sounding alarms
$50
Animals
Animals creating a nuisance
$35/$50
Awarding live animals as prizes
$35/$50
Confinement of cats and dogs
$35/$50
Curbing of animals required
$50/$75
Enticing animals to fight
$50/$75
Failure to confine dog or cat in heat
$35/$50
Failure to permanently identify dogs or cats
$35/$50
Failure to stop for vehicle collision with animals
$35/$50
Failure to vaccinate dog or cat
$35/$50
Keeping of farm animals
$35/$50
Keeping of wild animals
$50/$75
Unlawful disposal of animals
$35/$50
Unlawful enticing of animals
$35/$50
Use of animals in crime
$35/$50
Motor Vehicles
Improper parking; exceeding 12 inches from curb
$12/$20
Parking where prohibited
$12/$20
Parking where prohibited – limited parking
$12/$20
Prohibited stopping, standing, and parking - § 00-07-71-05(A)(1) through (A)(5)
$25/$50
Prohibited stopping, standing, and parking - § 00-07-71-05(A)(6) through (A)(8), (B), (C)(4), and (C)(5)
$12/$20
Prohibited stopping, standing, and parking - § 00-07-71-05(C)(1) through (C)(3)
$25/$35
Unlawful loading and unloading
$25/$35
Ordinance or Code of Ordinance Provisions
Civil Penalty
Unlawful parking – emergency situation
$50/$100
100
Unlawful parking – loading and unloading zones
$25/$35
Unlawful parking – meter violation
$12/$20
Unlawful parking – obstruction of traffic
$12/$20
Unlawful parking – oversized vehicle
$50/$10o0
Unlawful stopping, standing, and parking – bus stops and taxicab stands
$12/$20
Unlawful storing of motor vehicles on private property
$10
Unsafe opening of car door
$12/$20
Nuisance
Maintaining a health hazard – nuisance
$75/$100
Maintaining an offensive premises – nuisance
$75/$100
Permitting structures or things to become detrimental to health and safety – nuisance
$75/$100
Recreational Facilities
Failure to adhere to park rules
$25/$50
Failure to adhere to tennis facilities rules
$25/$50
Title IX Violations
Violations of the provisions of Title IX, Chapter 95 – Streets; Sidewalks; Bridges
$95
Title XI Violations
Violation of the provisions of XI, Chapter 111 – Peddlers and Solicitors
$95
Unlawful Conduct
Unlawful causing of noise
$50/$75
Unlawful congregating
$25/$35
Unlawful discharging of firearms
$100
Unlawful dumping or burning
$25/$35
Unlawful littering
$25/$35
Violation of building and construction provisions
$95
Violation of recreational vehicles and recreational vehicles parks
$95
Violation of the flood damage prevention provisions
$95
Violation of the zoning provisions
$95
(Ord. 2002-5, passed 2/6/2002)
101
CHAPTER 37: TOWN COURT
Section
00-03-37-01 Establishment
00-03-37-02 Eligibility for election of Judge
00-03-37-03 Election and term of Judge; bond
00-03-37-04 Powers and duties of Judge
00-03-37-05 Jurisdiction
00-03-37-06 Town Court seal
00-03-37-07 Location
00-03-37-08 Special Judge
00-03-37-09 Compensation
00-03-37-10 Prosecutor
00-03-37-11 Service of process
00-03-37-12 Not a court of record
00-03-37-13 Appeals
00-03-37-14 Clerk of Court
§ 00-03-37-01 ESTABLISHMENT.
There is hereby established the Town Court of Cumberland. The court shall come into existence January 1, 2012. The Judge shall be first elected in 2011.
(Ord. 2010-2, passed 3-3-2010)
§ 00-03-37-02 ELIGIBILITY FOR ELECTION OF JUDGE.
In order to be eligible for election as Judge of the Town Court, a person must reside in the town and satisfy all other statutory qualifications of a Town Court Judge.
(Ord. 2010-2, passed 3-3-2010)
§ 00-03-37-03 ELECTION AND TERM OF JUDGE; BOND.
The Judge shall be elected pursuant to I.C. § 3-10-6 by voters of the town. The term of office shall be four years, beginning at noon on January 1 following the election and continuing thereafter until a successor is elected and qualified. Before beginning the duties of office, the Judge shall, in the manner prescribed by I.C. 5-4-1, execute a bond with a good and sufficient surety in the peal sum of $15,000 conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties of the office. This bond must be approved by the Town Council and filed with the Clerk-Treasurer.
(Ord. 2010-2, passed 3-3-2010)
§ 00-03-37-04 POWERS AND DUTIES OF JUDGE.
The Judge of the Town Court may adopt rules for conducting the business of the court and has all power incident to a court of record in relation to the attendance of witnesses, the punishment of contempt, the enforcement of its orders and the issuing of commissions for
102
taking depositions in cases pending in the court. He or she may administer oaths and give all necessary certificates for the authentication of records and proceedings.
(Ord. 2010-2, passed 3-3-2010)
§ 00-03-37-05 JURISDICTION.
The Town Court shall have exclusive jurisdiction of all violations of ordinances of the town. The Town Court shall also have jurisdiction of all misdemeanors and infractions.
(Ord. 2010-2, passed 3-3-2010)
§ 00-03-37-06 TOWN COURT SEAL.
The Judge shall provide, at the expense of the town, a seal for the court that must contain on the fact thereof the words: “Town Court of Cumberland, Indiana.” A description of the seal, together with an impression of it, shall be affixed to the records of the court.
(Ord. 2010-2, passed 3-3-2010)
§ 00-03-37-07 LOCATION.
The Judge of the Town Court shall hold sessions for the Town Court as the business or the court demands at a place to be provided and designated by the Town Council.
(Ord. 2010-2, passed 3-3-2010)
§ 00-03-37-08 SPECIAL JUDGE.
If the Judge is temporarily absent or unable to act, he or she shall appoint a reputable practicing attorney, licensed to practice in the state, to preside in his or her absence. The special judge has all the powers and rights, and shall perform all the duties of the judge of the court as fully as the regular judge appointing him or her. Special judges are entitled to the compensation allowed special judges by the circuit court, to be paid from the town treasury on the certification of the regular judge and the warrant of the Clerk-Treasurer.
(Ord. 2010-2, passed 3-3-2010)
§ 00-03-37-09 COMPENSATION.
The Judge of the Town Court is entitled to receive compensation as established by Town Council.
(Ord. 2010-2, passed 3-3-2010)
§ 00-03-37-10 PROSECUTOR.
An attorney, licensed to practice in the town, shall be authorized and deputized to prosecute ordinance violations on behalf of the town.
(Ord. 2010-2, passed 3-3-2010)
103
§ 00-03-37-11 SERVICE OR PROCESS.
The Town Marshal or a Deputy Marshal shall serve all process issuing from the Town Court.
(Ord. 2010-2, passed 3-3-2010)
§ 00-03-37-12 NOT A COURT OF RECORD.
The Town Court is not a court of record.
(Ord. 2010-2, passed 3-3-2010)
§ 00-03-37-13 APPEALS.
Appeals from a judgment of the Town Court may be taken to the superior or circuit courts of Marion or Hancock Counties within 30 days of the rendition of the judgment.
(Ord. 2010-2, passed 3-3-2010)
§ 00-03-37-14 CLERK OF COURT.
The Clerk is an officer of the Town Court. The Judge may act as Clerk or appoint a Clerk. If the Judge appoints a Clerk, the Clerk shall receive compensation as prescribed by the Town Council. If the Judge neither serves as Clerk nor appoints a Clerk the Town’s Clerk-Treasurer shall perform the duties of Clerk.
(Ord. 2010-2, passed 3-3-2010)
104
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
Chapter
50. SANITARY SEWER SERVICES
51. STORM WATER MANAGEMENT
52. STREET LIGHTS
53. WATER UTILITY
Appendix
Utility Fee Schedule
105
CHAPTER 50: SANITARY SEWER SERVICES
Section
General Provisions
00-05-50-001 00-05-50-002 00-05-50-003 00-05-50-004 00-05-50-005 00-05-50-006 00-05-50-007 00-05-50-008 00-05-50-009 00-05-50-010 00-05-50-011 00-05-50-012 00-05-50-013
Authority of town
Definitions
Suitable toilet and sewage facilities
Disposition of septic tanks
Causing or contributing to pollution of streams or waters prohibited
Permit required to uncover, connect, alter, use, or disturb sewer or appurtenances Compliance of residential sewer laterals
Approval of plans and specifications
Denial of permits
Town's responsibility for maintenance; exception
Accessibility
Permits
Disconnection from system; permit and fee required
Administration and Enforcement; Appeals
00-05-50-025 Notice of violation 00-05-50-026 Appeals
Building Sewers; Connections
00-05-50-040 00-05-50-041 00-05-50-042 00-05-50-043 00-05-50-044 00-05-50-045 00-05-50-046 00-05-50-047 00-05-50-048 00-05-50-049 00-05-50-050
106
Separate sewers required for each building
Old sewers used with new buildings
Specification requirements
Size; slope; diameter
Elevations; lift
Connections of roof down spouts, exterior foundation drains, and the like Compliance with regulations; resistance to gas and water
Inspection
Excavation; restoration
Distance from water supply wells
Access
107
Cumberland - Public Works
Wastewater
00-05-50-065 Discharge regulations; prohibited substances
00-05-50-066 Town's authority to reject waste; procedure
Industrial Sites
00-05-50-080 00-05-50-081 00-05-50-082 00-05-50-083 00-05-50-084 00-05-50-085
Discharge permits required; application; fee Responsibility of owner; town indemnified Control manhole
Standards for measurements, tests, and analyses Special agreements and arrangements
Safety rules
Rates and Charges
00-05-50-100 00-05-50-101 00-05-50-102 00-05-50-103
00-05-50-104 00-05-50-105 00-05-50-106 00-05-50-107 00-05-50-108 00-05-50-109 00-05-50-110
Charge for service required; user classes established
Rates and charges to be collected; billing procedure
Rate determination
Non-residential users of water from sources other than Indianapolis Water Company
Schedule of rates and charges
Sewer interceptor costs
Sewer service application review fee
Waiver of applicable fees
Surcharges
Delinquency charge
Dishonored payment charge
Supplemental Provisions to Prevent Illegal Discharges
00-05-50-120 Proof of compliance; grant of inspection
00-05-50-121 Condition of noncompliance
00-05-50-122 User liable for expenses upon violation
00-05-50-123 Enforcement authority
00-05-50-124 Subchapter deemed supplemental
108
00-05-50-125 Determination of reasonable measures
00-05-50-126 Permit required to disturb connections
00-05-50-127 Discharge of storm or unpolluted water to sanitary sewer
00-05-50-128 Legal remedies; lien; costs of collection
00-05-50-999 Penalty
Cross-reference: Storm Water Management, see Chapter 51
109
Sanitary Sewer Services
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 00-05-50-001 AUTHORITY OF TOWN.
(A) The town shall make and enforce bylaws and regulations as may be deemed necessary for the safe, economical, and efficient management of the town's sewage collection system, pumping stations, and sewage treatment works, for the construction and use of house sewers and connections to the sewage collection system, and for the regulations, collection, rebating, and refunding of the rates and charges.
(B) The town is hereby authorized to prohibit dumping of wastes into the town's sewage collection system, which, in its discretion, is deemed harmful to the operation of the sewage treatment works, or to require methods affecting pretreatment of the wastes to comply with the pretreatment standards included in the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit issued to the town for its sewage treatment plant.
(1995 Code, § 00-05-51-001) (Ord. 1988-9, passed 8-25-1988)
(C) This Chapter, its references, and any associated construction standards shall apply to all sanitary sewer districts and territories owned and/or operated by the Town of Cumberland. For purposes of this Chapter, all rules, regulations and ordinances apply to the Cumberland sanitary system, GEM sanitary system, and any other sanitary system, owned and/or operated by the Town of Cumberland.
§ 00-05-50-002 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
APARTMENT. a family dwelling unit in a building containing three or more family dwelling units or an accessory family dwelling unit in a building that has primary use other than as a residence.
BASE UNIT. Each single-family house and each residence or dwelling unit in a multi-family building or building complex, including each individual apartment or condominium. For purposes of assessing the sanitary sewer tap/connection charges and interceptor charges, each base unit shall be counted as an EQUIVALENT DWELLING UNIT or EDU.
(Ord. 2001-9, passed 6-6-2001)
110
B.O.D. or BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND. The quantity of oxygen used in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20°C, expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/1).
(Ord. 1988-8, passed 8-25-1988)
BUILDINGS SEWER. The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal.
(Ord. 1988-8, passed 8-25-1988)
CLOSELY BUILT-UP AREAS. Any areas situated within the boundary of the town, upon which are located either residential or business buildings.
(Ord. 1988-8, passed 8-25-1988)
111
Cumberland - Public Works
COLLECTOR AND BRANCH LINES. Sewers that receive sewage from individual house and building sewers and transport the flows to a trunk line or sewer interceptor.
(Ord. 2001-9, passed 6-6-2001)
CONNECTION CHARGE. A one-time charge levied upon a sewer user for a single connection by that user to the sewer system at a specified site.
(Ord. 1988-9, passed 8-25-1988)
DEBT SERVICE COSTS. The average annual principal and interest payments on all outstanding revenue bonds or other long-term debt.
(Ord. 1988-9, passed 8-25-1988)
DWELLING. Any house or place used or intended to be used by human occupants as a place of residence.
(Ord. 1988-8, passed 8-25-1988)
EQUIVALENT DWELLING UNIT or EDU. A unit value used in the determination of sanitary sewer tap/connection charges and interceptor charges, with each unit equal to the average amount of daily sanitary sewage flow from an average single-family residence, which amount has been determined to be 310 gallons per day. By dividing the expected sanitary sewage flow from any building or part of a building that is not used as a residence, a determination shall be made of the number of EDUs attributable to that building.
(Ord. 2001-9, passed 6-6-2001)
EQUIVALENT RESIDENTIAL UNIT or ERU. A unit value used in the determination of storm water charges, with each unit equal to the average amount of ground surface area impervious to storm water for a single-family residential property in the Town of Cumberland.
(Ord. 2001-9, passed 6-6-2001)
EXCESSIVE STRENGTH SURCHARGES. An additional charge which is billed to users for treating sewage wastes with an average strength in excess of normal domestic sewage.
(Ord. 1988-9, passed 8-25-1988)
FOUNDATION DRAIN. That portion of a building drainage system provided to drain ground water from the outside of the foundation or under the basement floor, not including any sewage.
(Ord. 1988-8, passed 8-25-1988)
GARBAGE. Solid waste from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage, and sale of produce.
(Ord. 1988-8, passed 8-25-1988)
HEALTH OFFICER. The Health Officer of the state, county, and town. (Ord. 1988-8, passed 8-25-1988)
112
Sanitary Sewer Services
INDUSTRIAL WASTE.
(1) The liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing processes, trade, or business, as distinct from sanitary sewage.
(Ord. 1988-8, passed 8-25-1988)
(2) The wastewater discharges from industrial, trade, or business processes, as distinct from employee wastes or wastes from sanitary conveniences.
(Ord. 1988-9, passed 8-25-1988)
INSPECTION PERMIT FEE. A fee paid by the person requesting a required inspection of a connection.
(Ord. 1988-9, passed 8-25-1988)
INSPECTOR. The person duly authorized by the town, through the Town Council, to inspect and approve the installation of building sewers, private sewer systems, and/or their connection to the public sewer system.
(Ord. 1988-8, passed 8-25-1988)
INTERCEPTOR. A sewer that intercepts trunk and collector lines and transports the sewage flows from those lines to the sewage treatment plant.
(Ord. 2001-9, passed 6-6-2001)
INTERCEPTOR CHARGE. A one-time charge levied upon a person seeking connection to the town's sanitary sewer system to pay on a pro-rata basis for the cost of constructing the sewer interceptor line that will serve the person who will connect to the sewer system.
(Ord. 2001-9, passed 6-6-2001)
LIMITING LAYER. Any layer of soil within a stabilized percolation rate exceeding 60 minutes for the water to fall one inch.
(Ord. 1988-8, passed 8-25-1988)
MONTHLY RATE. A charge levied on users of the wastewater treatment works for the cost of operation and maintenance, capital replacement, and debt service of the works.
(Ord. 1988-9, passed 8-25-1988)
NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other body of surface or groundwater.
(Ord. 1988-8, passed 8-25-1988)
NEW CONSTRUCTION. A building, either under construction or completed, and connected or to be connected to the Cumberland sanitary system, GEM sanitary system, or any sanitary system owned and/or operated by the Town of Cumberland, which following issuance of a sewer permit and a building permit, has not been occupied.
113
(Ord. 2014-13, passed _______)
114
Cumberland - Public Works
NORMAL DOMESTIC SEWER. For the purpose of determining surcharges, NORMAL DOMESTIC SEWAGE is wastewater or sewage with average daily concentration of B.O.D. (BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND) of not more than 220 mg/land SS of not more than 240 mg/l. (Ord. 1988-9, passed 8-25-1988)
NPDES (THE NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM). The NPDES permit is the permit issued by the Indiana Department of Environmental Management for discharges of wastewater to waters of the United States pursuant to 22 U.S.C. §§ 402, 466.
(Ord. 1988-9, passed 8-25-1988)
OCCUPIED. A building, or a unit of a double residence connected to the Cumberland sanitary system, GEM sanitary system, or any sanitary system owned and/or operated by the Town of Cumberland.
(Ord. 2014-13, passed ________)
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE COSTS. All costs, including replacement, direct and indirect, necessary to provide adequate wastewater collection, transport, and treatment on a continuing basis and produce discharges to receiving waters that conform with all related federal, state, and local requirements.
(Ord. 1988-9, passed 8-25-1988)
OTHER SERVICE CHARGES. Inspection permit fees, connection charges, area charges, and other identifiable charges, other than user charges, debt service charges, and excessive strength surcharges. (Ord. 1988-9, passed 8-25-1988)
PERSON.
(1) Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation, or group. (Ord. 1988-8, passed 8-25-1988)
(2) Any and all persons, natural or artificial, including any individual, firm, company, municipal or private corporation, association, society, institution, enterprise, governmental agency, or other entity.
(Ord. 1988-9, passed 8-25-1988)
pH. The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter (g/l of solution. (Ord. 1988-8, passed 8-25-1988)
PRIVIES. Outside, open pit-type disposal systems. (Ord. 1988-8, passed 8-25-1988)
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. The wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food that has been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under
115
the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in dimension. (Ord. 1988-8, passed 8-25-1988)
116
Sanitary Sewer Services
PUBLIC SEWER.
(1) Any sewer constructed, installed, maintained, operated, and owned by the town.
(2) A county drain, or any storm sewer, installed or used for the purpose of carrying surface water runoff and subsoil drainage shall not be considered nor used as a PUBLIC SEWER. (Ord. 1988-8, passed 8-25-1988)
REPLACEMENT COSTS. The expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment, accessories, or appurtenances which are necessary during the service life of the sewage works to maintain the capacity and performance for which the works were designed and constructed.
(Ord. 1988-9, passed 8-25-1988)
RESIDENTIAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM.
(1) All equipment and devices necessary for proper conduction, collection, storage, treatment, and on-site disposal of sewage from a one- or two-family dwelling.
(2) RESIDENTIAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM includes, but is not limited to, building sewers, septic tanks, subsurface absorption fields, and privy vaults.
(Ord. 1988-8, passed 8-25-1988)
SANITARY BUILDING DRAIN. The part of the lowest horizontal piping of the sanitary drainage system inside the walls of any building, which receives and conveys the same to a point three feet outside the building walls where it connects with a building sewer.
(Ord. 1988-8, passed 8-25-1988)
SANITARY SEWER. A sewer which carries sewage and to which storm, surface, and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.
(Ord. 1988-8, passed 8-25-1988)
SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM. A system which is designed to receive sewage and transport the sewage to a proper sewage treatment system.
(Ord. 1988-8, passed 8-25-1988)
SEWAGE. A combination of the water-carried waste from residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments within the town and other areas.
(Ord. 1988-8, passed 8-25-1988)
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT. Any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage.
(Ord. 1988-8, passed 8-25-1988)
117
SEWAGE WORKS. All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating, and disposing of sewage. (Ord. 1988-8, passed 8-25-1988)
118
Cumberland - Public Works
SEWER. A pipe and/or conductor for carrying sewage. (Ord. 1988-8, passed 8-25-1988)
SEWER UTILITY BOARD. The Cumberland Sanitary Board.
(Ord. 2014-13, passed _______)
SLUG. Any discharge of water, sewage, or industrial waste which, in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-hour concentration of flows during normal operation.
(Ord. 1988-8, passed 8-25-1988)
SOIL PROFILE OBSERVATION. Observations of the physical characteristics of the soil horizons or layers to a depth of at least five feet.
(Ord. 1988-8, passed 8-25-1988)
STORM SEWER. A sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes, other than unpolluted cooling water.
(Ord. 1988-8, passed 8-25-1988)
SUBSURFACE ABSORPTION FIELD. Open-jointed or perforated pipes laid in a system of trenches into which the effluent from the distribution box is discharged for direct absorption into the soil. (Ord. 1988-8, passed 8-25-1988)
SUPERINTENDENT. The person appointed as the Superintendent or Manager of the Municipal Sewage Works or a person authorized to act in the capacity pursuant to a contract with the Town Council.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS. Solids that either float on the surface of or are in suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids and which are removable by laboratory filtering.
(Ord. 1988-8, passed 8-25-1988)
TOWN. The area served by the town's waste treatment system in Marion and Hancock counties and the municipal government of Cumberland.
(Ord. 1988-9, passed 8-25-1988)
TRUNK LINE. A sewer that intercepts collector and branch lines and transports the sewage flows from those lines to a sewer interceptor or to the sewage treatment plant.
(Ord. 2001-9, passed 6-6-2001)
UNOCCUPIED. A building, or a unit of a double residence connected to the Cumberland sewer, that is unoccupied by any employee, tenant, homeowner, or other occupant and empty of all furniture and personal property for a continuous period of 30 days or longer, but which does not qualify as "new construction."
119
(Ord. 1990-13, passed 8-1-1990; Am. Ord. 1992-5, passed 6-3-1992; Am. Ord. 1993-3, passed 2-3-1993)
120
Sanitary Sewer Services
USER. The owner, lessee or occupant of property with a building or appurtenance that is connected to the sewer system.
USER CATEGORIES. The division of wastewater treatment customers by source, function, waste characteristics and process, or discharge similarities.
(1) COMMERCIAL USER. Any establishment involved in a commercial enterprise, business, or service which, based on a determination by the town, discharges primarily domestic wastes or wastes from sanitary conveniences. This category shall include apartments.
(2) INDUSTRIAL USER. Any manufacturing or processing facility that discharges industrial waste to a publicly owned treatment works.
(3) INSTITUTIONAL/GOVERNMENTAL USER. Any establishment involved in a social, charitable, religious, and/or educational function or federal, state, or local government which, based on a determination by the town, discharges primarily segregated domestic wastes or wastes from sanitary conveniences.
(4) RESIDENTIAL USER. A user whose premises are in a residential building that has one or two family dwelling units.
(Ord. 1988-9, passed 8-25-1988)
USER CLASS. From the user categories, there shall be two user classes: residential users and nonresidential users, which shall include the commercial, industrial and institutional/governmental users.
VACATION HOLD. The rate for a single-family residence, or unit of a double residence, that is not occupied by any employee, tenant, homeowner, or other occupant for 60 days or longer, but which does not qualify for "unoccupied" or "new construction."
(Am. Ord. 1993-3, passed 2-3-1993)
WATERCOURSE. A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently.
(Ord. 1988-8, passed 8-25-1988)
(1995 Code, § 00-05-51-002)
§ 00-05-50-003 SUITABLE TOILET AND SEWAGE FACILITIES.
The owner of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes, including industrial or commercial business situated within the town and abutting any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now located, or may in the future be located, a public sanitary sewer of the town, shall:
121
(A) Install, at his or her expense, toilet and sewage facilities therein; and
122
Cumberland - Public Works
(B) Connect them directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter within 90 days after the date of official notice to do so, provided the public sewer is within 300 feet of the property line.
(1995 Code, § 00-05-51-003) (Ord. 1988-8, passed 8-25-1988) (Am. Ord. 1991-8, passed 10-2-1991) Penalty, see § 00-05-50-999
§ 00-05-50-004 DISPOSITION OF SEPTIC TANKS.
Disposition of existing septic tanks and rain fields shall be that the owner shall empty the septic tank of its contents, fill it with granular material, disconnect it from the house, and discontinue usage of it. (1995 Code, § 00-05-51-004) (Ord. 1988-8, passed 8-25-1988) Penalty, see § 00-05-50-999
§ 00-05-50-005 CAUSING OR CONTRIBUTING TO POLLUTION OF STREAMS OR WATERS PROHIBITED.
No person shall throw, run, drain, seep, or otherwise dispose into any of the streams or waters of this state, or cause, permit, or suffer to be thrown, run, drained, allowed to seep, or otherwise dispose into the waters, any organic or inorganic matter that shall cause or contribute to a polluted condition of the water, unless a permit for that disposal has been obtained as authorized by I.C. 13-1-3 or I.C. 13-7. (1995 Code, § 00-05-51-005) (Ord. 1988-8, passed 8-25-1988) Penalty, see § 00-05-50-999
§ 00-05-50-006 PERMIT REQUIRED TO UNCOVER, CONNECT, ALTER, USE, OR DISTURB SEWER OR APPURTENANCES.
It shall be unlawful to uncover, make any connection with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a permit or other written permission from the town.
(1995 Code, § 00-05-51-006) (Ord. 1988-8, passed 8-25-1988) Penalty, see § 00-05-50-999
§ 00-05-50-007 COMPLIANCE OF RESIDENTIAL SEWER LATERALS.
The design, construction, installation, location, maintenance, and operation of residential sewer laterals shall comply with the provisions of this chapter and its incorporated regulations.
(1995 Code, § 00-05-51-008) (Ord. 1988-8, passed 8-25-1988) Penalty, see § 00-05-50-999
123
§ 00-05-50-008 APPROVAL OF PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS.
Material alterations in any sanitary sewer lines or other sewage works that are currently connected to the town's sanitary sewer system, and construction of new sanitary sewer lines or other sewage works which are in the future to be connected to the town's sanitary sewer system, shall be done in accordance with the sanitary sewer design and construction standards established by the Town Council.
(1995 Code, § 00-05-51-009) (Ord. 1988-8, passed 8-25-1988; Am. Ord. 2005-07, passed 9-7-2005) Penalty, see § 00-05-50-999
§ 00-05-50-009 DENIAL OF PERMITS.
The town may refuse to issue any permit required by this chapter and not allow use of or connection to the town's sanitary sewer system if town officials determine that the requirements of the town's sanitary sewer design and construction standards or provisions of this chapter have not or cannot be met. (1995 Code, § 00-05-51-010) (Ord. 1988-8, passed 8-25-1988; Am. Ord. 2005-07, passed 9-7-2005)
§ 00-05-50-010 TOWN'S RESPONSIBILITY FOR MAINTENANCE; EXCEPTION.
Maintenance of the sewer system shall be the responsibility of the town, except for the portions of the sewer laterals, which shall be located on property not owned by the town.
(1995 Code, § 00-05-51-011) (Ord. 1988-8, passed 8-25-1988)
§ 00-05-50-011 ACCESSIBILITY.
(A) The Superintendent, Inspector, and other duly authorized employees of the town shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The Superintendent, or the Superintendent's representatives, shall have authority to inquire into any processes, including metallurgical, chemical, oil refining, ceramic, paper, or other industries having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers, waterways, or facilities for waste treatment, and the owner or custodian of the property shall have a duty to supply the information as may be reasonably requested.
(B) The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the town shall be permitted to enter all private property through which the town holds a duly negotiated easement for the
124
purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within the easement.
(1995 Code, § 00-05-51-012) (Ord. 1988-8, passed 8-25-1988) Penalty, see § 00-05-50-999
§ 00-05-50-012 PERMITS.
(A) The permittee shall notify the town when the work is ready for final inspection and before any underground portions are covered. The provisions of this permit for the construction of a residential
125
Cumberland - Public Works
sewage disposal system shall not be considered fulfilled until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the town or its agent.
(B) The town, or its agent, shall be permitted to enter upon all properties at the proper time for purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing necessary to carry out the provisions of this regulation.
(1995 Code, § 00-05-51-013) (Ord. 1988-8, passed 8-25-1988) Penalty, see § 00-05-50-999
§ 00-05-50-013 DISCONNECTION FROM SYSTEM; PERMIT AND FEE REQUIRED.
(A) Prior to a residence, building, or structure connected to the sanitary sewer system of the town being disconnected from such system, the owner, or his or her agent, shall notify the Department of Public Works and pay the disconnection fee.
(B) Disconnection shall be made at the point of connection of the sewer lateral to the town sewer system. Upon disconnection from the sanitary sewer, the owner shall, at the owner's sole expense, properly seal the sewer at the point of disconnection in a good and workmanlike manner to make the sewer gas-tight and watertight. The seal shall be inspected and approved by the town upon completion of the disconnection and prior to the seal being covered.
(1995 Code, § 00-05-51-014) (Ord. 1993-7, passed 3-3-1993) (Ord. 2014-13, passed _____) Penalty, see § 00-05-50-999
§ 00-05-50-014 AVAILABLE TO PUBLIC.
The town adopted the Indiana Sanitary Sewer Design and Construction Standards dated August 2005 setting forth requirements of the town regarding sanitary sewers. The document and its requirements may in the future be amended by the Town Council without adoption of a new ordinance. The document shall be available for public purchase for $15 per printed copy and $10 for a version on a compact disk. (Ord. 2005-07, passed 9-7-2005)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT; APPEALS § 00-05-50-025 NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
Any person found violating any provision of this chapter may be served by the town, or the town's duly appointed agent, with a written order stating the nature of the violation and providing a time limit for satisfactory correction thereof; but not more than ten days will be provided to remove the violation. (1995 Code, § 00-05-51-025) (Ord. 1988-8, passed 8-25-1988; Am. Ord. 1991-8, passed 10-2-1991)
(
126
Sanitary Sewer Services
§ 00-05-50-026 APPEALS.
(A) If an applicant is refused a permit, the town shall, upon request, afford the applicant a fair hearing.
(B) The town may, after reasonable notice and opportunity for fair hearing, revoke a permit authorizing the construction of a sewage disposal system if it finds the holder of the permit has failed to comply with any provision of this regulation.
(1995 Code, § 00-05-51-026) (Ord. 1988-8, passed 8-25-1988)
1,
127
Sanitary Sewer Services
BUILDING SEWERS; CONNECTIONS
§ 00-05-50-040 SEPARATE SEWERS REQUIRED FOR EACH BUILDING.
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building.
(1995 Code, § 00-05-51-050) (Ord. 1988-8, passed 8-25-1988) Penalty, see § 00-05-50-999
§ 00-05-50-041 OLD SEWERS USED WITH NEW BUILDINGS.
Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the town, to meet all requirements of this chapter.
(1995 Code, § 00-05-51-051) (Ord. 1988-8, passed 8-25-1988) Penalty, see § 00-05-50-999
§ 00-05-50-042 SPECIFICATION REQUIREMENTS.
(A) The building sewer shall be PVC SDR35, meeting with ASTM D3034 specifications; PVC SDR21 ASTM D3034 bell and spigot joint with elastomeric seals meeting ASTM D3212 specifications and gaskets meeting ASTM F-477 specifications or other suitable material approved by the town.
(B) Any part of the building sewer that is located within ten feet of a water service pipe shall be constructed of PVC SDR21 ASTM D3034, bell and spigot joint with elastomeric seals meeting ASTM D3212 specifications and gaskets meeting ASTM F-477 specifications.
(C) If installed in filled or unstable ground, the building sewer shall be of ductile iron pipe meeting ANSI/ASTM A746 class 50 specifications with push-on joints meeting ANSI A21.11/AWWA C111 specifications, except that PVC pipe may be accepted if laid on a suitable concrete bed or cradle as approved by the Inspector.
Penalty, see § 00-05-50-999
§ 00-05-50-043 SIZE; SLOPE; DIAMETER.
The size and slope of the building sewer shall be subject to the approval of the town, but in no event shall the diameter be of less than six inches. The slope of the pipe shall be not less than one-eighth inch per foot. For additional information, refer to the ASTM and WPCF Manual of Practice, No. 9.
(1995 Code, § 00-05-51-053) (Ord. 1988-8, passed 8-25-1988) Penalty, see § 00-05-50-999
(A) Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor.
128
§ 00-05-50-044 ELEVATIONS; LIFT.
129
Cumberland - Public Works
(B) In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by the building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer by the owner of the building.
(1995 Code, § 00-05-51-054) (Ord. 1988-8, passed 8-25-1988) Penalty, see § 00-05-50-999
§ 00-05-50-045 CONNECTIONS OF ROOF DOWN SPOUTS, EXTERIOR FOUNDATION DRAINS, AND THE LIKE.
No person shall make or allow to continue the connection of roof down spouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which, in turn, is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
(1995 Code, § 00-05-51-055) (Ord. 1988-8, passed 8-25-1988; Am. Ord. 1991-8, passed 10-2-1991) Penalty, see § 00-05-50-999
§ 00-05-50-046 COMPLIANCE WITH REGULATIONS; RESISTANCE TO GAS AND WATER.
The connection of the building sewer to the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing codes or other applicable rules and regulations of the town, or the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9. All connections shall be made gas-tight and watertight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the town or its certified representative before installation.
(1995 Code, § 00-05-51-056) (Ord. 1988-8, passed 8-25-1988) Penalty, see § 00-05-50-999
§ 00-00-50-047 INSPECTION.
The applicant for the building sewer shall notify the town when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the town or its agent.
(1995 Code, § 00-05-51-057) (Ord. 1988-8, passed 8-25-1988) Penalty, see § 00-05-50-999
§ 00-05-50-048 EXCAVATION; RESTORATION.
All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the town or county.
(1995 Code, § 00-05-51-058) (Ord. 1988-8, passed 8-25-1988) Penalty, see § 00-05-50-999
§ 00-05-50-049 DISTANCE FROM WATER SUPPLY WELLS.
The building sewer shall be located at least 100 feet from any water supply well or pump suction line serving a residence. Sewers constructed of waterworks grade cast iron having mechanical or push-
130
Sanitary Sewer Services
type joints or of waterworks grade pressure-type plastic with an SDR rating of 26, having gasket or push-type joints, may be located within the 50-foot distance, but not closer than 50 feet to dug and bored wells and not closer than 50 feet to drilled and driven wells of underground pump suction lines or requirements of SE-13.
(1995 Code, § 00-05-51-059) (Ord. 1988-8, passed 8-25-1988) Penalty, see § 00-05-50-999
§ 00-05-50-050 ACCESS.
Access may be provided to all parts of septic tanks where necessary to enable adequate inspection, operation, and maintenance.
(1995 Code, § 00-05-51-060) (Ord. 1988-8, passed 8-25-1988)
WASTEWATER
§ 00-05-50-065 DISCHARGE REGULATIONS; PROHIBITED SUBSTANCES.
(A) No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer.
(B) Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to the sewers specifically designated as storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by written permit of the town. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, on written approval of the town and all other applicable authorities, to a storm sewer or natural outlet.
(C) (1) No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described substances, materials, waters, or wastes if it appears likely, in the opinion of the town, that the wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage treatment process, or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, or otherwise can endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance.
(2) In forming this opinion as to the acceptability of theses wastes, the town will give written consideration to the factors such as quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and other pertinent factors.
(D) The following substances are prohibited from the sewerage system:
(1) Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150°F (65°C);
131
(2) Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease, or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/1, or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32°F (0°C) and 150°F (65°C);
132
Cumberland - Public Works
(3) Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes or concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not;
(4) Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, and similar objectionable or toxic substances or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to the degree that any material received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established by the town for the materials;
(5) Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste- or odor-producing substances, in concentrations exceeding limits which may be established by the town as necessary after treatment of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of the state, federal, or other public agencies of jurisdiction for the discharge to the receiving waters;
(6) Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of a half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the town in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations;
(7) Materials which exert or cause:
(a) Unusual concentrations of inert, suspended solids, such as, but not limited to, Fuller's earth, lime slurries, and lime residues, or of dissolved solids, such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate;
(b) Excessive discoloration, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions;
(c) Unusual B.O.D., chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment works; and/or
(d) Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting slugs.
(8) Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas, known or unknown as such;
(9) Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous substances, liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant;
(10) Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or greater than nine, or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of the sewage works;
(11) Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works, such as, but
133
not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood,
134
Sanitary Sewer Services
underground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails, plastic or paper dishes, cups, milk containers, and the like, either whole or ground by garbage grinders; and/or
(12) Waters or wastes containing substances which:
(a) Are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed; or
(b) Are amenable to treatment only to the degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent discharge cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters.
(1995 Code, § 00-05-51-070) (Ord. 1988-8, passed 8-25-1988) Penalty, see § 00-05-50-999
§ 00-05-50-066 TOWN'S AUTHORITY TO REJECT WASTE; PROCEDURE.
(A) If any wastes, or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which wastes contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in § 00-05-50-065 and which, in the judgment of the town, may have a deleterious effect on the sewage works, processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the town shall, upon written notice: Reject the wastes;
(1) Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers;
(2) Require control of the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or
(3) Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing sewer charges or revenues.
(B) If the town permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plans and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the town and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances, and laws.
(C) (1) Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the town, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand, or other harmful ingredients.
(2) All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the town and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
(D) Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for any water or waste, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by and at the owner's expense.
135
(1995 Code, § 00-05-51-071) (Ord. 1988-8, passed 8-25-1988)
136
Cumberland - Public Works
INDUSTRIAL SITES
§ 00-05-50-080 DISCHARGE PERMITS REQUIRED; APPLICATION; FEE.
(A) (1) The owner of any manufacturing or processing facility, or the owner's agent, shall apply to the town for a permit to discharge waste into the sewerage system.
(2) The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information considered pertinent in the judgement of the town.
(3) All required inspection permit, connection and interceptor fees shall be paid to the town when the application is filed.
(B) No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connection with, or opening to use, alter, or disconnect from any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first having obtained a permit from the town.
(1995 Code, § 00-05-51-085) (Ord. 1988-8, passed 8-25-1988; Am. Ord. 1991-8, passed 10-2-1991; Am. Ord. 1993-7, passed 3-3-1993) Penalty, see § 00-05-50-999
§ 00-05-50-081 RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNER; TOWN INDEMNIFIED.
(A) All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner.
(B) The owner shall indemnify the town from any loss or damage that, directly or indirectly, may be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
(1995 Code, § 00-05-51-086) (Ord. 1988-8, passed 8-25-1988) Penalty, see § 00-05-50-999
§ 00-05-50-082 CONTROL MANHOLE.
(A) As required by the town, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole, together with the necessary meters and other appurtenances, in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the wastes.
(B) The manhole, when required, shall be accessible by authorized town personnel and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with the plans approved by the town.
137
(C) The manhole shall be installed and maintained by the owner so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
(1995 Code, § 00-05-51-087) (Ord. 1988-8, passed 8-25-1988) Penalty, see § 00-05-50-999
138
Sanitary Sewer Services
§ 00-05-50-083 STANDARDS FOR MEASUREMENTS, TESTS, AND ANALYSES.
(A) All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of water and waste to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater," published by the American Public Health Association, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples taken at the control manhole.
(B) In the event no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected.
(C) Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb, and property.
(D) (1) The particular analyses involved will determine whether a 24-hour composite of all outfalls of a premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample(s) should be taken.
(2) Normally, but not always, B.O.D. and suspended solids analyses are obtained from 24-hour composites of all outfalls where pHs are determined from periodic grab samples.
(1995 Code, § 00-05-51-088) (Ord. 1988-8, passed 8-25-1988) Penalty, see § 00-05-50-999
§ 00-05-50-084 SPECIAL AGREEMENTS AND ARRANGEMENTS.
No statement contained in this subchapter shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the town and any industrial concern, whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the town for treatment, subject to payment therefor by the industrial concern.
(1995 Code, § 00-05-51-089) (Ord. 1988-8, passed 8-25-1988)
§ 00-05-50-085 SAFETY RULES.
(A) While performing the necessary work on industrial properties, the duly authorized employees of the town shall observe all reasonable safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company.
(B) The town shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to its property by town employees and against liability claims for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions as required and except as may be established otherwise.
139
(1995 Code, § 00-05-51-090) (Ord. 1988-8, passed 8-25-1988)
140
Cumberland - Public Works
RATES AND CHARGES
§ 00-05-50-100 CHARGE FOR SERVICE REQUIRED; USER CLASSES ESTABLISHED.
(A) Every person whose premises are served by the sewage works shall be charged for the services. These charges are established by each user class and are levied to defray the cost of operation and maintenance (including replacement and debt service) of the treatment works.
(B) User charges are subject to the rules and regulations adopted by the Indiana Department of Environmental Management.
(C) Users of the sewage works shall be classified as:
(1) Residential; or
(2) Non-residential.
(1995 Code, § 00-05-51-100) (Ord. 1988-9, passed 8-25-1988) Penalty, see § 00-05-50-999
§ 00-05-50-101 RATES AND CHARGES TO BE COLLECTED; BILLING PROCEDURE.
(A) Rates and charges shall be prepared, billed, and collected by the town in the manner provided by law and ordinance.
(B) Rates and charges for all users shall be prepared and billed monthly.
(C) (1) Rates and charges shall be billed to the owner of the real estate as established and reflected by the last recorded instrument or document of title to each parcel of real estate, and not to any lessee, tenant, contract purchaser, or non-owner occupant of the property. The records of the County Recorder or County Assessor shall serve to establish legal ownership of all parcels served by the town sewers.
(2) Charges may be billed to any lessee, tenant, contract purchaser, or non-owner occupant only upon receipt by the Director of Public Works of a form provided by the town and executed by the property owner.
(3) Any charges unpaid for more than 45 consecutive days may, at the option of the Clerk-Treasurer, thereafter be billed to the property owner. At the further option of the Director of Public Works, no further billings may be made to the nonpaying lessee, tenant, contract purchaser, or non-owner occupant.
141
(4) That nothing contained herein shall operate to release or discharge or relieve the owner of the subject real estate from liability for payment of all sewer use charges for the real estate, and the owner of the real estate shall at all times be and remain fully liable for and responsible for payment of such sewer use charges.
142
Sanitary Sewer Services
(5) The owners of properties served, which are occupied by lessees, tenants, contract purchasers, or non-owner occupants, shall have the right to examine the collection records of the town for the purpose of determining the payment status of the bills, provided that the examination shall be made at the office at which the records are kept during normal business hours.
(1995 Code, § 00-05-51-102) (Ord. 1988-9, passed 8-25-1988; Am. Ord. 1994-9, passed 8-3-1994) (Ord. 2014-13, passed ______) Penalty, see § 00-05-50-999
§ 00-05-50-102 RATE DETERMINATION.
Users are required to provide the Director of Public Works' office with all information necessary to make an accurate determination of the appropriate rate to be charged for their sewer service. The amount of charges billed a user will be considered as the correct amount owed by the user for sewer service, unless an error is discovered and reported to the Director of Public Works' office within 12 months of the billing date. When errors are attributable to a user's failure to provide the Clerk-Treasurer's office with any information necessary to make an accurate determination of the appropriate rate to be charged for their sewer service, and when such errors have resulted in the payment of sewer fees less than the amount that should have been paid, the Clerk-Treasurer's office may charge the user for the fees that should have been billed without limitation on the chargeable time period.
(Ord. 97-2, passed 3-18-1997) Penalty, see § 00-05-50-999
§ 00-05-50-103 NON-RESIDENTIAL USERS OF WATER FROM SOURCES OTHER THAN INDIANAPOLIS WATER COMPANY.
Non-residential users/customers who obtain water service or their water supply from sources other than the public water supply system must arrange to have all their water consumption metered on approved equipment with readings reported pursuant to a schedule established by the public water supply system or the town. For purposes of the application of the non-residential customer usage-based rate charge of § 50.123, these water meter readings shall be used to determine the user's monthly sewer charges in the same way as if the user were receiving their water service from the public water supply system. The non-residential users must allow the public water supply system or the town, as determined by the town, to make periodic inspections of their water meters to verify the accuracy of the readings being used for sewer billing purposes.
(Ord. 2000-2, passed 5-3-2000) Penalty, see § 00-05-50-999
§ 00-05-50-104 SCHEDULE OF RATES AND CHARGES.
For the use of and service rendered by the sewage works, rates and charges shall be collected from the owners of each and every lot, parcel of real estate, or building connected with the town's sanitary sewer system or that otherwise discharges sanitary sewage, industrial waste, water, or other liquids, either directly or indirectly, into the sanitary sewer system of the town. These rates and charges include user charges, debt service costs, connection charges, connection permit fees, sewer interceptor charges,
143
excessive strength surcharges, and other service charges, which rates and charges, whether listed in this section or elsewhere in Chapter 50, shall be payable as set forth in this chapter:
144
Cumberland - Public Works
(A) Residential: metered.
(1) General provisions. All residential users, as defined in § 00-05-50-002, that receive water service from a public water supply company or have their water service metered in a manner approved by the town, shall pay a monthly sewer user charge equal to $4 for each 100 cubic feet of water used, as metered by the a public water supply system or town-approved meter. Unless a user's residential unit is on unoccupied, vacation hold, or new construction status for the entire billing period, a residential user whose metered water usage is less than 400 cubic feet shall be assessed this charge based on a minimum 400 cubic feet of water usage. In addition to the charge determined by metered water use, these residential users shall also pay a monthly sewer debt service charge based on the size of the water line connected to the user's water meter as set forth in division(A)(4) below. The monthly sewer charge for non-residential service for buildings that are unoccupied or in the process of being newly constructed shall be the amount of the debt service charge based on the size of the water meter serving the building.
(2) Unoccupied, vacation hold, or new construction status. A user who arranges to have a residential unit put on unoccupied, vacation hold, or new construction status shall pay an administrative fee of $20 in advance for each continuous time period that the unit is on such status. For each entire monthly billing period the unit is on this status, the user is not subject to the minimum volume usage charge (i.e. the charge based on 400 cubic feet of water usage), but the user continues to be subject to the monthly debt service charge.
(a) The reduced rate for new construction shall apply to the billing for the first month following the issuance of the sewer permit and shall continue until the property is first sold, leased, rented, or occupied.
(b) It shall be the responsibility of a building contractor and the owner of the newly constructed building to notify the Department of Public Works in writing of the sale, lease, rental, or occupancy of the property and the name of the purchaser, lessee, tenant, or occupant.
(Ord. 1990-13, passed 8-1-1990; Am. Ord. 1992-5, passed 6-3-1992) (Ord.2014-13, passed ______)
(c) It shall be the responsibility of the user to notify the Department of Public Works in writing that a building or a unit of a double residence is unoccupied and when it is reoccupied. The reduced rate for an unoccupied building or a unit of a double residence shall apply to the next month's billing following first written notification and 30 days of non-occupancy.
(Ord. 1990-13, passed 8-1-1990; Am. Ord. 1992-5, passed 6-3-1992; Am. Ord. 1993-3, passed 2-3-1993) (Ord.2014-13, passed ______)
(d) It shall be the responsibility of the owner to notify the Department of Public Works in writing at least 30 days prior to the month that a single-family residence, or a unit of a double residence, is to be occupied for a period of 60 days or more. The reduced rate for a vacation hold shall first apply to the billing for the next whole month following written notification and non-occupancy. (Ord.2014-13, passed ______)
145
(3) Summer Service Credit. In recognition that many residences use significant amounts of water during the summer months that are not discharged into the sanitary sewer system, residential users may have that part of their sewer bill which is based on water usage reported on their four bills for the
Sanitary Sewer Services
billing months of June, July, August, and September be determined on their water usage amounts reported on their 12 bills for the billing months of January through December for the prior year, in accordance with rules established by the Sewer Utility Board for the Summer Service Credit. If the residential user has not resided in the residence for at least 12 months, the credit will be calculated using the water usage of the previous resident of the residence during the 12 month period the residence was occupied. Residents of new homes will not be entitled to a credit until they have occupied the residence continuously for a 12-month period.
(4) Debt service charges.
Water Meter Size
Rate
Five-eighth to three-fourth inch
$22.18
One inch
$31.72
One and one-half inch
$45.80
Two inch
$59.89
Three inch
$107.14
Four inch
$173.02
Six inch
$244.22
(B) Residential: non-metered. Monthly charge for each unit.
(1) Single-family dwelling: $54.70.
(2) Single-family dwelling placed on unoccupied, vacation hold, or new construction status: $27.35.
(3) Two-family dwelling (i.e. double): $54.70.
(4) Two-family dwelling placed on unoccupied, vacation hold, or new construction status: $27.35.
(C) Non-residential: metered.
(1) General provisions. All non-residential users, as defined in § 00-05-50-100, that receive water service from a public water supply company or have their water (or sanitary sewer discharge) service metered in a manner approved by the town, shall pay a monthly sewer user charge equal to $4 for each
146
100 cubic feet of water used (or of sanitary sewer discharge) as metered by a public water supply system or town-approved meter. A non-residential user whose metered water usage (or sanitary sewer discharge) is less than 400 cubic feet shall be assessed this charge based on a minimum 400 cubic feet of water usage. In addition to the charge determined by metered water use (or sanitary sewer
147
Cumberland - Public Works
discharge), these non-residential users shall also pay a monthly sewer debt service charge based on the size of the user's water meter as set forth in division(C)(2) below, or a minimum debt service charge determined as follows. The debt service charge to be paid for apartments shall not be less than an amount equal to the debt service charge for a five-eighth to three-fourth inch water meter ($22.18) times a factor of 80% ($17.74) times the number of dwelling units and other separate facilities receiving sewage service (e.g. office, laundry, clubhouse) in the apartment building. These sewer user charges shall be in lieu of charges under division (D) below, which charges continue for all non-residential users not receiving all their water service from a public water supply company who have been directed by the Sewer Utility Board to have their sanitary sewer discharges metered.
(2) Debt service charges.
Water Meter Size
Rate
Five-eighth to three-fourth inch
$22.18
One inch
$31.72
One and one-half inch
_ $45.80
Two inch
$59.89
Three inch
$107.14
Four inch
$173.02
Six inch
$244.22
(D) Non-residential: non-metered.
(1) The Sewer Utility Board shall determine a projected monthly water usage amount for non-residential sewer users who do not receive all their water service from a public water supply company or through a town-approved meter. Non-residential, non-metered users shall pay sewer user charges based on this projected monthly water usage amount, but shall be subject to a minimum user charge equal to the residential non-metered rate for a single dwelling unit.
(2) The non-metered users that have been identified and for which a projected monthly water usage amount has been established are:
Name of User
Address
Projected Monthly Water Usage
Monthly Charge
Buck Creek Baptist Church
135 South Muessing Street
600 cubic feet
$54.70
Ind. Medical Management
11890 East Welland Street
600 cubic feet
$54.70
(E) Connection charges and inspection permit fees.
148
Sanitary Sewer Services
(1) (a) For all buildings, except apartment buildings, a sewer connection charge of $3,100 for each EDU and an inspection permit fee of $50 for each EDU shall be paid.
(b) For apartment buildings a sewer connection charge of $2,480 for each EDU and an inspection permit fee of $50 for each EDU shall be paid.
(c) For any non-residential building, except apartments, the Sewer Utility Board shall determine a reasonable projected daily sewage flow rate (in gallons) based on information provided by the user and state and federal guidelines, including those in 327 I.A. C. 3-6-11, and that daily flow rate shall then be divided by 310 to determine the number of EDUs to be attributed to the building. EDUs for such non-residential buildings may be determined in fractions of one-tenth of a unit, but the minimum connection charge and inspection permit fee shall be based on one EDU.
(2) (a) No sewer permit shall be issued until the required connection charge and inspection permit fees have been full aid to the Department of Public Works.
(b) Sewer connection charges may be paid for any building prior to its construction. Such prepayment of sewer connection charges for any building does not require the Sewer Utility Board to determine that the number of EDUs attributable to that building equals the number of EDUs prepaid for the building. Prepayment of sewer connection charges does not entitle the payer to connect buildings to the town's sewer system before the Sewer Utility Board has determined that buildings/development and the town's sewer system are both ready for the connection to be made. All payments of connection charges are non-refundable, unless the Sewer Utility Board has specifically provided otherwise in an agreement with the person paying such charges.
(F) Large volume prepayments of connection charges and permit fees. If the rules of the Cumberland Sewer Utility Board for large volume prepayments of connection charges have been met, a person may pay the following charges and fees instead of the otherwise applicable connection charges and permit fees established hereby.
(1) Prepayment of connection charges and inspection permit fees for 51 to 200 ED Us.
(a) For all buildings, except apartment buildings, a sewer connection charge of $2,850 for each EDU ($145,350 minimum) and an inspection permit fee of $50 for each EDU shall be paid.
(b) For apartment buildings a sewer connection charge of $2,280 for each EDU ($116,280 minimum) and an inspection permit fee of $50 for each EDU shall be paid.
(2) Prepayment of connection charges and inspection permit fees for more than 200 EDUs.
(a) For all buildings, except apartment buildings, a sewer connection charge of $2,600 for each EDU ($522,600 minimum) and an inspection permit fee of $50 for each EDU shall be paid.
149
(b) For apartment buildings a sewer connection charge of $2,080 for each EDU ($418,080 minimum) and an inspection permit fee of $50 for each EDU shall be paid.
150
Cumberland - Public Works
(G) Disconnection charges. No building shall be disconnected from the town's sanitary sewer system without notification being given to the Department of Public Works and the payment of a $50 disconnection fee.
(H) User monitoring costs. If the Sewer Utility Board determines that it is necessary to monitor a user's discharges into the town's sanitary sewer system in order to assure compliance with the requirements of Chapter 50, the user shall be charged the actual costs to the town for the monitoring. (Ord. 2001-9, passed 6-6-2001; Am. Ord. 2001-13, passed 8-1-2001; Am. Ord. 2002-07, passed 5-1-2002; Am. Ord. 2002-15, passed 6-5-2002; Am. Ord. 2002-16, passed 9-19-2002; Am. Ord. 2011-5, passed 5-18-2011; Ord. 2014-13, passed ______)
§ 00-05-50-105 SEWER INTERCEPTOR COSTS.
(A) Costs for the extension of the town's sewer collection system to make available sewer service to areas not receiving such service shall be recovered by monies collected from sewer interceptor charges. No connection shall be to the town's sewer system to be served by sewer interceptor or sewer trunk line until a permit is obtained and payment, or satisfactory surety for payment, has been made to the town's Interceptor Expansion Fund, which shall be a depository for all sewer interceptor charges collected.
(B) (1) The sewer interceptor charge is intended to cover the engineering, easement acquisition, construction, project administration, inspection, and legal costs of new sewer interceptor and trunk line projects. These project costs are to be allocated among all the projected new and future users of the interceptor or trunk line based on the amount of their expected use of the capacity of the new interceptor or trunk line.
(2) For each sewer interceptor or trunk line project, the Sewer Utility Board shall arrange for the Town Engineer to prepare a report identifying the proposed route of the interceptor or trunk line, the area it will serve, its capacity, and the anticipated costs. The information in the Engineer's report shall be utilized by the Sewer Utility Board to calculate the sewer interceptor charge to be paid by each developer or owner of property to be served by the interceptor or trunk line on the basis of the number of Equivalent Dwelling Units (EDU) identified for that new user. The interceptor or trunk line's EDU capacity shall be determined by dividing the Engineer's projection for the interceptor or trunk line's daily sewage flow capacity by the daily sewage flow rate attributed for each EDU. Each new user shall have its sewer interceptor charge based on the number of EDUs attributed to the buildings they are connecting to the sewer system that will be served by the interceptor or trunk line, with each EDU assigned an interceptor charge equal to the Engineer's calculation of the anticipated interceptor or trunk line cost divided by the interceptor or trunk line capacity.
(C) The sewer interceptor charge for Buck Creek Interceptor Phase 1 (i.e. approximately 8,600 linear feet of sanitary sewer interceptor to extend from the Cumberland Wastewater Treatment Plant
151
in a northeasterly direction along the course of Buck Creek) shall be $354.58 per EDU. The sewer interceptor charge for the East Branch Buck Creek Interceptor East (i.e. , approximately 8,000 linear feet of sanitary sewer interceptor to extend from its connection with the Buck Creek Interceptor Phase I, froma location approximately 1,436 feet
152
Sanitary Sewer Services
northeast of the Cumberland Wastewater Treatment Plant, in an easterly direction along the course of the old "Pennsy" Railroad right-of-way) shall be $565.50 per EDU. The EDU-based charge to be assessed for each interceptor or trunk line shall be established by ordinance. A schedule of the EDU charges for each interceptor and trunk line shall be kept on file in the office of the Department of Public Works.
(D) (1) If a person pays an interceptor charge that is based on the Town Engineer's projected costs, and if the actual costs for a sewer interceptor or trunk line project are more than 10% less than the projected costs, that person shall receive a refund of the charges paid in an amount sufficient to make the charge paid based on the actual cost of the interceptor or trunk line project.
(2) If a person pays an interceptor charge prior to the completion of the interceptor or trunk line project, and the interceptor or trunk line project is terminated without being completed, or the interceptor or trunk line is not constructed within three years of that person's payment of the interceptor fee, that person shall be entitled to a full refund of the interceptor charge paid.
(3) If an interceptor or trunk line is constructed after a refund has been made, the owner of the property for which the refund was provided shall be assessed a charge for the cost of the interceptor or trunk line based on the actual project cost of the interceptor or trunk line.
(E) If a person pays for and/or constructs a sewer interceptor or trunk line with the approval of the Sewer Utility Board, that person's expenditures for the line shall serve as payment in lieu of the sewer interceptor charge. A person paying for and/or constructing a sewer interceptor or trunk line may arrange with the Sewer Utility Board to receive payment of interceptor charges collected in the future from other persons connecting to that interceptor or trunk line and/or other payment from the town to compensate for part of the cost of the interceptor or trunk line.
(F) In the event that a sewer interceptor or trunk line is not in place to sufficiently serve a connection a person is seeking to the town's sewer system, and the Town Engineer has determined that a new connection should not be made without some improvement to the sewer collection system to facilitate the new connection, the Sewer Utility Board may require that person to pay for the improvements the Town Engineer has determined are needed to facilitate that person's connection to the sewer system.
(Ord, 2001-9, passed 6-6-2001) Penalty, see § 00-05-50-999
§ 00-05-50-107 WAIVER OF APPLICABLE FEES.
(A) The Town Council may waive the requirement of this chapter that no sewer installation permit shall be issued until the applicable sewer tap fee and permit fee have been fully paid (§ 00-05-50-104), subject to the following conditions.
153
(1) The sewer connection is to an existing single-family residential building that has relied on a septic system to handle its sanitary wastes.
(2) The residential building is located on property within the corporate limits of the town, or the owner has made a binding commitment to support the town's annexation of his or her property at the time the town initiates annexation and throughout the annexation process.
(3) The owner of the residential building enters into a written agreement prepared by the town to pay the applicable sewer tap fee and permit fee by making equal installment payments in each month over a 12-month period, with the first payment to be made prior to the connection being made to the town's sewers.
(Ord. 1998-6, passed 6-3-1998)
(B) The Town Council may waive the requirement for a sewer service application and the sewer service application review fee for sewer connection sought for property outside the town boundaries when it determines that a formal and detailed review process is not needed by the town.
§ 00-05-50-108 SURCHARGES.
(A) (1) The town shall require the user to determine the strength and content of all sewage and wastes discharged, either directly or indirectly, into the sanitary sewage system in the manner and method the town deems practicable, in light of the conditions attending circumstances of the case, in order to determine the proper charge.
(2) The user shall furnish a central sampling point available at any time to the town.
(B) Normal domestic waste strength should not exceed a biochemical oxygen demand of 220 mg/1 of fluid or suspended solids in excess of 220 mg/1 of fluid. Additional charges for treating stronger than normal domestic waste shall be made on the following basis when applicable.
(1) Rate surcharge based upon suspended solids. There shall be an additional charge per pound of suspended solids for suspended solids received in excess of 250 mg/1 of fluid, which shall relate reasonably to the incremental cost of treatment and disposal thereof.
(2) Rate surcharge based upon B.O.D. There shall be an additional charge, per pound of biochemical oxygen demand for B.O.D. received in excess of 200 mg/1 of fluid, which shall be reasonably related to the incremental cost of treatment and disposal thereof.
154
Sanitary Sewer Services
(3) Rate surcharge based upon ammonia. There shall be an additional charge per pound for ammonia in excess of 10 mg/l of fluid, which charge shall be reasonably related to the incremental cost of treatment and disposal.
(C) The determination of suspended solids and five-day B.O.D. contained in the waste shall be in accordance with the latest copy of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water, Sewage, and Industrial Wastes," as written by the American Public Health Association, the American Waterworks Association, and the Water Pollution Control Federation, and in compliance with "Guidelines Establishing Test Procedures for Analysis of Pollutants," Regulation C.F.R. pt. 136, published in the Federal Register on October 16, 1973.
(1995 Code, § 00-05-51-101) (Ord. 1988-9, passed 8-25-1988) Penalty, see § 00-05-50-999
§ 00-05-50-109 DELINQUENCY CHARGE.
Payment for all charges for sewer use shall be due upon user's receipt of their billing notice, and users' accounts shall be considered delinquent if full payment is not received at the payment office identified in the billing notice by the due date specified in the billing notice. In the event that a mailed payment, properly addressed to the billing office, for the full amount of the bill, is postmarked at least five days prior to the due date specified in the billing notice, no delinquent penalty shall apply if payment is received by the billing office within ten days of the due date specified in the billing notice. A penalty in the amount of 10% of the delinquent fee shall be charged to the user. The Clerk-Treasurer shall have the authority to negotiate repayment plans for delinquent accounts and to correct erroneous billing, and he or she may waive late penalties, not to exceed the sum of $400 for any user, if the Clerk-Treasurer, in his or her sole discretion, believes that such a waiver is appropriate under the circumstances.
(Am. Ord. 2011-14, passed 12-7-2011)
§ 00-05-50-110 DISHONORED PAYMENT CHARGE.
A fee in the amount of $25 shall be charged to any person or entity presenting a check, draft or order for payment of sewer use fees or shall be charged the person for whose benefit the instrument was given, which instrument is returned to the town's agent for collecting sewer use fees marked "unpaid" or otherwise dishonored by the institution upon which it was drawn. This charge shall be imposed for each returned or dishonored instrument in addition to any other charges made by the institution upon which it was drawn and by other utility service providers that were entitled to any part of the payment from the returned or dishonored instrument.
(Ord. 2003-2, passed 7-16-2003)
(
155
Cumberland - Public Works
SUPPLEMENTAL PROVISIONS TO PREVENT ILLEGAL DISCHARGES § 00-05-50-120 PROOF OF COMPLIANCE; GRANT OF INSPECTION.
A user of the town's sanitary sewer system may avoid the imposition or levy of any fines, fees, charges, or penalties with regard to such use and utilization by presentation of proof of compliance and continued compliance with the provisions of the town's ordinance, together with any amendments thereto, which proof shall consist of and include compliance with the following procedures and conditions as to each building and/or appurtenance connected thereto.
(A) Upon request by a sewage official or one of the town's designated employees, either in writing or by personal contact, each user utilizing the system shall, within ten business days after such request, execute a "grant of inspection" to the town to permit entry upon the property served by the system upon which the building or appurtenance is located to inspect and/or perform such test as may be deemed necessary by the town to verify and prove compliance with the provisions of the town's ordinance, as set forth herein, together with any amendments thereto.
(B) The grant of inspection shall be deemed to include the right of periodic inspections and/or tests thereafter as may be reasonably determined to be necessary by the town to maintain, monitor, and ensure continued compliance with the provisions of the town's ordinance, as set forth herein, and any amendments thereto.
(C) Once a grant of inspection has been executed, it shall be deemed to be an ongoing authorization without termination as provided for herein. Once a grant of inspection has been executed, it may not be revoked by the original grantor.
(D) Reasonable written notice at least 24 hours in advance shall be given by the town officials, or their designated employee or employees, to the user of the time and place at which the inspections and/or tests provided for herein are to be made and conducted.
(E) No fees shall be charged for any inspections and/or tests conducted and performed by the town's designated representatives.
(F) In the event a user utilizing the system executes a grant of inspection and the town determines that the buildings and/or appurtenances are in compliance, no surcharge, fines, or other penalties shall be imposed or levied upon the user; provided, however, that the town shall have the right and authority, pursuant to the grant of inspection executed as required herein and the terms of this subchapter, together with any amendments thereto, to conduct additional inspections and/or tests at a later date to determine that compliance continues to exist.
156
(G) (I) In the event a user utilizing the system fails, declines, or refuses to execute a grant of inspection to the district for the purposes provided herein, a surcharge of $50 per month shall be imposed in addition to all other charges authorized and imposed under any of the applicable ordinances of the
157
Sanitary Sewer Services
town, commencing at the beginning of the next billing period following the date of the failure and refusal to execute the grant of inspection to the town.
(2) If the user continues to refuse to execute a grant of inspection after a period of 60 days from the date of first request, the surcharge shall be raised and increased to $100 per month beginning on the sixty-first day.
(H) In the event a user utilizing the system executes a grant of inspection and the town inspects, conducts tests, and determines that the buildings and/or appurtenances of the user are not in compliance, then, and in such event, the town, by its designated employee, shall provide written notice of the results of the inspection and tests to the user, who shall be required to permanently comply with the applicable provisions of all relevant ordinances, together with all amendments thereto within 45 days of the date of the notice.
(I) In the event that the building and/or appurtenances of the user are determined not to be in compliance with the provisions set forth herein, together with any amendments thereto, and the time period referred to herein for corrective work expires, and the user has failed to bring the building or appurtenances into compliance with this subchapter, a surcharge of $100 per month per billing account for the user shall be imposed, in addition to all other charges authorized and imposed under any applicable ordinance of the town, commencing the next billing period immediately following the date of inspection or testing wherein the noncompliance was first determined, as and for fine and penalty for allowing and permitting the violation to continue to exist.
(J) The surcharge referred to herein shall be removed only upon the following conditions:
(1) The user utilizing the system executes a grant of inspection to the town and takes the required corrective action to bring about compliance;
(2) The town inspects and/or performs such additional tests of the buildings and/or appurtenances connected to the system and determines the buildings and/or appurtenances so connected are fully in compliance; and
(3) The payment in full of all the surcharges billed to the user utilizing the system until such time as the building and/or appurtenances in question are determined to be in compliance.
(K) The failure or refusal by the user utilizing the system to execute a grant of inspection or to cause his or her buildings and/or appurtenances not to be in compliance after being determined by the agents of the town not to be in compliance, within the statutory guidelines from the date of failure, refusal, or notice of noncompliance, shall cause the town, by its agents, to prepare a notice of violation of the ordinance of the town and to file the notice for recording in the office of the Recorder of the county in which the real estate is located.
(1995 Code, § 00-05-51-121) (Ord. 1994-4, passed 4-7-1994)
158
Cumberland - Public Works
§ 00-05-50-121 CONDITION OF NONCOMPLIANCE.
In the event a user is found to be in compliance but subsequent inspections and/or tests determine a condition of noncompliance currently exists, the aforesaid relevant provisions of § 00-05-50-120 and its appropriate divisions shall be deemed applicable, except that, in addition to the surcharge therein required, the user shall be liable for payment of a sum equal to the. sum of the months since the original determination of compliance was made multiplied by the monthly surcharge provided for in § 00-05-50-120, in the event town agents determine the user knowingly, willfully, and/or intentionally created or permitted such violation to commence and continue.
(1995 Code, § 00-05-51-122) (Ord. 1994-4, passed 4-7-1994)
§ 00-05-50-122 USER LIABLE FOR EXPENSES UPON VIOLATION.
Any user violating any of the provisions of this subchapter, or any amendments thereto, shall be liable to the town for any expenses, costs, and fees, including, but not limited to, reasonable court costs and attorney fees, including recording and filing fees, occasioned or caused to the town in seeking enforcement of the provisions of the ordinances against the violator, as well as for any losses or damages occasioned or caused to the town by reason of the violation.
(1995 Code, § 00-05-51-123) (Ord. 1994-4, passed 4-7-1994) Penalty, see § 00-05-50-999
§ 00-05-50-123 ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY.
(A) The Town Council, and its sewage utility, shall have full power and authority to invoke any and all legal, equitable, or special remedies for the enforcement of this subchapter, including, but not limited to, prohibitory or mandatory injunctive relief to prevent or discontinue any violations of this subchapter and to ensure compliance with the provisions hereof.
(B) The Council may authorize its attorney to institute any proceedings deemed necessary on behalf of the town in the appropriate court of the county in which the offending real estate shall be located. (1995 Code, § 00-05-51-124) (Ord. 1994-4, passed 4-7-1994)
§ 00-05-50-124 SUBCHAPTER DEEMED SUPPLEMENTAL.
This subchapter shall be deemed supplemental to all other ordinances and provisions thereof for enforcement and compliance purposes and shall not be deemed to amend, alter, or rescind any other such ordinances; further that any fines, fees, charges, or penalties levied, assessed, or imposed pursuant to this subchapter shall be in addition to any fines, fees, charges, or penalties levied or imposed pursuant to any other ordinance or any of the provisions thereof.
(1995 Code, § 00-05-51-125) (Ord. 1994-4, passed 4-7-1994)
159
Sanitary Sewer Services
§ 00-05-50-125 DETERMINATION OF REASONABLE MEASURES.
The Town Council, by passage hereof, has determined that the measures herein above set out are reasonable means of ensuring compliance with the provisions as set forth herein together with any amendments thereto.
(1995 Code, § 00-05-51-126) (Ord. 1994-4, passed 4-7-1994)
§ 00-05-50-126 PERMIT REQUIRED TO DISTURB CONNECTIONS.
No person, firm, or corporation shall uncover or make any connection with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a permit from the town. (1995 Code, § 00-05-51-127) (Ord. 1994-4, passed 4-7-1994) Penalty, see § 00-05-50-999
§ 00-05-50-127 DISCHARGE OF STORM OR UNPOLLUTED WATER TO SANITARY SEWER.
No person, firm, or corporation shall discharge or cause or permit to be discharged any storm water, surface water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process water to any sanitary sewer.
(1995 Code, § 00-05-51-128) (Ord. 1994-4, passed 4-7-1994) Penalty, see § 00-05-50-999
§ 00-05-50-128 LEGAL REMEDIES; LIEN; COSTS OF COLLECTION.
(A) Any fines, fees, charges, or penalties levied or made against any property for violation of any of the terms herein, in addition to the legal remedies set forth above, shall:
(1) Constitute a lien upon the real estate of the owners; and
(2) The Director of Public Works may utilize a collection agency to pursue repayment of outstanding fines, fees, etc. Additionally, the Town reserves the right to pursue all other legal remedies available to itself.
(B) In addition to any fines or penalties imposed, any person, firm, or corporation, developer, contractor, or subcontractor liable for or owing the fine or cost shall pay, in addition to the fines imposed herein, all costs of collection, including filing and recording fees, reasonable attorneys fees, and any other costs incurred in connection with the levy or collection of all sums due.
(1995 Code, § 00-05-51-129) (Ord. 1994-4, passed 4-7-1994) (Ord. 2014-13, passed ______)
160
Cumberland - Public Works
§ 00-05-50-999 PENALTY.
(A) Any person, firm, or corporation, developer, contractor, or subcontractor violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction or true finding of violation, be fined not more than $1,000 for the first offense, not more than $2,500 for any second offense, and not more than $5,000 for the third and each offense subsequent thereto. The expiration of the time specified for abating the violation shall constitute a separate offense.
(B) In addition to any fines or penalties imposed, any person, firm, or corporation, developer, contractor, or subcontractor liable for or owning such fine or cost shall pay, in addition to the fines imposed herein, all costs of collection, including filing and recording fees, reasonable attorneys fees and any other costs incurred in connection with the levy or collection of all sums due.
(1995 Code, § 00-05-51-999) (Ord. 1988-8, passed 8-25-1988; Am, Ord. 1991-8, passed 10-2-1991; Am. Ord. 1994-5, passed 4-7-1994)
161
CHAPTER 51: STORM WATER MANAGEMENT
Section
General Provisions
00-05-51-001 Authority and title
00-05-51-002 Applicability and exemptions
00-05-51-003 Background
00-05-51-004 Findings
00-05-51-005 Purpose
00-05-51-006 Abbreviations
00-05-51-007 Definitions
00-05-51-008 Responsibility for administration
Prohibited Discharges and Connections
00-05-51-015 Applicability and exemptions
00-05-51-016 Prohibited discharges and connections
00-05-51-017 Exempted discharges and connections
00-05-51-018 Storage of hazardous or toxic material
00-05-51-019 Private property maintenance duties
00-05-51-020 Spill reporting
00-05-51-021 Inspections and monitoring
Stormwater Quantity Management
00-05-51-030 Applicability and exemptions
00-05-51-031 Policy on stormwater quantify management
00-05-51-032 Calculations and design standards and specifications
00-05-51-033 Drainage easement requirements
00-05-51-034 Placement of utilities
00-05-51-035 Structures near regulated drains
00-05-51-036 Inspection, maintenance, record keeping, and reporting
Stormwater Pollution Prevention for Construction Sites
00-05-51-045 Applicability and exemptions
00-05-51-046 Policy on stormwater pollution prevention
00-05-51-047 Calculations and design standards and specifications
00-05-51-048 Inspection, maintenance, record keeping, and reporting
Stormwater Quality Management for Post-Construction
00-05-51-060 Applicability and exemptions
00-05-51-061 Policy on stormwater quality management
00-05-51-062 Calculations and design standards and specifications
162
00-05-51-063 Easement requirements
00-05-51-064 Inspection, maintenance, record keeping, and reporting
Permit Requirements and Procedures
00-05-51-070 Conceptual drainage plan review
00-05-51-071 Permit procedures
00-05-51-072 Information requirements
00-05-51-073 Review of individual lots within a permitted project 00-05-51-074 Changes to plans
00-05-51-075 Fee structure
00-05-51-076 Required assurances
00-05-51-077 Terms and conditions of permits
00-05-51-078 Certification of as-built plans
Storm Water Utility Fee
00-05-51-090 Storm water utility fee
00-05-51-091 Storm Water fee Fund
Enforcement
00-05-51-100 Compliance with this chapter
00-05-51-101 Stop work order
00-05-51-102 Failure to comply or complete
00-05-51-103 Suspension of access to the storm drain system
00-05-51-104 Corrective action
00-05-51-105 Appeals
00-05-51-999 Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 00-05-51-001 AUTHORITY AND TITLE.
(A) This chapter is adopted in accordance with statutory authority granted under code authorizing jurisdiction over storm system, and further is required by Phase II of the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System program (FR Doc. 99-29181) authorized by the 1972 amendments to the Clean Water Act, the Indiana Department of Environmental Management’s Rule 5 (327 IAC 15-5). Based on this authority and these requirements, this chapter regulates:
(1) Discharges of prohibited non-stormwater flows into the storm drain system.
(2) Stormwater drainage improvements related to development of lands located within town.
(3) Drainage control systems installed during new construction and grading of lots and other parcels of land.
163
(4) Erosion and sediment control systems installed during new construction and grading of lots and other parcels of land.
(5) The design, construction, and maintenance of stormwater drainage facilities and systems.
(6) The design, construction, and maintenance of stormwater quality facilities and systems.
(B) This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the Town of Cumberland Stormwater Management Ordinance.
(Ord. 2004-12, passed 1-5-2005)
§ 00-05-51-002 APPLICABILITY AND EXEMPTIONS.
(A) This chapter shall regulate all development and redevelopment occurring within town. No building permit shall be issued and no land disturbance started for any construction in a development, as defined in § 00-05-51-007, until the plans required by this chapter for such construction have been accepted in writing by the Stormwater Board and/or the permitting officer. With the exception of the requirements of §§ 00-05-51-015 et seq. and §§ 00-05-51-073, single-family dwelling houses in accepted subdivisions, new buildings or cumulative building additions) with less than 500 square feet of area, and land-disturbing activities affecting less than 10,000 square feet of area shall be exempt from the requirements of this chapter. Also exempt from this chapter shall be the agricultural land-disturbing activities.
(B) Town of Cumberland Projects shall be exempt from obtaining permit, but are expected to meet all applicable technical requirements of this chapter and the Stormwater Technical Standards Manual.
(C) Any construction project which has had its final drainage plan accepted by the Stormwater Board and/or the permitting officer within a two-year period prior to the effective date of this chapter shall be exempt from all requirements of this chapter that are in excess of the requirements of ordinances in effect at the time of acceptance. Such an exemption is not applicable to the requirements detailed in §§ 00-05-51-015 et seq.
(D) The Stormwater Board and/or the permitting officer has the authority to modify, grant exemptions, and/or waive any and all the requirements of this chapter and its associated technical standards document. A pre-submittal meeting with the Stormwater Board and/or the permitting officer may be requested by the applicant to discuss the applicability of various provisions of the chapter and its associated technical standards document with regards to unique or unusual circumstances relating to a project. However, any initial determination of such applicability shall not be binding on future determinations of the Stormwater Board and/or the permitting officer that may be based on the review of more detailed information and plans.
(Ord. 2004-12, passed 1-5-2005)
§ 00-05-51-003 BACKGROUND.
On December 8, 1999, Phase II of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit program, was published in the Federal Register. The NPDES program, as
164
authorized by the 1972d amendments to the Clean Water Act, controls water pollution by regulating point sources that discharge pollutants into waters of the United States. Phase II of the NPDES requires permit coverage for stormwater discharges from regulated small municipal separate storm sewer systems (MS4s) and for small construction activity that results in the disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre. This federal regulation went into effect March 10, 2003. In response to Phase II of NPDES, the Indiana Department of Environmental Management enacted Rule 12 (327 IAC 15-13) and revised Rule 5 (327 IAC 15-5). Under these new state and federal regulations, the won is required to establish a regulatory mechanism for regulating stormwater quality management.
(Ord. 2004-12, passed 1-5-2005)
§ 00-05-51-004 FINDINGS.
The town Storm Water Board finds that:
(A) Water bodies, roadways, structures, and other property within and downstream of town are at times subjected to flooding.
(B) Flooding is a danger to the lives and property of the public and is also a danger to the natural resources of the region.
(C) Land development alters the hydrologic response of watersheds, resulting in increased stormwater runoff rates and volumes, increased flooding, increased stream channel erosion, and increased sediment transport and deposition.
(D) Soil erosion resulting from land-disturbing activities causes a significant amount of sediment and other pollutants to be transported off-site and deposited I ditches, streams, wetlands, lakes and reservoirs.
(E) Increased stormwater runoff rates and volumes, and the sediments and pollutants associated with stormwater runoff from future development projects within town will, absent reasonable regulation and control, adversely affect the town’s water bodies and water resources.
(F) Pollutant contributions from illicit discharges within the town will, absent reasonable regulation, monitoring, and enforcement, adversely affect the town’s water bodies and water resources.
(G) Stormwater runoff, soil erosion, non-point source pollution, and illicit sources of pollution can be controlled and minimized by the regulation of stormwater management.
(H) Adopting the standards, criteria, and procedures contained and referenced in this chapter and implementing the same will address many of the deleterious effects of stormwater runoff and illicit discharges.
(I) Adopting this chapter is necessary for the preservation of the public health, safety, and welfare, for the conservation of our natural resources, and for compliance with state and federal regulations.
(Ord. 2004-12, passed 1-5-2005)
165
§ 00-05-51-005 PURPOSE.
(A) The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of town through the regulation of stormwater and non-storwmater discharges to the storm drainage system and to protect, conserve and promote the orderly development of land and water resources within town. This chapter establishes methods for managing the quantity and quality of stormwater entering into the storm drain system in order to comply with state and federal requirements.
(B) The objective of this chapter are:
(1) To reduce the hazard to public health and safety caused by excessive stormwater runoff.
(2) To regular the contribution of pollutants to the storm drain system from construction site runoff.
(3) To regular the contribution of pollutants to the storm drain system from runoff from new development and re-development.
(4) To prohibit illicit discharges into the storm drain system.
(5) To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, monitoring, and enforcement procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter.
(Ord. 2004-12, passed 1-5-2005)
§ 00-05-51-006 ABBREVIATIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following abbreviations shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
BMP
Best Management Practice
COE
United States Army Corps of Engineers
CWA
Clean Water Act
EPA
Environmental Protection Agency
GIS
Geographical Information System
IDEM
Indiana Department of Environmental Management
MS4
Municipal Separate Storm Sewers
NRCS
USDA-Natural Resources Conservation Service
NPDES
National Pollution Discharge Elimination System
166
POTW
Publicly Owned Treatment Works
SWCD
Soil and Water Conservation District
SWPPP
Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan
USDA
United Stated Department of Agriculture
USFWD
United States Fish and Wildlife Service
(Ord. 2004-12, passed 1-5-2005)
§ 00-05-51-007 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
AGRICULTURAL LAND DISTURBING ACTIVITY. Tillage, planting, cultivation, or harvesting operations for the production of agricultural or nursery vegetative crops. The term also includes pasture renovation and establishment, the construction of agricultural conservation practices, and the installation and maintenance of agricultural drainage tile. For purposes of this rule, the term does not include land disturbing activities for the construction of agricultural related facilities, such as barns, buildings to house livestock, roads associated with infrastructure, agricultural waste lagoons and facilities, lake and ponds, wetlands; and other infrastructure.
BASE FLOW. Stream discharge derived from groundwater sources as differentiated from surface runoff. Sometimes considered to include flows from regulated lakes or reservoirs.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES. Design, construction, and maintenance practices and criteria for stormwater facilities that minimize the impact of stormwater runoff rates and volumes, prevent erosion, and capture pollutants.
BUFFER STRIP. An existing, variable width strip of vegetated land intended to protect water quality and habitat.
CAPACITY (OF A STORM DRAINAGE FACILITY). The maximum flow that can be conveyed or stored by a storm drainage facility without causing damage to public or private property.
CATCH BASIN. A chamber usually built at the curb line of a street for the admission of surface water to a storm drain or subdrain, having at its base a sediment sump designed to retain grit and detritus below the point of overflow.
CHANNEL. A portion of a natural or artificial watercourse which periodically or continuously contains moving water, or which forms a connecting link between two bodies of water. It has a defined bed and banks which serve to confine water.
COMPREHENSIVE STORMWATER MANAGEMENT. A comprehensive stormwater program for effective management of stormwater quantity and quality throughout the community.
167
CONSTRUCTED WETLAND. A manmade shallow pool that creates growing conditions suitable for wetland vegetation and is designed to maximize pollutant removal.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY. Land disturbing activities, and land disturbing activities associated with the construction of infrastructure and structures. This term does not include routine ditch or road maintenance or minor landscaping projects.
CONSTRUCTION SITE ACCESS. A stabilized stone surface at all points of ingress or egress to a project site, for the purpose of capturing and detaining sediment carried by tires of vehicles or other equipment entering o exiting the project site.
CONTIGUOUS. Adjoining or in actual contact with.
CONTOUR. An imaginary line on the surface of the earth connecting points of the same elevation.
CONTOUR LINE. Line on a map which represents a contour or points of equal elevation.
CONTRACTOR OR SUBCONTRACTOR. An individual or company hired by the project site or individual lot owner, their agent, or the individual lot operation to perform services on the project site.
CONVEYANCE. Any structural method for transferring stormwater between at least two points. The term includes piping, ditches, swales, curbs, gutters, catch basins, channels, storm drains, and roadways.
CROSS SECTION. A graph or plot of ground elevation across a stream valley or a portion of it, usually along a line perpendicular to the stream or direction of flow.
CULVERT. A closed conduit used for the conveyance of surface drainage water under a roadway, railroad, canal or other impediment.
DECHLORINATED SWIMMING POOL DISCHARGE. Chlorinated water that has either sat idle for seven days following chlorination prior to discharge to the MS4 conveyance, or, by analysis, does not contain detectable concentrations (less than five-hundredths (9.95) milligram per liter) of chlorinated residual.
DESIGN STORM. A selected storm event, described in terms of the probability of occurring once within a given number of years, for which drainage or flood control improvements are designed and built.
DETENTION. A facility constructed or modified to restrict the flow of storm water to a prescribed maximum rate, and to detain concurrently the excess waters that accumulate behind the outlet.
DETENTION STORAGE. The temporary detaining of storage of stormwater in storage facilities, on rooftops, in streets, parking lots, school yards, parks, open spaces or other areas under predetermined and controlled conditions, with the rate of release regulated by appropriately installed devices.
168
DETENTION TIME. The theoretical time required to displace the contents of a tank or unit at a given rate of discharge (volume divided by rate of discharge).
DETRITUS. Dead or decaying organic matter; generally contributed to stormwater as fallen leaves and sticks or as dead aquatic organisms.
DEVELOPER. Any person financially responsible for construction activity, or an owner of property who sells or leases, or offers for sale or lease, any lots in a subdivision.
DISCHARGE. Usually the rate of water flow. A volume of fluid passing a point per unit time commonly expressed as cubic feet per second, cubic meters per second, gallons per minute, or millions of gallons per day.
DISPOSAL. The discharge, deposit, injection, spilling, leaking, or placing of any solid waste or hazardous waste into or on any land or water so that the solid waste or hazardous waste, or any constituent of the waste, may enter the environment, be emitted into the air, or be discharged into any waters, including ground waters.
DRAINAGE AREA. The area draining into a stream at a given point. It may be of different sizes for surface runoff, subsurface flow and base flow, but generally the surface runoff area is considered as the drainage area.
DRY WELL. A type of infiltration practice that allows stormwater runoff to flow directly into the ground via a bored or otherwise excavated opening the ground surface.
DURATION. The time period of a rainfall event.
ENVIRONMENT. The sum total of all the external conditions that may act upon a living organism or community to influence its development or existence.
ERODIBILITY INDEX (EI). The soil erodibiity index (EI) provides a numerical expression of the potential for a soil to erode considering the physical and chemical properties of the soil and the climatic conditions where it is located. The higher the index, the greater the investment needed to maintain the sustainability of the soil resource base if intensively cropped. It is defined to be the maximum of (RxKxLS)/T (from the Universal Soil Loss Equation) and (Cxl)/T (from Wind Erosion Equation), where R is a measure of rainfall and runoff, K is a factor of the susceptibility of the soil to water erosion, LS is a measure of the combined effects of slope length and steepness, C is a climatic characterization of windspeed and surface solid moisture and I is a measure of the susceptibility of the soil to wind erosion. ERODIBILITY INDEX scores equal to or greater than 8 are considered highly erodible land.
EROSION. The wearing away of the land surface by water, wind, ice, gravity, or other geological agents. The following terms are used to describe different types of water erosion:
(1) Accelerated erosion. Erosion much more rapid than normal or geologic erosion, primarily as a result of the activities of man.
(2) Channel erosion. An erosion process whereby th3e volume and velocity of flow wears away the bed and/or banks of a well-defined channel.
169
(3) Gully erosion. An erosion process whereby runoff water accumulates in narrow channels and, over relatively short periods, removes the soil to considerable depths, ranging from one to two feet to as much as 75-100 feet.
(4) Rill erosion. An erosion process in which numerous small channels only several inches deep are formed; occurs mainly on recently disturbed and exposed soils (see RILL).
(5) Splash erosion. The spattering of small soil particles caused by the impact of raindrops on wet soils, the loosened and spattered particles may or may not be subsequently removed by surface runoff.
(6) Sheet erosion. The gradual removal of a fairly uniform layer of soil from the land surface by runoff water.
EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL. A practice, or a combination of practices, to minimize sedimentation by first reducing or eliminating erosion at the sourced and then as necessary, rapping sediment to prevent it from being discharged from or within a project site.
FILTER STRIP. Usually a long, relatively narrow area (usually, 20-75 feet wide) of undisturbed or planted vegetation used near disturbed or impervious surfaces to filter stormwater pollutants for the protection of watercourses; reservoirs, or adjacent properties.
FLOATABLE. Any solid waste that will float on the surface of the water.
FLOOD (or FLOOD WATERS). A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow, the unusual and rapid accumulation, or the runoff of surface waters from any source.
FLOODPLAIN. The channel proper and the areas adjoining the channel which have been or hereafter may be covered by the regulatory or 100-year flood. Any normally dry land area that is susceptible to being inundated by water fro any natural source. The floodplain includes both the floodway and the floodway fringe districts.
FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or stream and those portions of the floodplains adjoining the channel which are reasonably required to efficiently carry and discharge the peak flow of the regulatory flood of any river or stream.
FLOODWAY FRINGE. That portion of the flood plain lying outside the floodway, which is inundated by the regulatory flood.
FOOTING DRAIN. A drain pipe installed around the exterior of a basement wall foundation to relieve water pressure caused by high groundwater elevation.
GARBAGE. All putrescible animal solid, vegetable solid, and semisolid wastes resulting from the processing, handling, preparation, cooking, serving, or consumption of food or food materials.
GASOLINE OUTLET. An operating gasoline or diesel fueling facility whose primary function is the resale of fuels. The term applies to facilities that create 5,000 or more square feet of impervious surfaces, or generate an average daily traffic count of 100 vehicles per 1,000 square feet of land area.
170
GEOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION SYSTEM. A computer system capable of assembling, soring, manipulation, and displaying geographically referenced information. This technology can be used for resource management and development planning.
GRADE.
(1) The inclination or slope of a channel, canal, conduit, and the like, or natural ground surface usually expressed in terms of the percentage the vertical rise (or fall) bears to the corresponding horizontal distance.
(2) The finished surface of a canal bed, roadbed, top of embankment, or bottom of excavation; any surface prepared to design elevation for the support of construction, such as paving or the laying of a conduit.
(3) To finish the surface of a canal bed, roadbed, top of embankment, or bottom of excavation, or other land area to a smooth, even condition.
GRADING. The cutting and filling of the land surface to a desired slope or elevation.
GRASS. A member of the botanical family Graminae, characterized by blade-like leaves that originate as a sheath wrapped around the stem.
GROUNDWATER. Accumulation of underground water, natural or artificial. The term does not include manmade underground storage or conveyance structures.
HABITAT. The environment in which the life needs of a plant or animal are supplied.
HIGHLY ERODIBLE LAND (HEL). Land that has an erodibility index of eight or more.
HYDROLOGY. The science of the behavior of water in the atmosphere, on the surface of the earth, and underground. A typical hydroiogic study is undertaken to compute flow rates associated with specified flood events.
ILLICIT DISCHARGE. Any discharge to a conveyance that is not composed entirely of stormwater except naturally occurring floatables, such as leaves or tree limbs.
IMPAIRED WATERS. Waters that do not or are not expected to meet applicable water quality standards, as included on IDEM’s CWA Section 303(d) List of Impaired Waters.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE. Surfaces, such as pavement and rooftops, which prevent the infiltration of stormwater into the soil.
INDIVIDUAL BUILDING LOT. A single parcel of land within a multi-parcel development.
INDIVIDUAL LOT OPERATOR. A contractor or subcontractor working on an individual lot.
171
INDIVIDUAL LOT OWNER. A person who has financial control of construction activities for an individual lot.
INFILTRATION. Passage or movement of water into the soil. Infiltration practices include any structural BMP designed to facilitate the percolation of run-off through the soil to groundwater. Examples include infiltration basins or trenches, dry wells, and porous pavement.
INLET. An opening into a storm drain system for the entrance of surface storm water runoff, more completely described as a storm drain inlet.
LAND-DISTURBING ACTIVITY. Any man-made change of the land surface, including removing vegetative cover that exposes the underlying soil, excavating, filling, transporting and grading.
LAND PERMITTING OFFICER. A person licensed under the laws of the State of Indiana to practice land purveying.
LARGER COMMON PLAN OF DEVELOPMENT OR SALE. A plan, undertaken by a single project site owner or a group of project site owners acting in concert, to offer lots for sale or lease; where such land is contiguous, or is known, designated, purchased or advertised as a common unit or by a common name, such land shall be presumed as being offered for sale or lease as a part of a larger common plan. The term also includes phased or other construction activity by a single entity for its own use.
LOWEST ADJACENT GRADE. The elevation of the lowest grade adjacent to a structure, where the soil meets the foundation around the outside of the structure (including structural members such as basement walkout, patios, decks, porches, support posts or piers, and rim of the widow well.)
LOWEST FLOOR. Refers to the lowest of the following:
(1) The top of the basement floor.
(2) The top of the garage floor, if the garage is the lowest level of the building.
(3) The top of the first floor of buildings constructed on a slab or of buildings elevated on pilings or constructed on a crawl space with permanent openings; or
(4) The top of the floor level of any enclosure below an elevated building where the walls of the enclosure provide any resistance to the flow of flood waters unless:
(a) The walls are designed to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on the walls by allowing for the entry and exit of flood waters, by providing a minimum of two opening (in addition to doorways and windows) having a total area of one square foot for every two square feet of enclosed area subject to flooding. The bottom of all such openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade.
(b) Such enclosed space shall be usable only for the parking of vehicles or building access.
172
MANHOLE. Storm drain structure through which a person may enter to gain access to an underground storm drain or enclosed structure.
MEASURABLE STORM EVENT. A precipitation event that results in a total measured precipitation accumulation equal to, or greater than, one-half inch of rainfall.
MULCH. A natural or artificial layer of plant residue or other materials covering the land surface which conserves moisture, hold soil in place, aids in establishing plant cover, and minimizes temperature fluctuations.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWERS. An MS4 meets all the following criteria:
(1) Is a conveyance or system of conveyances owned by the state, county, city, town, or other public entity:
(2) Discharges to waters of the U.S.;
(3) Is designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater:
(4) Is not a combined sewer; and
(5) Is not part of a Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW).
NATIONAL POLLUTION DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM. A permit developed by the U.S. EPS through the Clean Water Act. In Indiana, the permitting process has been delegated to IDEM. This permit covers aspects of municipal stormwater quality.
NATURAL DRAINAGE. The flow patterns of stormwater run-off over the land in its pre-development state.
NUTRIENT(S).
(1) A substance necessary of the growth and reproduction of organisms.
(2) In water, those substances (chiefly nitrates and phosphates) that promote growth of algae and bacteria.
OPEN DRAIN. A natural watercourse or constructed open channel that conveys drainage water.
OPEN SPACE. Any land area devoid of any disturbed or impervious surfaces crated by industrial, commercial, residential, agricultural, o other manmade activities.
OUTFALL. The point, location, or structure where a pipe or open drain discharges to a receiving body of water.
OUTLET. The point of water disposal from a stream, river, lake, tidewater, or artificial drain.
173
PEAK DISCHARGE (OR PEAK FLOW). The maximum instantaneous flow from a given storm condition at a specific location.
PERCOLATION. The movement of water through soil.
PERMANENT STABILIZATION. The establishment, at a uniform density of 70% across the disturbed area, of vegetative cover or permanent non-erosive material that will ensure the resistance of the soil to erosion, sliding, or other movement.
PERMITTING OFFICER. The Town Manager, unless the Town Council formally designates another official or employee of the town to have the title, authority and responsibilities of this position.
PERVIOUS. Allowing movement of water.
POINT SOURCE. Any discernible, confined, and discrete conveyance including but not limited to any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, conduit, well, discrete fissures, or container from which pollutants are or may be discharged (P.L 92-500, Section 502[14]).
POROUS PAVEMENT. A type of infiltration practice to improve the quality and reduce the quantity of storm water run-off via the use of manmade, pervious pavement which allows run-off to percolate through the pavement and into underlying soils.
PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER. A person licensed under the laws of the State to practice professional engineering.
PROJECT SITE. The entire area on which construction activity is to be performed.
PROJECT SITE OWNER. The person required to submit a stormwater permit application, and required to comply with the terms of this chapter, including a developer or a person who has financial and operational control of construction activities, and project plans and specification, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications.
RAIN GARDEN. A vegetative practice used to alter impervious surfaces, such as roofs, into pervious surfaces for absorption and treatment of rainfall.
RECEIVING STREAM, RECEIVING CHANNEL, or RECEIVING WATER. The body of water into which runoff or effluent is discharged. The term does not include private drains, unnamed conveyances, retention and detention basins, or constructed wetlands used as treatment.
RECHARGE. Replenishment of groundwater reservoirs by infiltration and transmission from the outcrop of an aquifer or from permeable soils.
REDEVELOPMENT. Alterations of a property that change a site or building in such a way that there is disturbances of one acre or more of land. The term does not include such activities as exterior remodeling.
REFUELING AREA. An operating gasoline or diesel fueling area whose primary function is to provide fuel to equipment or vehicles.
174
REGULATORY FLOOD. The discharge or elevation associated with the 100-year flood as calculated by a method and procedure which is acceptable to and accepted by the Indiana Department of Natural Resources and the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The REGULATORY FLOOD is also known as the BASE FLOOD.
REGULARLY FLOODWAY. See FLOODWAY.
RELEASE RATE. The amount of storm water release from a storm water control facility per unit of time.
RESERVOIR. A natural or artificially created pond, lake or other space used for storage, regulation or control of water. May be either permanent or temporary. The term is also used in the hydrologic modeling of storage facilities.
RETENTION. The storage of stormwater to prevent it from leaving the development site. May be temporary or permanent.
RETENTION BASIN. A type of storage practice, that has no positive outlet, used to retain storm water run-off for an indefinite amount of time. Runoff from this type of basin is removed only by infiltration through a porous bottom or by evaporation.
RETURN PERIOD. The average interval of time within which a given rainfall event will be equaled or exceeded once. A flood having a return period of 100 years has a 1% probability of being equaled or exceeded in any one year.
RIPARIAN ZONE. Of, on, or pertaining to the banks of a stream, river, or pond.
RIPARIAN HABITAT. A land area adjacent to a waterbody that supports animal and plant life associated with that waterbody.
RUNOFF. That portion of precipitation that flows from a drainage area on the land surface, in open channels, or in stormwater conveyance systems.
RUNOFF COEFFICIENT. A decimal fraction relating the amount of rain which appears as runoff and reaches the storm drain system to the total amount of rain falling. A coefficient of 0.5 implies that 50% of the rain falling on a given surface appears as storm water runoff.
SEDIMENT. Solid material (both mineral and organic) that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water, gravity, or ice and has come to rest on the earth’s surface.
SEDIMENTATION. The process that deposits soils, debris and other unconsolidated materials either on the ground surfaces or in bodies of water or watercourses.
SENSITIVE WATER. A waterbody in need of priority protection or remediation based on its:
(1) Providing habitat for threatened or endangered species;
(2) Usage as a public water supply intake;
175
(3) Relevant community value;
(4) Usage for full body contact recreation;
(5) Exceptional use classification as found in 327 I.A.C. 2-1-22(b), outstanding state resource water classification as found in 327 I.A.C. 2-1-2(3) and 327 I.A.C. 2-1.5-19(b).
SITE. The entire area included in the legal description of the land on which land disturbing activity is to be performed.
SLOPE. Degree of deviation of a surface from the horizontal, measured as a numerical ratio or percent. Expressed as a ratio, the first number is commonly the horizontal distance (run) and the second is the vertical distance “(rise)—e.g., 2;1 However, the preferred method for designation of slopes is to clearly identify the horizontal (H) and vertical (V) components (length (L) and Width (W) components for horizontal angles). Also note that according to international standards (metric), the slope are presented as the vertical or width component shown on the numerator-e.g., 1V:2H. Slope expressions in this chapter follow the common presentation of slopes—e.g., 2:1 with the metric presentation shown in parenthesis—e.g., (1V:2H). Slopes can also be expressed in “percents”. Slopes given in percents are always expressed as (100*V/H) – e.g., a 2:1 (1V:2H) slope is a 50% slope.
SOIL. The unconsolidated mineral and organic material on the immediate surface of the earth that serves as a natural medium for the growth of land plants.
SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION DISTRICT. A public organization created under state law as a special-purpose district to develop and carry out a program of soil, water, and related resource conservation, use, and development within its boundaries. A subdivision of State government with a local governing body, established under I.C. 14-32.
SOLID WASTE. Any garbage, refuse, debris, or other discarded material.
SPILL. The unexpected, unintended, abnormal, or unapproved dumping, leakage, drainage, seepage, discharge, or other loss of petroleum, hazardous substances, extremely hazardous substances, or objectionable substances. The term does not include releases to impervious surfaces when the substance does not migrate off the surface or penetrate the surface and enter the soil.
STORM DURATION. The length of time that water may be stored in any stormwater control facility, computed from the time water first begins to be stored.
STORM EVENT. An estimate of the unexpected amount of precipitation within a given period of time. For example, a ten-year frequency, 24-hour duration storm event is a storm that has a 10% probability of occurring in any one year. Precipitation is measured over a 24-hour period.
STORM SEWER. A closed conduit for conveying collected storm water, while excluding sewage and industrial wastes. Also called a storm drain.
STORMWATER. Water resulting from rain, melting or melted snow, hail, or sleet.
176
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN. A plan developed to minimize the impact of storm water pollutants resulting from construction activities.
STORMWATER RUNOFF. The water derived from rains falling within a tributary basin, flowing over the surface of the ground or collected in channels or conduits.
STORMWATER QUALITY MANAGEMENT PLAN. A comprehensive written document that addresses stormwater runoff quality.
STORMWATER QUALITY MEASURE. A practice, or a combination of practices, to control or minimize pollutants associated with storm water runoff.
STORMWATER DRAINAGE SYSTEM. All means natural or man-made, used for conducting storm water to, through or from a drainage area to any of the following: conduits and appurtenant features, canals, channels, ditches, storage facilities, swales, streams, culverts, streets and pumping stations.
STRIP DEVELOPMENT. A multi-lot project where building lots front on an existing road.
SUBDIVISION. Any land that is divided or proposed to be divided into lots, whether contiguous or subject to zoning requirements, for the purpose of sale or lease as part of a large common plan of development or sale.
SUBSURFACE DRAIN. A pervious backfield trench, usually containing stone and perforated pipe, for intercepting groundwater or seepage.
SURFACE RUNOFF. Precipitation that flows onto the surfaces of roofs, streets, the ground, and the like, and is not absorbed or retained by that surface but collects and runs off.
SWALE. An elongated depression in the land surface that is at least seasonally wet, is usually heavily vegetated, and is normally without flowing water. Swales conduct stormwater into primary drainage channels and may provide some groundwater recharge.
TEMPORARY STABILIZATION. The covering of soil to ensure its resistance to erosion, sliding, or other movement. The term includes vegetative cover, anchored mulch or other non-erosive material applied at a uniform density of 70% across the disturbed area.
TILE DRAIN. Pipe made of perforated plastic, burned clay, concrete, or similar material, laid to a designed grade and depth, to collect and carry excess water from the soil.
TOPOGRAPHIC MAP. Graphical portrayal of the topographic features of a land area, showing both the horizontal distances between the features and their elevations above a given datum.
TOPOGRAPHY. The representation of a portion of the earth’s surface showing natural and man-made features of a give locality such as rivers, streams, ditches, lakes, roads, building and most importantly, variations in ground elevations for the terrain of the area.
TRAINED INDIVIDUAL. An individual who is trained and experienced in the principles of storm water quality, including erosion and sediment control as may be
177
demonstrated by state registration, professional certification, experience, or completion of courseware that enable the individual to make judgments regarding storm water control or treatment and monitoring.
URBAN DRAIN. A drain defined as URBAN DRAIN in Indiana Drainage Code.
URBANIZATION. The development, change or improvement of any parcel of land consisting of one or more lots for residential, commercial, industrial, institutional, recreational or public utility purposes.
VEGETATED SWALE. A type of vegetative practice used to filter stormwater runoff via a vegetated, shallow-channel conveyance.
WATER QUALITY. A term used to describe the chemical, physical, and biological characteristics of water, usually in respect to its suitability for a particular purpose.
WATER RESOURCES. The supply of groundwater and surface water in a given area.
WATERBODY. Any accumulation of water, surface, or underground, natural or artificial, excluding water features designed and designated as water pollution control facilities.
WATERCOURSE. Any river, stream, creek, brook, branch, natural or man-made drainageway in or into which stormwater runoff or floodwaters flow either continuously or intermittently.
WATERSHEDS. The region drained by or contributing water to a specific point that could be along a stream, lake or other stormwater facilities. WATERSHEDS are often broken down into subareas for the purposes of hydroiogic modeling.
WATERSHED AREA. All land and water within the confines of a drainage divide. See also WATERSHED.
WETLANDS. Areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions.
(Ord. 2004-12, passed 1-5-2005)
§ 00-05-51-008 RESPONSIBILITY FOR ADMINISTRATION.
The Stormwater Board and/or the permitting officer shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this chapter. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the authorized enforcement agency may be delegated in writing by Stormwater Board and/or the permitting officer to qualified persons or entities acting in the beneficial interest of or in the employ of Stormwater Board and/or the permitting officer.
(Ord. 2004-12, passed 1-5-2005)
178
PROHIBITED DISCHARGES AND CONNECTIONS
§ 00-05-51-015 APPLICABILITY AND EXEMPTIONS.
(A) This chapter shall apply to all discharges, including illegal dumping, entering the storm drain system under the control of the Stormwater Board and/or the permitting officer, regardless of whether the discharge originates from developed or undeveloped lands, and regardless of whether the discharge is generated from an active construction site or a stabilized site. These discharges include flows from direct connections to the storm drain system, illegal dumping, and contaminated runoff.
(B) Stormwater runoff from agricultural, timber harvesting, and mining activities is exempted from the requirements of this chapter unless determined to contain pollutants not associated with such activities or in excess of standard practices. Farm residences are not included in this exemption.
(C) Any non-stormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit, waiters, or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the Federal Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written acceptance has been granted for the subject discharge to the storm drain system, is also exempted from this chapter.
§ 00-05-51-016 PROHIBITED DISCHARGES AND CONNECTIONS.
(A) No person shall discharge to a MS4 conveyance, watercourse, or waterbody, directly or indirectly, any substance other than stormwater or an exempted discharge. Any person discharging stormwater shall effectively minimize pollutants from also being discharged with the stormwater, though the use of best management practices (BMPs).
(B) The Stormwater board and/or the permitting officer is authorized to require dischargers to implement pollution prevention measures, utilizing BMPs, necessary to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants into the town’s stormwater drainage system.
(Ord. 2004-12, passed 1-5-2005)
§ 00-05-51-017 EXEMPTED DISCHARGES AND CONNECTIONS
Notwithstanding other requirements in this chapter, the following categories of non-stormwater discharges or flows are exempted from the requirements of this chapter:
(A) Water line flushing:
(B) Landscape irrigation;
(C) Diverted streamflows:
179
(D) Rising ground waters;
(E) Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration;
(F) Uncontaminated pumped ground water;
(G) Discharges from potable water sources;
(H) Foundation drains:
(I) Air conditioning condensation;
(J) Irrigation water;
(K) Springs:
(L) Water from crawl space pumps;
(M) Footing drains;
(N) Lawn watering;
(O) Individual residential car washing;
(P) Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands;
(Q) Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges:
(R) Street wash water.
(S) Discharges from firefighting activities;
(T) Naturally introduced detritus (e.g. leaves and twigs);
(U) Dye-testing authorized by the Town Council.
(Ord. 2004-12, passed 1-5-2005)
§ 00-05-51-018 STORAGE OF HAZARDOUS OR TOXIC MATERIAL.
Strata or stockpiling of hazardous or toxic material within any watercourse, or in its associated floodway or floodplain, is strictly prohibited. Storage or stockpiling of hazardous or toxic material, including sewage treatment plant stockpiles, on active construction sites must include adequate protection and/or containment so as to prevent any such materials from entering any temporary or permanent stormwater conveyance or watercourse.
(Ord. 2004-12, passed 15-2005)
180
§ 00-05-51-019 PRIVATE PROPERTY MAINTENANCE DUTIES.
Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such person’s lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse located within their property boundaries, free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and or the obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical integrity of the watercourse.
(Ord. 200412, passed 1-5-2005)
§ 00-05-51-020 SPILL REPORTING.
(A) Any discharger who discharges into a waterbody any substance other than stormwater or an exempted discharge shall immediately inform the office of the Town Manager, and if that office is not open the Police Department concerning the discharge. A written report concerning the discharge shall be filed with the permitting officer’s office and IDEM, by the discharges, within five days. The written report shall specify:
(1) The composition of the discharged and the cause thereof;
(2) The date, time, and estimated volume of the discharge;
(3) All measures taken to clean up the accidental discharge and all measured proposed to be taken to prevent any recurrence:
(4) The name and telephone number of the person making the report, and the name and telephone number of a person who may be contacted for additional information on the matter.
(B) A properly reported accidental discharge shall be an affirmative defense to a civil infraction proceeding brought under this chapter against a discharger for such discharge. It shall not however, be a defense to a legal action brought to obtain an injunction, to obtain recovery of costs or to obtain other relief because of or arising out of the discharge. A discharge shall be considered properly reported only if the discharger complies with all the requirements of this section This requirement does not relive discharge from notifying other entities as required by state or federal regulations.
(Ord. 2004-12, passed 1-5-2005)
§ 00-05-51-021 INSPECTIONS AND MONITORING.
(A) Storm drainage system. The Stormwater Board and/or the permitting officer has the authority to periodically inspect the portion of the storm drainage system under the town’s control, in an effort to detect and eliminate illicit connections and discharges into the system. This inspection will include a screening of discharges from outfalls connected to the system in order to determine if prohibited flows are being conveyed into the storm drainage system. It could also include spot testing of waters contained in the storm drainage system itself to detect the introduction of pollutants into the system by means other than a defined outfall, such as dumping or contaminated sheet runoff.
181
(B) Potential polluters. If, as a result of the storm drainage system inspection, a discharger is suspected of an illicit discharge, the Stormwater Board and/or the permitting officer may inspect and/or obtain stormwater samples from stormwater runoff facilities of the subject discharger, to determine compliance with the requirements of this chapter. Upon request, the discharger shall allow the Stormwater Board and/or the permitting officer’s properly identified representative to enter upon the premises of the discharger at all hours necessary for the purposes of such inspection or sampling. The Stormwater Board and/or the permitting officer or its properly identified representative may place on the discharger’s property the equipment or devices used for such sampling or inspection. Identified illicit connections or discharges shall be subject to enforcement action as described in §§ 00-05-51-100 et seq.
(C) New development and re-development. Following the final completion of construction and the receipt of as-built drawings by the town permitting officer’s office, the Stormwater Board and/or the permitting officer has the authority to inspect new development and re-development sites to verify that all on-site stormwater conveyances and connections to the storm drainage system are in compliance with this chapter.
(Ord. 2004-12, passed 1-5-2005)
STORMWATER QUANTITY MANAGEMENT
§ 00-05-51-030 APPLICABILITY AND EXEMPTIONS.
The storage and controlled release rate of excess stormwater runoff shall be required for all new business, commercial and industrial developments, residential subdivisions, planned development, rural estate subdivisions, and any redevelopment or other new construction located within town. Additional exemptions regarding the detention requirements are provided under § 00-05-51-031(A)(5).
(Ord. 2004-12, passed 1-5-2005)
§ 00-05-51-031 POLICY ON STORMWATER QUANTITY MANAGEMENT.
(A) Detention policy. It is recognized that most streams and drainage channels serving town do not have sufficient capacity to receive and convey stormwater runoff resulting from continued urbanization. Accordingly, except for situations provided in divisions (A)(3) and (A)(4), the storage and controlled release of excess stormwater runoff shall be required for all developments and redevelopments (as defined in § 00-05-51-007) located within town.
(1) General release rates. In general, the post-development release rates for developments up to and including the ten-year return period storm may not exceed 0.1 cfs per acre of development. The post-development release rate for developments for the 11 through 100-year return period storms shall not exceed 0.3 cfs per acre of development. For sites where the pre-develo0ped area has more than one outlet, the release rate should be computed based on pre-developed discharge to edh outlet point. The computed release rate for each outlet point shall not be exceeded at the respective outlet point even if the post developed conditions would involves a different arrangement of outlet points.
182
(2) Site-specific release rates for sites with depressional storage.
(a) For sites where depressional storage exists, the general release rates provided above may have to be further reduced. If depressional storage exists at the site, site-specific release rates must be calculated according to methodology described in the Stormwater Technical Standards Manual, accounting for the depressional storage by modeling it as a pond whose outlet is a weir at an elevation that stormwater can currently overflow the depressional storage area. Post developed release rate for sites with depressional storage shall be the two-year pre-developed peak runoff rate for the post-developed ten-year storm and ten-year pre-developed peak runoff rate for the post-developed 100-yar storm. In no case shall the calculated site-specific release rates be larger than general release rates provided above.
(b) Also note that for determining the post-developed peak runoff rate, the depressional storage must be assumed to be filled unless the Stormwater Board and/or the permitting officer can be assured, through dedicated easement, that the noted storage will be preserved in perpetuity.
(3) Management of off-site runoff.
(a) Runoff from all upstream tributary areas (off-site land areas) may be bypassed around the detention/retention facility without attenuation. Such runoff may also be bypassed through the detention/retention facility without attenuation, provided that a separate outlet system or channel is incorporated for the safe passage of such flows, i.e., not through the primary outlet of a detention facility. Unless the pond is being designed as a regional detention facility, the primary outlet structure shall be sized and the invert elevation of the emergency overflow weir determined according to the on-site runoff only. Once the size and location of primary outlet structure and the invert elevation of the emergency overflow weir are determined by considering o-site runoff, the 100-year pond elevation is determined by routing the entire inflow, on-site and off-site, through the pond.
(b) Note that the efficiency of the detention/retention facility I controlling the on-site runoff may be severely affected if the off-site area is considerably larger than the on-site area. As a general guidance, on-line detention may not be effective in controlling on-site runoff where the ration of off-site area to on-site area is larger than 5:1. Additional detention (above and beyond that required for on-site area) may be required by the Stormwater Board and/or the permitting officer when the ratio of off-site area to on-site area is larger than 5:1.
(4) Downstream restrictions.
(a) In the event the downstream receiving channel or storm sewer system is inadequate to accommodate the post-developed release rate provided above, then the allowable release rate shall be reduced to that rate permitted by the capacity of the receiving downstream channel or storm sewer system. Additional detention, as determined by the Stormwater Board and/or the permitting officer, shall be required to store that portion of the runoff exceeding the capacity of the receiving sewers or watercourses. When such downstream restrictions are suspected, the Stormwater Board and/or the permitting officer may require additional analysis to determine the receiving system’s limiting downstream capacity.
(b) If the proposed development makes up only a portion of the undeveloped watershed upstream of the limiting restriction, the allowable release rate for the development
183
shall be in direct proportion to the ratio of its drainage area to the drainage area of the entire watershed upstream of the restriction.
(5) Exemptions for detention requirements. Detention will not be required for the following:
(a) Notwithstanding the requirements for an individual lot plot plan permit in this chapter, land alterations where the primary basis on which a stormwater drainage permit is required is the construction, enlargement, or location (on a permanent foundation) of a one-family dwelling, two-family dwelling, or accessory structure appurtenant to either a one- or two-family dwelling.
(b) Accepted fill area or one-time addition to existing commercial buildings that do not increase the amount of impervious area on-site by more than a total of 0.5 acres, provided the existing runoff patterns and flow capacity within the property will not be altered by the filling operations.
(c) Notwithstanding the provisions of division (4), those site developments where the stormwater management system has been designed such that:
1. After combining flows from both the off-sties and on-site drainage areas, there will be no increase in the total peak discharge from the developing site during the two-, ten-, and 100-year storm events; and
2. The volume of runoff for each project site outlet has not been increased for the two-, ten- and 100-year storm events; and
3. The flow width and velocity at the property boundary line of each sub-basin is less than or equal to that flow width and velocity which existed prior to the development for the two-, ten-, and 100-year storm events.
(B) Grading and building pad elevations.
(1) Maximum yard slopes are 3:1 where soil has been disturbed during construction processes. Finished floor elevation must be no less than 15 inches above finished grade and a minimum of 15 inches above an adjacent road elevation unless a written variance is granted by the Stormwater Board and/or the permitting officer.
(2) For all structures located in the special flood hazards area (SFHA) as shown on the FEMA maps, the lowest floor elevations of all residential, commercial, or industrial buildings, shall be such that Lowest Floor elevation, including basement, shall be at the flood protection grade and therefore have two feet of freeboard above the 100-year flood elevation.
(3) The Lowest Adjacent Grade for residential, commercial, or industrial buildings outside a FEMA or IDNR designated floodplain shall have two feet of freeboard above the flooding source’s 100-yer flood elevation under proposed conditions, unless the flooding source is a rear-yard swale. When the flooding is a rear—yard swale, the lowest adjacent grade for residential, commercial, or industrial buildings shall have wo feet of freeboard above the 100-year flood elevation under proposed conditions or be separated by a minimum distance of 50 feet from the proposed-condition 100-year flood boundary.
184
(4) For areas outside a FEMA or IDNR designated floodplain, the lowest adjacent grade (including walkout basement floor elevation) for all residential, commercial, or industrial buildings adjacent to ponds shall be set a minimum of two feet above the 100-year pond elevation or two feet above the emergency overflow weir elevation, whichever is higher. In addition to the lowest adjacent grade requirements, any basement floor must be at least a foot above the permanent water level (normal pool elevation).
(5) The 100-year flow paths throughout the development, whether shown on FEMA maps or not, must be shown as hatched area on the plans and 30 feet along the centerline of the flow path contained within permanent drainage easements. No fences or landscaping can be constructed within the easement areas that may impede the free flow of stormwater. These areas are to be maintained by the property owners or be designated as common areas that are to be maintained by the homeowners association. The lowest adjacent grade for all residential, commercial, or industrials buildings shall be set a minimum of one foot above the noted overflow path/ponding elevation.
(6) It shall be the property owners’ responsibility to maintain the natural features on their lots and to take preventive measures against any and all erosion and/or deterioration of natural or manmade features on their lots.
(C) Acceptable outlet and adjoining property impacts policies.
(1) Design and construction of the stormwater facility shall provide for the discharge of the stormwater runoff from off-site land areas as well as the stormwater from the area being developed (on-site land areas) to be acceptable outlet(s) (as determined by the Stormwater Board and/or the permitting officer) having capacity to receive upstream (off-site) and on-site drainage. The flow path from the development outfall(s) to a regulated drain or natural watercourse (as determined by the Stormwater Board and/or the permitting office) shall be provided on an exhibit that includes topographic information. Any existing field tile encountered during the construction shall also be incorporated into the proposed stormwater drainage system or tied to an acceptable outlet.
(2) Where the outfall from the stormwater drainage system of any development flows through real estate owned by others prior to reaching a regulated drain or watercourse, no acceptance shall be granted for such drainage system until all owners of real estate crossed by the outfall consent in writing to the use of their real estate through a recorded easement. In addition, no activities conducted as part of the development shall be allowed to obstruct the free flow of flood waters from an upstream property. If an adequate outlet is not located on site, then off-site drainage improvements may be required. Those improvements may include, but are not limited to, extending storm sewers, clearing, dredging and/or removal of obstructions to open drains or natural water courses, and the removal or replacement of undersized culver pipes as required by the Stormwater Board and/or the permitting officer.
(D) No net loss floodplain storage policy.
(1) Floodplains exist adjacent to all natural and man-made streams, regardless of contributing drainage area or whether they have been previously identified or mapped. Due to potential impacts of floodplain loss of peak flows in streams and on the environment, disturbance to floodplains should be avoided. When the avoidance of floodplain disturbance is not practical, the natural functions of floodplain should be preserved to the extent possible.
185
(2) In an attempt to strike a balance between the legitimate need for economic development within town and the need to preserve the natural functions of floodplains to the extent possible, compensatory excavation equivalent to the floodplain storage lost shall be required for all activities within floodplain of streams located in town where drainage area of the stream is equal or larger than one square mile. This requirement shall be considered to be above and beyond the minimum requirements provided I the applicable flood hazard areas ordinance currently in effect in town. The Stormwater Board and/or the permitting officer may alter the compensation ratio, based on extenuating circumstances, for a specific project.
(3) Note that by definition, compensatory storage is the replacement of the existing floodplain and, in rare exceptions, the floodway storage lost due to fill. Compensatory storage is required when a portion of the floodplain is filled, occupied by a structure or when as a result of a project a change in the channel hydraulics occurs that reduces the existing available floodplain storage. The compensatory storage should be located adjacent or opposite the placement of the fill and maintain an unimpeded connection to an adjoining floodplain area.
(4) Computations must show no net loss of floodplain storage for two-year, ten-year, 50-year, and 100-year storm events. That is, the post-development two-year floodplain storage along a stream shall be the same as two-year pre-development floodplain storage along the stream within the property limits, the post-development ten-year floodplain storage along a stream shall be the same as ten-year pre-development floodplain storage along the stream within the property limits, and so on.
(5) Calculations for floodplain volume shall be submitted I tabular form showing calculations by cross-section. The volume of floodplain storage under the without-project conditions and the with-project conditions should be determined using the average-end-area method with plotted cross-sections at a horizontal to vertical ratio of between 5:1 and 10:1, with two though 100-year flood elevations noted on each cross section. The scale chosen should be large enough to show the intent of proposed grading. Cross-sections should reflect both the existing and proposed conditions on the same plot. The location and extent of the compensatory storage area as well as the location and orientation of cross-sections should be shown on the grading plan.
(Ord. 2004-12, passed 1-5-2005)
§ 00-05-51-032 CALCULATIONS AND DESIGN STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS.
The calculation methods as well as the type, sizing, and placement of all stormwater facilities shall meet the design criteria, standards, and specifications outlined in the Stormwater Technical Standards Manual. The methods and procedures in the Stormwater Technical Standards Manual are consistent with the policy stated above.
(Ord. 2004-12, passed 1-5-2005)
§ 00-05-51-033 DRAINAGE EASEMENT REQUIREMENTS.
(A) There shall be no trees or shrubs planted, nor any structures or fences erected in any drainage easement, unless otherwise accepted by the Stormwater Board and/or permitting officer.
186
(B) All stormwater systems, including detention or retention basins, conveyance systems, structures and appurtenance, located outside of the right-of-way may be incorporated into the town’s system at the discretion of the town Stormwater Board and/or the permitting officer. The developer shall petition to incorporate the storm system into the town’s system. The stormwater management permit shall not be approved until such petition is submitted in a form accepted by the Stormwater Board and/or the permitting officer.
(1) The following specific areas shall be included in a petition:
(a) All new channels, drain tiles equal to or greater than eight inches in diameter, inlet and outlet structures of detention and retention ponds, and appurtenances thereto as required by this chapter, that are installed in subdivisions requiring a stormwater management permit from the town shall be petitioned to become incorporated into the town’s system upon completion, proper inspection, and acceptance by the Stormwater Board and/or the permitting officer. New drain tiles refer to all sub-surface stormwater piping, tubing, tiles, manholes, inlets, catch basins, risers, and the like.
(b) New drain tile, eight inches to 24 inches in diameter, shall be placed in a minimum 20-foot easement (ten feet from centerline on each side) and shall be designated on the record plat as 20-foot drain easement Pipes that are 24 inches or larger in diameter shall be placed in a 30-foot easement (15 feet from centerline on each side) and shall be designated on the record plat as 30-foot regulated drain easement. Wider easements may be required by Stormwater Board and/or the permitting officer when the depth of pipe is greater than six to ten feet, depending on the pipe size.
(c) A minimum of 25 feet from top of the bank on each side of a new channel shall be designated on the record plat as a drain easement.
(d) Rear-yard swales and emergency overflow paths associated with detention ponds shall not be included in petition for incorporation. However, a minimum of 30 feet width (15 feet from centerline on each side) needs to be designated as drainage easement.
(e) A minimum of 30 feet beyond the actual footprint (top of the bank) of stormwater detention facilities shall be designated as drainage easement. A minimum 30-foot width easement shall also be required as access easement, unless the pond is immediately next to a public right-of-way.
(f) An annual maintenance assessment shall be set up on each new drain established in a new subdivision. The amount of the assessment will be determined by the Stormwater Board and/or the permitting officer and so certified.
(g) Where the Stormwater Board and/or the permitting officer is responsible for maintenance of the drainage system, drainage easements of 75 feet from the top of bank on each side of the channel or each side of the tile centerline must be dedicated to town. In addition, a minimum of 25-foot-width of vegetative filter strip must be provided and maintained along top-of-bank, on each side, by the applicant within these easements.
(2) Municipalities and schools. All new channels, swales, drain tiles, inlet and outlet structures of detention and retention ponds, an appurtenance thereto as required by this chapter, that are installed on the municipal or school property will be maintained, repaired, and constructed by the entity and will not become town drains. The design must meet the standards
187
of the town Stormwater Management Ordinance for sizing and installation. Any off-side portion of the drainage system must be within easements and have clearly defined maintenance agreements.
(Od. 2004-12, passed 1-5-2005)
§ 00-05-51-034 PLACEMENT OF UTILITIES.
No utility company may disturb existing storm drainage facilities without the consent of the Stormwater Board and/or the permitting officer, whose decision may be appealed to the Town Council. All existing drainage facilities shall have senior rights and damage to said facilities shall result in penalties as prescribed in § 00-05-51-999.
(Org. 2004-12, passed 1-5-2005)
§ 00-05-51-035 STRUCTURES NEAR REGULATED DRAINS.
For regulated drains not located in platted subdivisions, unless otherwise accepted by the Stormwater Board and/or the permitting officer, no permanent structures (including fences) shall be erected within 75 feet measured at right angles from:
(A) The existing top edge of each bank of a regulated open drain, as determined by the Stormwater Board and/or the permitting officer; or
(B) The center line of a tiled regulated drain.
(Ord. 2004-12, passed 1-5-2005)
§ 00-05-51-036 INSPECTION, MAINTENANCE, RECORD KEEPING, AND REPORTING.
(A) After the approval of the stormwater management permit by the town Stormwater Board and the commencement of construction activities, the Stormwater Board and/or the permitting officer has the authority to conduct inspections of the work being done to insure full compliance with the provisions of this chapter, the Stormwater Technical Standards Manual, and the terms and conditions of the approved permit.
(B) Following construction completion, operation, maintenance, and inspection of stormwater quantity facilities shall be the long-term responsibility of the owner of the stormwater quantity facilities. The Stormwater Board and/or the permitting officer also has the authority to perform or require inspections of all public or privately owned stormwater quantity facilities. The owner of stormwater quantity facilities shall be responsible for inspections that evaluate physical conditions, available storage capacity, and the operational condition of key facility elements. Stormwater quantity facilities shall be maintained in good condition, in accordance with the terms and conditions of the approved stormwater management permit, and shall not be subsequently altered, revised or replaced except in accordance with the approved stormwater permit, or in accordance with approved amendments or revisions to the permit. If deficiencies are found during the inspection, the owner of the facility will be notified by Stormwater Board and/or the permitting officer and will be required to take all necessary measures to correct such deficiencies. If the owner fails to correct the deficiencies within the allowed time period, as specified in the notification letter, the Stormwater Board and/or the
188
permitting officer will undertake the work and collect from the owner using lien rights if necessary.
(C) Assignment of responsibility for maintaining facilities serving more than one lot or holding shall be documented by appropriate covenants to property deeds, unless responsibility is formally accepted by a public body, and determined before the final stormwater permit is approved. Stormwater detention/retention basins may be donated to the town or other unit of government designated by the Stormwater Board and/or the permitting officer, for ownership and permanent maintenance providing the Stormwater Board and/or the permitting officer or other governmental unit is willing to accept responsibility.
(Ord. 2004-12, passed 1-5-2005)
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION FOR CONSTRUCTION SITES
§ 00-05-51-04 APPLICABILITY AND EXEMPTIONS.
(A) The Stormwater Board and/or the permitting officer will require a Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP), which includes erosion and sediment control measures and materials handling procedures, to be submitted as part of the construction plans and specifications. Any project located within town that includes clearing, grading, excavation, and other land disturbing activities, resulting in the disturbance of one acre or more of total land area, is subject to the requirements of this chapter. This includes both new development and re-development. This chapter also applies to disturbances of less than one acre of land that are part of a larger common plan of development or sale if the larger common plan will ultimately disturb one or more acres of land, within the MS4 area. Section 00-05-51-047 provides guidelines for calculating land disturbance. Projects meeting the coverage requirements of 327 I.A.C 15-5 (Rule 5) shall also be in compliance with 327 I.A.C. 15-5.
(B) The requirements under this chapter do not apply to the following activities:
(1) Agricultural land disturbing activities; or
(2) Forest harvesting activities.
(C) The requirements under this chapter do not apply to the following activities, provided other applicable state permits contain provisions requiring immediate implementation of soil erosion control measures:
(1) Landfills that have been issued a certification of closure under 329 I.A.C. 10.
(2) Coal mining activities permitted under I.C. 14-34.
(3) Municipal solid waste landfills that are accepting waste pursuant to a permit issued by the Indiana Department of Environmental Management under 329 I.A.C. 10 that contains equivalent stormwater requirements, including the expansion of landfill boundaries and construction of new cells either within or outside the original solid waste permit boundary.
(D) For an individual lot where land disturbance is expected to be one acre or more, the individual lot owner must complete their own notice of intent letter, apply for a stormwater permit from the Stormwater Board, and ensure that a sufficient construction and stormwater
189
pollution prevention plan is completed and submitted in accordance with §§ 00-05-51-070 et seq.; regardless of whether the individual lot is part of a larger permitted project site.
(E) An individual lot with land disturbance less than one acre, located within a larger permitted project site, is considered part of the larger permitted project site, and the individual lot operator must comply with the terms and condition of the stormwater permit approved for the larger project site. The stormwater permit application for the larger project site must include detailed erosion and sediment control measures for individual lots. In addition these individual lots are required to submit Individual lot plot plan permit applications prior to receiving a building permit. Details of the permitting process are contained in §§ 00-05-51-070 et seq.
(F) It will be the responsibility of the project site owner to complete a stormwater permit application and ensure that a sufficient construction plan is completed and submitted to Stormwater Board and/or the permitting officer in accordance with §§ 00-05-51-070 et seq. It will be the responsibility of the project site owner to ensure compliance with this chapter during the construction activity and implementation of the construction plan, and to notify the Stormwater Board and/or the permitting officer with a sufficient notice of termination letter upon completion of the project and stabilization of the site. However, all persons engaging in construction and land disturbing activities on a permitted project site meeting the applicability requirements must comply with the requirements of this chapter and this chapter.
(Ord. 2004-12, passed 1-5-2005)
§ 00-05-51-046 POLICY ON STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION.
(A) Effective stormwater pollution prevention on construction sites is dependent on a combination of preventing movement of soil from its original position (erosion control), intercepting displaced soil prior to entering a waterbody (sediment control), and proper on-site materials handling.
(B) The developer must submit to the Stormwater Board and/or the permitting officer, a SWPPP with detailed erosion and sediment control plans as well as a narrative describing materials handling and storage, and construction sequencing.
(C) The following principles apply to all land-disturbing activities and should be considered in the preparation of a Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan within town.
(1) Minimize the potential for soil erosion by designing a development that fits the topography and soils of the site. Deep cuts and fills in areas with steep slopes should e avoided wherever possible, and natural contours should be followed as closely as possible.
(2) Existing natural vegetation should be retained and protected wherever possible. Areas immediately adjacent (within 35 feet of top of bank) to watercourses and lakes also should be left undisturbed wherever possible. Unvegetated or vegetated areas with less than 70% cover that are scheduled or likely to be left inactive for 15 days or more must be temporarily or permanently stabilized with measures appropriate for the season to reduce erosion potential. Alternative measures to site stabilization may be acceptable if the project site owner or their representative can demonstrate they have implemented and maintained erosion and sediment control measures adequate to prevent sediment discharge from the inactive area.
190
(3) All activities on a site should be conducted in a logical sequence so that the smallest practical area of land will be exposed for the shortest practical period of time during development.
(4) The length and steepness of designed slopes should be minimized to reduce erosion potential. Drainage channels and swales must be designed and adequately protected so that their final gradients and resultant velocities will not cause erosion in the receiving channel or at the outlet. Methods for determining acceptable velocities are included Stormwater Technical Standards Manual.
(5) Sediment-laden water which otherwise would flow from the project site shall be treated by erosion and sediment control measures appropriate to minimize sedimentation. A stable construction site access shall be provided at all points of construction traffic ingress and egress to the project site.
(6) Appropriate measures shall be implemented to prevent wastes or unused building materials, including, garbage, debris, packaging material, fuels and petroleum products, hazardous materials or wastes, cleaning wastes, wastewater, concrete truck washout, and other substances from being carried from a project site by runoff or wind. Identification of areas where concrete truck washout is permissible must be clearly posted at appropriate areas of the site. Wastes and unused building materials shall be managed and disposed of in accordance with all applicable State statutes and regulations. Proper storage and handling of materials such as fuels or hazardous wastes, and spill prevention and cleanup measures shall be implemented to minimize the potential for pollutants to contaminate surface or ground water or degrade soil quality.
(7) Public or private roadways shall be kept cleared of accumulated sediment that is a result of runoff or tracking. Bulk cleaning of accumulated sediment shall not include flushing the area with water. Cleared sediment shall be redistributed or disposed of in a manner that is in accordance with all applicable statues and regulations.
(8) Collected runoff leaving a project site must be either discharged directly into a well-defined, stable receiving channel, or diffused and released to adjacent property without causing an erosion or pollutant problem to the adjacent property owner.
(9) Natural features, including wetlands, shall be protected from pollutants associated with stormwater runoff.
(Ord. 2004-12, passed 1-5-2005)
§ 00-05-51-047 CALCULATIONS AND DESIGN STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS.
(A) In calculating the total area of land disturbance, for the purposes of determining applicability of this chapter to the project, the following guidelines should be used:
(1) Off-site construction activities that provide services (for example, road extensions, sewer, water, and other utilities) to a land disturbing project site, must be considered as a part of the total land disturbance calculation for the project site, when the activity is under the control of the project site owner.
191
(2) Strip developments will be considered as one project site and must comply with this chapter unless the total combined disturbance on all individual lots is less than one acre and is not part of a larger common plan of development or sale.
(3) To determine if multi-lot project sites are regulated by this rule, the area of land disturbance shall be calculated by adding the total area of land disturbance for improvements, such as roads, utilities, or common areas, and the expected total disturbance on each individual lot, as determined by the following:
(a) For a single-family residential project site where the lots are on-half acre or more, one-half acre of land disturbance must be used as the expected lot disturbance.
(b) For a single-family residential project site where the lots are less than one-half acre in size, the total lot must be calculated as being disturbed.
(c) To calculate lot disturbance on all other types of project sites, such as industrial and commercial projects project sites, a minimum of one acre of land disturbance must be used as the expected lot disturbance, unless the lots are less than one acre in size, in which case the total lot must be calculated as being disturbed.
(B) The calculation methods as well as the type, sizing, and placement of all stormwater pollution prevention measures for construction sites shall meet the design criteria, standards, and specifications outlined in the “Indiana Stormwater Quality Manual or the Town of Cumberland Stormwater Technical Standards Manual. The methods and procedures included in these two references are in keeping with the above stated policy and meet the requirements if IDEM’s Rule 5.
(Ord. 2004-12, passed 1-5-2005)
§ 00-05-51-048 INSPECTION, MAINTENANCE, RECORD KEEPING, AND REPORTING.
(A) Following approval of the stormwater management permit by the Stormwater Board and commencement of construction activities, the Stormwater Board and/or the permitting officer has the authority to conduct inspections of the site to ensure full compliance with the provisions of this chapter, the Indiana Stormwater Quality Manual, and the terms and conditions of the approved permit.
(B) A self-monitoring program must be implemented by the project site owner to ensure the stormwater pollution prevention plan is working effectively. A trained individual, acceptable to Stormwater Board and/or the permitting officer, shall perform a written evaluation of the project site by the end of the next business day following each measurable storm event. If there are no measurable storm events within a given week, the site should be monitored at least once in that week. Weekly inspections, and evaluations following measurable storm events, by the trained individual shall continue until the entire site has been stabilized and a notice of termination of new facility monitoring has been issued. The trained individual should look at the maintenance of existing stormwater pollution prevention measures, including erosion and sediment control measures, drainage structures, and construction materials storage/containment facilities, to ensure they are functioning properly. The trained individual should also identify additional measure, beyond those originally identified in the stormwater
192
pollution prevention plan, necessary to remain in compliance with all applicable statutes and regulations.
(C) The resulting evaluation reports must include the name of the individual performing the evaluation, the date of the evaluation, problems identified at the project site, and details of maintenance, additional measures, and corrective actions recommended and completed.
(D) The stormwater pollution prevention plan shall serve as a guideline for stormwater quality, but should not be interpreted to be the only basis for implementation of stormwater quality measures for a project site. The project site owner is responsible for implementing, in accordance with this chapter, all measures necessary to adequately prevent polluted stormwater runoff. Recommendations by the trained individual for additional stormwater quality measures should be implemented, unless a written report explaining why the measure are not feasible is prepared and attached to the trained individual’s recommendation report.
(E) Although self-monitoring reports do not need to be submitted to Stormwater Board and/or the permitting officer, the Stormwater Board and/or the permitting officer has the right to request complete records of maintenance and monitoring activities involving stormwater pollution prevention measures. All evaluation reports for the project site must be made available to Stormwater Board and/or the permitting officer, in an organized fashion, within 48 hours upon request.
(Ord. 2004-12, passed 1-5-1005)
STORMWATER QUALITY MANAGEMENT FOR POST-CONSTRUCTION
§ 00-05-51-060 APPLICABILITY AND EXEMPTIONS.
(A) In addition to the requirements of §§ 00-05-51-048 et seq. the stormwater pollution prevention plan, which is to be submitted to the Stormwater Board and/or the permitting officer as part of the stormwater management permit application, must also include post-construction stormwater quality measures. These measures are incorporated as a permanent feature into the site plan and are left in place following completion of construction activities to continuously treat stormwater runoff from the stabilized site. Any project located within town that includes clearing, grading, excavation, and other land disturbing activities, resulting in the disturbance of one acre or more of total land area, is subject to the requirements of this chapter. This includes both new development and re-development, and disturbances of less than one acre of land that are part of a larger common plan of development or sale if the larger common plan will ultimately disturb one or more acres of land, within the MS4 area.
(B) The requirements under this chapter do not apply to the following activities:
(1) Agricultural land disturbing activities;
(2) Forest harvesting activities;
(3) Construction activities associated with a single family residential dwelling disturbing less than five acres, when the dwelling is not part of a larger common plan of development or sale;
193
(4) Single family residential developments consisting of four or less lots;
(5) A single-family residential strip development where the developer offers for sale or lease without land improvements and the project is not part of a larger common plan of development of sale; or
(6) Individual building lots within a larger permitted project.
(C) The requirements under this chapter do not apply to the following activities, provided other applicable state permits contain provisions requiring immediate implementation of soil erosion control measures:
(1) Landfills that have been issued a certification of closure under 329 IAC 10.
(2) Coal mining activities permitted under I.C 14-34.
(3) Municipal solid waste landfills that are accepting waste pursuant to a permit issued by the Indiana Department of Environmental Management under 329 IAC 10 that contains equivalent stormwater requirements, including the expansion of landfill boundaries and construction of new cells either within or outside the original solid waste permit boundary.
(D) It will be the responsibility of the project site owner to complete a stormwater permit application and ensure that a sufficient construction plan is completed and submitted to the Stormwater Board and/or the permitting officer in accordance with §§ 00-05-51-070 et seq. It will be the responsibility of the project site owner to ensure proper construction and installation of all stormwater BMPs in compliance with this chapter and with the approved stormwater management permit, and to notify the Stormwater Board and/or the permitting officer with a sufficient notice of termination letter upon completion of the project and stabilization of the site. However, all eventual property owners of stormwater quality facilities meeting the applicability requirements must comply with the requirements of this chapter and this chapter.
(Ord. 2004-12, passed 1-5-2005)
§ 00-05-51-061 POLICY ON STORMWATER QUALITY MANAGEMENT
(A) It is recognized that developed areas, as compared to undeveloped areas, generally have increased imperviousness, decreased infiltration rates, increased runoff rates, and increased concentrations of pollutants such as fertilizers, herbicides, greases, oil, salts and other pollutants. As new development and re-development continues in town, measures must be taken to intercept and filter pollutants from stormwater runoff prior to reaching regional creeks, streams, and rivers. Through the use of Best Management Practices (BMP) stormwater runoff will be filtered and harmful amounts of sediment, nutrients, and contaminants will be removed. The town has adopted a policy that the control of Stormwater quality will be based on the management of Total Suspended Solids (TSS).
(B) The project site owner must submit to the Stormwater Board and/or the permitting officer, a Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) that would show placement of appropriate BMP(s) from a pre-approved list of BMPs specified in the Stormwater Technical Standards Manual. The noted BMPs must be designed, constructed, and maintained according to guidelines provided or referenced in the Stormwater Technical Standards Manual. Practices other than those specified in the pre-approved list may be utilized. However, the burden of
194
proof, as to whether the performance (minimum 80% TSS removal) and ease of maintenance of such practices will be according to guidelines provided in the Stormwater Technical Standards Manual, would be placed with the applicant. Details regarding the procedures and criteria for consideration of acceptance of such BMPs are provide in the Stormwater Technical Standards Manual.
(C) Gasoline outlets and refueling areas must install appropriate practices to reduce lead, copper, zinc, and hydrocarbons in stormwater runoff. These requirements will apply to all new facilities and existing facilities that replace their tanks.
(Ord. 2004-12 passed 1-5-2005)
§ 00-05-51-062 CALCULATIONS AND DESIGN STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS.
(A) Calculation of land disturbance should follow the guidelines discussed in § 00-05-51-047.
(B) The calculation methods as well as the type, sizing, and placement of all stormwater quality management measures, or BMPs shall meet the design criteria, standards, and specifications outlined in the Indiana Stormwater Quality Manual or the Stormwater Technical Standards Manual. The methods and procedures included in these two references are in keeping with the above stated policy and meet the requirements of IDEM’s Rule 13.
(Ord. 2004-12, passed 1-5-2005)
§ 00-05-51-063 EASEMENT REQUIREMENTS.
All stormwater quality management systems, including detention or retention basins, filter strips, pocket wetlands, in-line filters, infiltration systems, conveyance systems, structures and appurtenances located outside of the right-of-way shall be incorporated into permanent easements.
(Ord. 2004-12, passed 1-5-2005)
§ 00-05-51-064 INSPECTION, MAINTENANCE, RECORD KEEPING, AND REPORTING.
(A) After the approval of the stormwater management permit by the Stormwater Board and the commencement of construction activities, the Stormwater Board and/or the permitting officer has the authority to conduct inspections of the work being done to ensure full compliance with the provisions of this chapter, the Stormwater Technical Standards Manual, and the terms and conditions of the approved permit.
(B) Following construction completion, operation, maintenance, and inspection of stormwater quality facilities shall be the long-term responsibility of the owner of the stormwater quality facilities. The Stormwater Board and/or the permitting officer also has the authority to perform or require inspections of all public or privately owned stormwater quality facilities. The owner of stormwater quantity facilities shall be responsible for inspections that evaluate physical conditions, available treatment capacity, and the operational condition of key facility elements. Stormwater quality facilities shall be maintained in good condition, in accordance
195
with the terms and conditions of the approved stormwater management permit, and shall not be subsequently altered, revised or replaced except in accordance with the approved stormwater permit, or in accordance with approved amendments or revisions to the permit. If deficiencies are found during the inspection, the owner of the facility will be notified by Stormwater Board and/or the permitting officer and will be required to take all necessary measures to correct such deficiencies. If the owner fails to correct the deficiencies within the allowed time period, as specified in the notification letter, the Stormwater Board and/or the permitting officer will undertake the work and collect from the owner using lien rights if necessary.
(C) Assignment of responsibility for maintaining facilities serving more than one lot or holding shall be documented by appropriate covenants to property deeds, unless responsibility is formally accepted by a public body, and determined before the final stormwater permit is approved. Stormwater detention/retention basins may be donated to the Town of Cumberland or other unit of government designated by the Stormwater Board and/or the permitting officer, for ownership and permanent maintenance providing the Stormwater Board and/or the permitting officer or other governmental unit is willing to accept responsibility.
(Ord. 2004-12, passed 1-5-2005)
PERMIT REQUIREMENTS AND PROCEDURES
§ 00-05-51-070 CONCEPTUAL DRAINAGE PLAN REVIEW.
(A) In order to gain an understanding of the drainage requirements for a specific project, a developer may submit conceptual drainage plans and calculations for review by the Stormwater Board and/or the permitting officer.
(B) The direction provided by the Stormwater Board and/or the permitting officer during such a review is based on preliminary data and shall not be construed as an approval or binding on either party.
(C) The following is a general listing of minimum data requirements for the review of conceptual drainage plans:
(1) Two complete sets of conceptual plans showing general project layout, including existing and proposed drainage systems (plan sheets must be larger than 11 inches by 17 inches, but not to exceed 24 inches by 36 inches.)
(2) General description of the existing and proposed drainage systems in narrative form.
(3) Watershed Boundaries with USGS Contours or best information possible.
(4) Exiting watercourse or regulated drains.
(Ord. 2004-12, passed 1-5-2005)
196
§ 00-05-51-071 PERMIT PROCEDURES.
(A) This section applies to all development, or re-development of land, that results in land disturbance of one acre or more.
(B) Individual lots with land disturbance less than one acre that are developed within a larger permitted project site, should refer to § 00-05-51-073 for plan review requirements and procedures.
(1) The project site owner shall submit an application for a stormwater management permit to the Stormwater Board and/or the permitting officer. The application will include a notice of intent letter (NOI) that would also act as permit application form, proof of public notice, construction plan sheets, stormwater drainage technical report, a stormwater pollution prevention plan, and any other necessary support information. Specific information not be included in the application can be found in § 00-05-51-072. Four copies of each application must be submitted to the Stormwater Board and/or the permitting officer. Additionally, a digital copy of the construction plans is required in a format accepted by the Stormwater Board and/or the permitting officer.
(2) After the Stormwater Board and/or the permitting officer receipt of the application, the applicant will be notified as to whether their application was complete or insufficient. The applicant will be asked for additional information if the application is insufficient. If the application is complete, the Stormwater Board and/or the permitting officer will forward one copy of the application to the Soil and Water Conservation District (SWCD) for its review and comment within a ten-day period. The remaining three copies will be reviewed in detail by the Stormwater Board and/or the permitting officer and/or its plan review consultant(s). Once all comments have been received and review completed, the Stormwater Board and/or the permitting officer will either accept the project, request modifications, or place the project on the agenda of the next scheduled meeting of the Stormwater Board. If the project must go through a scheduled meeting, the Stormwater Board and/or the permitting officer will furnish the applicant a complete list of comments and objections to the plans and accompanying data prior to the scheduled meeting. After the scheduled meeting, the Stormwater Board will either issue a permit, or request modifications to the construction plans.
(3) The project site owner must notify the Stormwater Board and/or the permitting officer and IDEM 48 hours before beginning construction. Notification shall be in the form of an updated IDEM NOI form. Once a permit has been issued and the update NOI submitted to the Stormwater Board and/or the permitting officer and IDEM 48 hours before beginning construction, construction may commence. Once construction starts, the project owner shall monitor construction activities and inspect all stormwater pollution prevention measures in compliance with this chapter and the terms and conditions of the approved permit. Upon completion of construction activities, as-built plans must be submitted to the Stormwater Board and/or the permitting officer once the construction site has been stabilized and all temporary erosion and sediment control measures have been removed. The Stormwater Board and/or the permitting officer, or representative, shall inspect the construction site to verify the requirements for an NOT have been met. Once the applicant receives a “verified” copy of the NOT, they must forward a copy to IDEM. Permits issued under this scenario will expire five years from the date of issuance. If construction is not completed within five years, the NOI must be resubmitted at least 90 days prior to expiration. No Rule 5 (327 IAC 15-5) permit is required from IDEM for projects, within the MS4 area boundary, since the Stormwater Board is the permitting authority. (Ord. 204-12, passed 1-5-2005)
197
§ 00-05-51-072 INFORMATION REQUIREMENTS.
(A) Specific projects or activities may be exempt from all or part of the information requirements listed below. Exemptions are detailed in the “applicability and exemptions” in §§ 00-05-51-001, 00-05-51-015, 00-05-51-030, 0-05-51-045, 00-05-51-060 of this chapter. If a project or activity is exempt from any or all requirements of this chapter, an application should be filed listing the exemption criteria met, in lieu of the information requirements listed below. This level of detailed information is not required from individual lots, disturbing less than one acre of land, developed within a larger permitted project site. Review and acceptance of such lots is covered under § 00-05-51-073.
(B) The different elements of a permit submittal include a notice of intent (NOI), proof of publication of a public notice, construction plans, a stormwater drainage technical report, a stormwater pollution prevention plan for active construction sites, a post-construction stormwater pollution prevention plan, and any other necessary supporting information. All plans, reports, calculations, and narratives shall be signed and sealed by a professional engineer or a licensed surveyor, registered in the state.
(1) Notice of intent. The NOI is a standard form developed by the Indiana Department of Environmental Management which requires general project information. The NOI form should be completed in full and accompanied by proof of publication in a newspaper of general circulations, in the affected area, that notified the public that a construction activity is to commence. The publication must include the following language:
“(Company name, address) is submitting an NOI letter to notify the Town of Cumberland Stormwater Board and/or Town of Cumberland the permitting officer and the Indiana Department of Environmental Management of our intent to comply with the requirements of the Town of Cumberland Stormwater Management Ordinance, as well as the requirements of 327 IAC 15-5 and 327 IAC 15-13, to discharge stormwater from construction activities for the following project: (name of the construction project, address of the location of the construction project. Run-off from the project site will discharge to (stream(s) receiving the discharge(s)).”
(2) Construction plans. Construction plan sheets (not to exceed 24 inches by 36 inches in size0 and an accompanying narrative report shall describe and depict the existing and proposed conditions. Construction plans need to include the following detailed items:
(a) Project narrative and supporting documents, including the following information:
1. An index indicating the location, in the construction plans, of all information required by this subsection.
2. Description of the nature and purpose of the project.
198
3. A copy of a legal boundary survey for the site, performed in accordance with Rule of Title 865 of the Indiana Administrative Code or any applicable and subsequently adopted rule or regulation for the subdivision limits, including all drainage easements and wetlands.
4. Soil properties, characteristics, limitations, and hazards associated with the project site and the measures that will be integrated into the project to overcome or minimize adverse soil conditions.
5. General construction sequence of how the project site will be built, including phases of construction.
6. Fourteen-digit watershed hydrologic unit code.
7. A reduced plat or project site map showing the lot numbers, lot boundaries, easements, and road layout and names. The reduced map must be legible and submitted on a sheet or sheets no large than 11 inches by 17 inches for all phases or sections of the project site.
8. A topographic map of the land to be developed and such adjoining and whose topography may affect the layout or drainage of the development. The contour intervals shall be one foot when slopes are less than or equal to 2% and shall be two feet when slopes exceed 2%. All elevations shall be given in North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD). The horizontal datum of topographic map shall be based on Indiana State Plane Coordinates, NAD83. The map will contain a notation indicating these datum information.
a. If the project site is less than or equal to two acres in total land area, the topographic map shall include all topography of land surrounding the site to a distance of at least 100 feet.
b. If the project site is greater than two acres in total land area, the topographic map shall include all topography of land surrounding the site to a distance of at least 200 feet.
9. Identification of any other state or federal water quality permits that are required for construction activities associated with the owner’s project site.
(b) Vicinity map depicting the project site location in relationship to recognizable local landmarks, towns, and major roads, such as a USGS topographic quadrangle map, or county or municipal road map.
(c) An existing project site layout that must include the following information:
1. Location, name, and normal water level of all wetlands, lakes, ponds, and water courses on, or adjacent to, the project site.
2. Location of all existing structures on the project site.
3. One hundred year floodplains, floodway fringes, and floodways. Please note if none exists.
199
4. Soil map of the predominant soil types, as determined by the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA), Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) Soil Survey, or as determined by a soil scientist hydroiogic classification for soils should be shown when hydroiogic methods requiring soils information are used. A soil legend must be included with the soil map.
5. Identification and delineation of vegetative cover such as grass, weeds, brush, and trees on the project site.
6. Location of storm, sanitary, combined sewer, and septic tank systems and outfalls.
7. Land use of all adjacent properties.
8. Identification and delineation of sensitive areas.
9. Existing topography at a contour interval appropriate to indicate drainage patterns.
10. The location of regulated drains, farm drains, inlets and outfalls, if any of record.
11. Location of all existing cornerstones within the proposed development and a plan to protect and preserve them.
(d) Final project site layout, including the following information:
1. Location of all proposed site improvements, including roads, utilities, lot delineation and identification, proposed structures, and common areas.
2. One hundred-year floodplains, floodway fringes, and floodways. Please note if none exists.
3. Proposed final topography, at a contour interval appropriate to indicate drainage patterns.
(e) A grading plan, including the following information:
1. Delineation of all proposed land disturbing activities, including off-site activities that will provide services to the project site.
2. Location of all soil stockpiles and borrow areas.
3. Information regarding any off-site borrow, stockpile, or disposal areas that are associated with a project site, and under the control of the project site owner.
4. Existing and proposed topographic information.
(f) A drainage plan, including the following information:
200
1. An estimate of the peak discharge, based on the ten-year storm 24-hour event, of the project site for post-construction conditions.
2. The proposed 100-year and ten-year release rates determined for the site, showing the methodology used to calculate them and detailing considerations given to downstream restrictions (if any) that may affect the calculated allowable release rates.
3. Calculation showing peak runoff rate after development for the 10-year and 100-year return period 24-hour storms do not exceed the respective allowable release runoff rates.
4. Location, size, and dimensions of all existing streams to be maintained, and new drainage systems such as culverts, bridges, storm sewers, conveyance channels, and 100-year overflow paths, ponding areas shown as hatched acres, along with all associated easements.
5. Locations where stormwater may be directly discharged into groundwater, such as abandoned wells or sinkholes. Please note if none exists.
6. Locations of specific points where stormwater discharge will leave the project site.
7. Name of all receiving waters. If the discharge is to a separate municipal storm sewer, identify the name of the municipal operator and the ultimate receiving water.
8. Location, size, and dimensions of features such as permanent retention or detention facilities, including natural or constructed wetlands, used for the purpose of stormwater management. Include existing retention or detention facilities that will be maintained, enlarged or otherwise altered and new ponds or basins to be built and the basis of their design.
9. The estimated depth and amount of storage required by design of the new ponds or basins.
10. One or more typical cross sections of all existing and proposed channels or other open drainage facilities carried to a point above the 100-year high water and showing the elevation of the existing land and the proposed changes, together with the high water elevations expected from the 100 year storm under the controlled conditions called for by this chapter, and the relationship of structures, streets, and other facilities.
11. Any other information required by Stormwater Board and/or the permitting officer in order to thoroughly evaluate the submitted material.
(3) Stormwater Drainage Technical Report. A written stormwater drainage technical report must contain a discussion of the steps taken in the design of the stormwater drainage system. The technical report needs to include the following detailed items:
(a) A summary report, including the following information:
1. The significant drainage problems associated with the project;
201
2. The analysis procedure used to evaluate these problems and to propose solutions;
3. Any assumptions or special conditions associated with the use of these procedures, especially the hydrologic or hydraulic methods;
4. The proposed design of the drainage control system; and
5. The results of the analysis of the proposed drainage control system showing that it does solve the project’s drainage problems. Any hydrologic or hydraulic calculations or modeling results must be adequately cited and described in the summary description. If hydrologic or hydraulic models are used, the input and output files for all necessary runs must be included in the appendices. A map showing any drainage area subdivisions used in the analysis must accompany the report.
(b) A Hydrologic/hydraulic analysis, consistent with the methodologies and calculation included in the Stormwater Technical Standards Manual, and including the following information:
1. A hydraulic report detailing existing and proposed drainage patterns on the subject site. The report should include a description of present land use and proposed land use. Any off-site drainage entering the site should be addressed as well. This report should be comprehensive and detail all of the steps the engineer took during the design process.
2. All hydrologic and hydraulic computations should be included in the submittal. These calculations should include, but are not limited to: runoff curve numbers and runoff coefficients, runoff calculations, stage-discharge relationships, times-of-concentration and storage volumes.
3. Copies of all computer runs. These computer runs should include both the input and the outputs. Electronic copies of the computer runs with input files must also be included.
4. A set of exhibits should be included showing the drainage sub-areas and a schematic detailing of how the computer models were set up.
5. A conclusion which summarizes the hydraulic design and details how this design satisfies this chapter.
(4) Stormwater pollution prevention plan for construction sites. A stormwater pollution prevention plan associated with construction activities must be designed to, at least, meet the requirements of this chapter and must include the following:
(a) Location, dimensions, detailed specifications, and construction details of all temporary and permanent stormwater quality measures.
(b) Temporary stabilization plans and sequence of implementation.
(c) Permanent stabilization plans and sequence of implementation.
(d) Temporary and permanent stabilization plans shall include the following:
202
1. Specifications and application rates for soil amendments and seed mixtures.
2. The type and application rate for anchored mulch.
(e) Construction sequence describing the relationship between implementation of stormwater quality measures and stages of construction activities.
(f) A typical erosion and sediment control plan for individual lot development.
(g) Self-monitoring program including plan and procedures.
(h) A description of potential pollutant sources associated with the construction activities, which may reasonably be expected to add a significant amount of pollutants to stormwater discharges.
(i) Material handling and storage associated with construction activity shall meet the spill prevention and spill response requirements in 327 IAC 2-6.1.
(j) Name, address, and telephone number of the trained individual in charge of the mandatory stormwater pollution prevention self-monitoring program for the project site.
(5) Post-Construction Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan. The post-construction storm water pollution prevention plan must include the following information:
(a) A description of potential pollutant sources from the proposed land use, which may reasonably be expected to add a significant amount of pollutants to stormwater discharges.
(b) Location, dimensions, detailed specifications, and construction details of all post-construction stormwater quality measures.
(c) A description of measures that will be installed to control pollutants in stormwater discharges that will occur after construction activities have been completed. Such practices include infiltration of run-off, flow reduction by use of open vegetated swales and natural depressions, buffer strip and riparian zone preservation, filter strip creation, minimization of land disturbance and surface imperviousness, maximization of open space, and stormwater retention and detention ponds.
(d) A sequence describing when each post-construction stormwater quality measure will be installed.
(e) Stormwater quality measures that will remove or minimize pollutants from stormwater run-off.
(f) Stormwater quality measures that will be implemented to prevent or minimize adverse impacts to stream and riparian habitat.
(g) A narrative description of the maintenance guidelines for all post-construction stormwater quality measures to facilitate their proper long term function. This narrative description shall be made available to future parties who will assume responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the post-construction stormwater quality measures.
(Ord. 2004-12, passed 1-5-2005)
203
§ 00-05-51-073 REVIEW OF INDIVIDUAL LOTS WITHIN A PERMITTED PROJECT.
(A) For individual lots disturbing less than one acre, developed within a larger permitted project, a formal review and issuance of an individual lot plot plan permit will be required before a building permit can be issued. All stormwater management measures necessary to comply with this chapter must be implemented in accordance with permitted plan for the large project.
(B) The following information must be submitted to the town Stormwater Board and/or the permitting officer, for review and acceptance, by the individual lot operator, whether owning the property or acting as the agent of the property owner, as part of a request for review and issuance of an individual lot plot plan permit that must be obtained prior to the issuance of a building permit.
(1) A site layout for the subject lot and all adjacent lots showing building pad location, dimensions, and elevations, and the drainage patterns and swales.
(2) Erosion and sediment control plan that, at a minimum, includes the following measures.
(a) Installation and maintenance of a stable construction site access.
(b) Installation and maintenance of appropriate perimeter erosion and sediment control measures prior to land disturbance.
(c) Minimization of sediment discharge and tracking from the lot.
(d) Clean-up of sediment that is either tracked or washed onto roads. Bulk cleaning of sediment shall not include flushing the area with water. Cleared sediment must be redistributed or disposed of in a manner that is in compliance with all applicable statutes and rules.
(e) Adjacent lots disturbed by an individual lot operator must be repaired and stabilized with temporary or permanent surface stabilization.
(f) Self-monitoring program including plan and procedures.
(3) Certification of compliance stating that the individual lot plan is consistent with the stormwater management permit, as approved by the Stormwater board, for the larger project.
(4) Name, address, and telephone number of the trained individual in charge of the mandatory stormwater pollution prevention self-monitoring program for the project site.
(C) The individual lot operator is responsible for installation and maintenance of all erosion and sediment control measures until the site is stabilized.
(Ord. 2004-12, passed 1-5-2005)
204
§ 00-05-51-074 CHANGES TO PLANS
Any changes or deviations in the detailed plans and specifications after approval of the applicable stormwater management permit shall be filed with, and accepted by, the Stormwater Board and/or the permitting officer prior to the land development involving the change. Copies of the changes, if accepted, shall be attached to the original plans and specifications.
(Ord. 2004-12, passed 1-5-2005)
§ 00-05-51-075 FEE STRUCTURE.
Current rates and charges are found in the Utility Fee Schedule. The Storm Water Board and Permitting Officer shall have the right to not accept the drainage improvements or the advancement of any project for which the applicable fees have not been paid.
(Ord. 2014-04, passed __________)
§ 00-05-51-076 REQUIRED ASSURANCES.
As a condition of approval and issuance of the permit, the Stormwater Board and/or the permitting officer shall require the applicant to provide assurance in form of an irrevocable letter of credit or a bond when the stormwater management plan has been accepted, all applicable fees paid, and before construction begins. Said assurance will guarantee a good faith execution of the stormwater drainage plan, the stormwater pollution prevention plan, the stormwater quality management plan, and any permit conditions. The assurance shall be for an amount equal to 120% of the total costs of all stormwater management measures for the entire project. The above mentioned costs shall be based on an estimate as prepared by a registered engineer or land the permitting officer. Said costs shall be for the installation and ongoing monitoring and maintenance of erosion control measures and the construction and ongoing monitoring and maintenance of storm drainage infrastructure, detention/retention facilities, and stormwater quality BMPs, as regulated under this chapter, until the construction is completed, site is stabilized, and as-built plans are accepted by the Stormwater Board and/or the permitting officer. Assurances shall be for a minimum of $2,000. Local governmental jurisdictions may require additional performance and/or maintenance assurances. The intent of this assurance is not only to complete the installation of storm drain infrastructure for the project, but also to assure that adequate stormwater pollution prevention measures are properly installed and maintained. If adequate assurances are set aside by the project site owner for the overall project, proof of total assurance can be submitted in place of an individual stormwater assurance.
(Ord. 2004-12, passed 1-5-2005)
§ 00-05-51-077 TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF PERMITS.
(A) In granting a stormwater management permit, the Stormwater Board and/or the permitting officer may impose such terms and conditions as are reasonably necessary to meet the purposes of this chapter. The project site owner shall insure compliance with such terms and conditions. Non-compliance with the terms and conditions of permits will be subject to enforcement as described in §§ 00-05-51-100 et seq.
205
(B) The project site owner shall inform all general contractor, construction management firms, grading or excavating contractors, utility contractors, and the contractors that have primary oversight on individual building lots of the terms and conditions for the stormwater management permit and the schedule for proposed implementation.
(C) In the event that a project site is determined to impact or discharge to a sensitive area or is located in an impact drainage area, the Stormwater Board and/or the permitting officer may require more stringent stormwater quantity and quality measures than detailed in this chapter or in the Indiana Stormwater Quality Manual.
(1) Determination of sensitive areas. Sensitive areas include highly erodible soils, wetlands, threatened or endangered species habitat, outstanding waters, impaired waters, recreational waters, and surface drinking water sources. A listing of highly erodible soils, outstanding water, impaired water, recreation water and surface drinking water sources can be found in the Stormwater Technical Standards Manual. If wetlands are suspected on a site, a wetland delineation should be completed in accordance with the methodology established by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (COE). The presence of threatened or endangered species habitat will be determined by the Stormwater Board and/or the permitting officer during the permit review process. Special terms and conditions for development determined to impact or discharge to any sensitive area shall be included in the stormwater management permit.
(2) Determination of impact drainage areas.
(a) The Stormwater Board is authorized, but is not required, to classify certain geographical areas as impact drainage areas. In determining impact drainage areas, the Stormwater Board shall consider such factors as topography, soil type, capacity of existing drains, and distance from adequate drainage facility. The following areas shall be designated as impact drainage areas, unless good reason for not including them is presented to the Stormwater Board.
1. A floodway or floodplain as designated by the most updated town dealing with floodplain regulation.
2. Land within 75 feet of each bank of any ditch within the town’s system.
3. Land within 75 feet of the centerline of any drain tile or enclosed conduit within the town’s system.
(b) Land that does not have an adequate outlet, taking into consideration the capacity and depth of the outlet, may be designated as an impact drainage area b the Stormwater Board. Special terms and conditions for development within any impact drainage area shall be included in the stormwater management permit.
(Ord. 2004-12, passed 1-5-2005)
§ 00-05-51-078 CERTIFICATION OF AS-BUILT PLANS
(A) After completion of construction of the project and before final acceptance of the stormwater management plan, a professionally prepared and certified as-built set of plans shall be submitted to the Stormwater Board and/or the permitting officer for review. Additionally, a digital copy of the ‘as-built’ plans in a current version of AutoCad is required. These plans shall
206
include all pertinent data relevant to the completed storm drainage system and stormwater management facilities, and shall include:
(1) Pipe size and pipe material;
(2) Invert elevations;
(3) Top rim elevations;
(4) Pipe structure lengths;
(5) BMP types, dimensions, and boundaries/easements;
(6) “As-planted” plans for BMPs, as applicable;
(7) Data and calculations showing detention basin storage volume:
(8) Data and calculations showing BMP treatment capacity;
(9) Certified statement on plans stating the completed storm drainage system and stormwater management facilities substantially comply with construction plans and the stormwater management permit as approved by the Stormwater Board. (See certificate in Stormwater Technical Standards Manual).
(B) The property owner, developer, or contractor shall be required to file a five-year maintenance bond or other acceptable guarantee with the Stormwater Board and/or the permitting officer, prior to acceptance, in an amount of 25% of the cost of the stormwater drainage system located outside the public road right-of-ways, and in a form satisfactory to the town of drainage’s attorney in order to assure that such stormwater system installation was done according to standards of good workmanship, that the materials used in the construction and installation were of good quality and construction, and that such project was done in accordance with the accepted plans, and this chapter. The bond or other acceptable guarantee shall be in effect for a period of five years after the date of the final project acceptance by the Stormwater Board and/or the permitting office.
(C) Deflection tests shall be performed on all flexible pipes after the final backfill has been in place at least 30 days. No pipe shall exceed a vertical deflection of 5%. Deflection testing shall be performed using a mandrel pulled by hand. The mandrel (go/no-go) device shall be cylindrical in shape and constructed with nine or ten evenly spaced arms or prongs. Any sewer not passing the mandrel shall be uncovered, replaced and retested.
(D) The following are considered nonflexible pipes that do not require deflection tests:
(1) Vitrified clay pipe.
(2) Concrete pipe.
(3) Ductile iron pipe.
(4) Cast iron pipe.
207
(E) Visual recordings of all storm drainage conveyances shall be required before release of maintenance bonds. These visual recordings will be scheduled by the Stormwater Board and/or the permitting officer and paid for by the developer. Notices shall be provided to the Stormwater Board and/or the permitting officer within at least 60 days prior to the expiration date of the maintenance bond so that the noted recordings may be scheduled reports summarizing the results of the noted visual recordings shall be reviewed and accepted by the Stormwater Board and/or the permitting officer before maintenance bond would be recommended to be released.
(Ord. 2004-12, passed 1-5-2005)
STORM WATER UTILITY FEE
§ 00-05-51-090 STORM WATER UTILITY FEE.
(A) There is hereby established a monthly storm water utility fee for the use of and services provided by the storm water utility of the town.
(B) The monthly fee will be uniform for all residential properties which will be assigned one Equivalent Residential Unit (ERU). This acknowledges that all property owners of the town place demands on the storm water utility of the town and benefits from the storm water management activities of the town.
(C) The monthly fee for non-residential properties will be determined using an ERU multiplier which will be calculated by dividing the total impervious surface area within the property by the base ERU of 3,300 square feet. This method allows for the non-residential property user fee to be based upon the impervious surface area of the property as compared to the average impervious surface area of a residential property. The ERU for non-residential property shall not be less than one ERU. The ERU multiplier shall then be multiplied by the current fee for one ERU as established in division (E) to determine the actual user fee in dollars.
(D) The monthly user fee for combined residential/business properties user fees shall be determined by measuring the amount of impervious surface area that is used for business purposes. If 50% or greater of the total impervious surface area is used for business purposes, the property shall be billed as a non-residential property using the ERU multiplier as slated above. If the business use results in less than 50% of the total impervious surface area, then the property shall be billed as a residential property and will be assigned one ERU.
(E) The monthly user fee per ERU will be $7.50.
(F) The policies and procedures for determining impervious surface area, establishing the ERU and its multiplier, billing and collection procedures and the credit process are described in the Policy Manual, which Policy Manual is attached hereto as Appendix C to Ord. 207-11, passed 8-20-2008, incorporated herein by reference and is hereby approved.
(G) The monthly storm water utility fee as herein set forth shall be effective on the first full billing period occurring once the town’s computer billing system for the storm water utility fees is operational.
(Ord. 2007-11, passed 8-20-2008)
208
§ 00-05-51-091 STORM WATER FEE FUND.
(A) There shall be created a Storm Water Fee Fund. This fund shall be compromised of fees paid by users under this subchapter, penalties and assessments imposed in the collection of fees under this chapter, and other income generated from the operation of the Department.
(B) This shall be a non-reverting fund, and it shall be used to construct, reconstruct, repair and maintain storm water facilities, to pay for the operation of the storm water utility and storm water management activities, and to otherwise further the purposes of improving drainage and water quality in the town.
(Ord. 2007-11, passed 8-20-2008)
ENFORCEMENT
§ 00-05-51-100 COMPLIANCE WITH THIS CHAPTER.
In addition to the requirements of this chapter, compliance with the requirements set forth in the local Zoning Ordinances is also necessary. Compliance with all applicable ordinances of town as well as with applicable state statutes and regulations shall also be required. Unless otherwise stated, all other specifications referred to in this chapter shall e the most recent edition available. Violations of the requirements of this chapter are subject to the penalties listed below.
(Ord 2004-12, passed 1-5-2005)
§ 00-05-51-101 STOP WORK ORDER.
(A) In addition to the penalties listed above, if land disturbance activities are conducted contrary to the provisions of this chapter or accepted final stormwater management plans, the Stormwater Board and/or the permitting officer may order the work stopped by notice in writing served on any person engaged in the doing or causing of such work to be done, and any such persons shall forthwith stop such work until authorized by the Stormwater Board and/or the permitting officer to proceed with the work. The Stormwater Board and/or the permitting officer may also undertake or cause to be undertaken, any necessary or advisable protective measures to prevent violations of this chapter or to avoid or reduce the effects of noncompliance herewith. The costs of any such protective measures shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property upon which the work is being done and the responsibility of any person carrying out or participating in the work.
(B) Any person who neglects or fails to comply with a stop work order shall be subject to a fine of not less than $1,000, and such person shall also pay such costs as may be imposed in the discretion of the court. A permit reinstatement fee may be assessed by the Stormwater Board and/or the permitting officer.
(Ord. 2004-12, passed 1-5-2005)
209
§ 00-05-51-102 FAILURE TO COMPLY OR COMPLETE.
In addition to any other remedies, should any owner fail to comply with the provisions of this chapter, the Stormwater Board and/or the permitting officer may, after giving notice and opportunity for compliance, have the necessary work done, and the owner shall be required to promptly reimburse the Stormwater Board and/or the permitting officer for all costs of such work.
(Ord. 2004-12, passed 1-5-2005)
§ 00-05-51-103 SUSPENSION OF ACCESS TO THE STORM DRAIN SYSTEM.
(A) Suspension due to emergency situations. The Stormwater Board and/or the permitting officer may, without prior notice, suspend storm drain system discharge access to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the storm drain system or waters of the United States. If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency, town may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the storm drain system or waters of the United States, or to minimize danger to persons.
(B) Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharge. Any person discharging to the storm drain system in violation of this chapter may have their storm drain system access terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The Stormwater Board and/or the permitting officer will notify a violator of the proposed termination of its MS4 access. The violator may petition the Stormwater Board and/or the permitting officer for a reconsideration and hearing.
(Ord.2004-12, passed 1-5-2005)
§ 00-05-51-104 CORRECTIVE ACTION.
Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Stormwater Board and/or the permitting officer from taking such other lawful action as may be necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. All costs connected therewith shall accrue to the person or persons responsible. Costs include, but are not limited to, repairs to the storm drain system made necessary by the violation, as well as those penalties levied by the EPA or IDEM for violation of the town’s NPDES permit, attorney fees, and other costs and expenses.
(Ord. 2004-12, passed 1-5-2005)
§ 00-05-51-105 APPEALS.
(A) Any person to whom any provision of this chapter has been applied may appeal in writing, not later than 30 days after the action or decision being appealed from, to the Stormwater Board the action or decision whereby any such provision was so applied. Such appeal shall identify the matter being appealed, and the basis for the appeal.
210
(B) The Stormwater Board shall consider the appeal and make a decision whereby it affirms, rejects or modifies the action being appealed. In considering any such appeal, the Stormwater Board may consider the recommendations of the Stormwater Board and/or the permitting officer and the comments of other persons having knowledge of the matter.
(C) In considering any such appeal, the Stormwater Board may grant a variance from the terms of this chapter to provide relief, in whole or in part, from the action being appealed, but only upon finding that the following requirements are satisfied:
(1) The application of the chapter provisions being appealed will present or cause practical difficulties for a development or development site; provided; however, that practical difficulties shall not include the need for the developer to incur additional reasonable expenses in order to comply with the chapter; and
(2) The granting of the relief requested will not substantially prevent the goals and purposes of this chapter, nor result in less effective management of stormwater runoff.
(Ord. 2004-12, passed 1-5-2005)
§ 00-05-51-999 PENALTY.
(A) Any person found in violation of any provision of this chapter shall be responsible for a civil infraction and subject to a maximum fine of $5,000 for a first offense, and a maximum of $10,000 for a subsequent offense, plus costs, damages, and expenses. Each day such violation occurs or continues shall be deemed a separate offense and shall make the violator liable for the imposition of a fine for each day. The rights and remedies provided for in this section are cumulative and in addition to any other remedies provided by law. An admission or determination of responsibility shall not exempt the offender from compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
(B) Any person who aids or abets a person in violation of this chapter shall be subject to the penalties provided in this section.
(C) For purposes of this section, “subsequent offense” means a violation of the provisions of this chapter committed by the same person within 12 months of a previous violation of the same provision of this chapter for which said person admitted responsibility or was adjudicated to be responsible.
(Ord. 2004-12, passed 1-5-2005)
211
CHAPTER 52: STREET LIGHTS
Section
00-05-52-001 Authority of town
00-05-52-002 Definitions
00-05-52-003 Payment for electric service to street lights
00-05-52-004 No payment for nonconforming street lights
00-05-52-005 Maintenance of street lights
00-05-52-006 Right to petition
§ 00-05-52-001 AUTHORITY OF TOWN.
(A) The Town has the authority under Indiana law to provide services which will promote the health, safety and welfare of its citizens.
(B) The town has provided street lights for many years in order to promote pedestrian and traffic safety and to deter crime.
(C) The town regulates new subdivisions by way of its Zoning Ordinance, Subdivision Control Ordinance, and other ordinances. As part of that regulation, the town and its agencies control the number, type and location of street lights constructed in new subdivisions.
(D) The town also has the authority under I.C. 36-9-9 to operate a street light utility. However, the town has not established such a utility and does not assess land owners for the cost of street lights.
(Ord. 2009-03, passed 4-15-2009)
§ 00-05-52-002 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following abbreviations shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
ELECTRIC SERVICE. Charges for electricity provided to the street lights, pole and equipment rental, taxes, and other charges and surcharges for the pole, fixture, and electricity charged by an electric utility.
STREET LIGHT. Only those polies and fixtures which are in their construction, design, condition and placement compliant with all laws, ordinances, resolutions, rules and orders of the town.
(Ord. 209-03, passed 4-15-2009)
§ 00-05-52-003 PAYMENT FOR ELECTRIC SERVICE TO STREET LIGHTS.
(A) It is the policy of the town that in order to promote pedestrian and traffic safety and to deter crime, the Clerk-Treasurer shall pay all of the monthly utility charges for electrical service provided to all existing street lights in the town.
212
(B) The Clerk-Treasurer shall pay for the electric service provided to the street lights in the town.
(C) In order to effectuate this policy as it relates to existing subdivisions which are billed directly by the electric utilities, the Clerk-Treasurer shall contact all developers or homeowners’ associations, make all of the necessary arrangements with the electrical utilities which provide electric service to the street lights in the existing subdivisions of the twin to ensure that the invoices for these services are billed directly to the town, and pay the invoices in a timely manner.
(D) As new subdivisions are constructed in the town, the decision whether to pay for the electric service provided to the street lights in the new subdivisions shall be made on a case by case basis by resolution of the Town Council.
(Ord. 2009-03, passed 4-15-2009)
§ 00-05-52-004 NO PAYMENT FOR NONCONFORMING STREET LIGHTS.
(A) The town shall not pay for the electric service provided to street lights which are not in compliance with the town’s laws, ordinances, resolutions, rules and orders.
(B) In the event that the town determines that a street light or lights are not in compliance, the Town Manager or his or her delegee shall send to the owner of the light or lights a notice of noncompliance. All charges for electric service provide to the noncompliant light or lights shall be the responsibility of the owner for the period of noncompliance.
(Ord. 2009-03, passed 4-15-2009)
§ 00-05-52-005 MAINTENANCE OF STREET LIGHTS.
(A) The town shall be responsible for maintenance of street lights it owns.
(B) Nothing in this chapter shall impose a duty on the town to maintain privately owned street lights.
(Ord. 2009-03, passed 4-15-2009)
§ 00-05-52-006 RIGHT TO PETITION.
This chapter shall not affect the right of landowners to petition the town for the construction, installation, maintenance and operation of a street light utility, as provided for in I.C. 36-9-9.
(Ord. 2009-03, passed 4-15-2009)
§ 00-05-52-007 PROHIBITED CONDUCT.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to place, attach or affix unauthorized signs, banners and other items to the Town’s street lights, poles and fixtures.
213
(B) It shall be unlawful for any person to use the Town’s street lights, poles and fixtures and park benches, landscaping and other site fixtures to secure items, including but not limited to bicycles, motorcycles, scooters, and vehicles.
(C) A person who violates this section shall pay a fine for each violation in the amount of $50. A person who violates this section commits a separate violation for each day that person allows the prohibited conduct to continue.
(D) The Town of Cumberland and its agents have the authority to remove from the Town’s street lights, poles and fixtures and park benches, landscaping and other site fixtures any items secured thereto in violation of this Section, to store the items at the expense of the owner, and to add to any fine imposed by this section the expense of removing and storing the item. If the item is not retrieved by the owners within thirty (30) days after its removal, the items shall be deemed abandoned and disposed of by the Town in accordance with Indiana law.
(Ord. 2011-11, passed 10-19-2011)
214
CHAPTER 53: WATER UTILITY
Section
00-05-53-001 Authority & Water Board
00-05-53-002 Waterworks System
00-05-53-003 Rates and Charges
00-05-53-004 Cross Connection Control and Backflow Prevention Policies
§ 00-05-53-001 AUTHORITY & WATER BOARD
(A) The Town may regulate the furnishing of water to the public. The Town may also establish, maintain and operate a waterworks system. The Town may also contract with private or public water service providers for the provision of water to its residents.
(B) There is established a water utility which shall be known as the Cumberland Water Utility (the Utility). The Utility may provide water service in the Town’s corporate boundaries, in the GEM water service territory, and at any location as authorized by Indiana law.
(C) The Members of the Town Council shall comprise the Cumberland Water Board. The Board shall administer, operate and maintain the Water Utility.
§ 00-05-53-002 WATERWORKS SYSTEM
(A) The Utility shall construct, operate and maintain the waterworks system.
(B) The Utility may also extend its mains as it, in its discretion, determines is in the best interest of the Utility. Customers affected by the extension of the mains shall be responsible for the pro rata share and the main extension surcharges for service extensions.
(C) The Utility may enter into contracts with individuals or corporations for the extension of lines and services of the Utility. The contracts shall provide for the person deserving such extensions to pay for all of the cost of the extension and to construct such consistent with the specifications of the Utility. After such construction said persons desiring to tap into the water line shall be regulated and governed in the use of the lines and water therefrom. The contract shall further provide that any easements necessary for construction of the lines shall be made in the name of the Town and for the benefit of the Town and that the lines shall become the property of the Town.
§ 00-05-53-003 RATES AND CHARGES
(A) The Cumberland Water Board shall determine all rates and charges for the provision of water service, connection fees, minimum charges, fire protection charges, tapping fees, and other fees. These rates and charges shall produce sufficient revenue to pay all legal and other necessary expenses incident to the operation of the Utility, provide a sinking fund for the liquidation of bonds or other obligations, including leases, provide a debt service reserve for bonds or other obligations, including leases, in an amount established by the Board, not to exceed the maximum annual debt service on the bonds or obligations or maximum annual lease
215
rentals, provide adequate money for working capital, provide adequate money for making extensions and replacements to the extent not provided for through depreciation, and provide money for the payment of any taxes that may be assessed against the Utility.
(B) Current rates and charge are found in the Utility Fee Schedule.
(C) All terms of service for GEM customers shall be governed by an account agreement executed by users at the time of the commencement of service. The Water Board may alter, amend or modify the terms of these agreements.
(D) The Town shall mail the water bill to the address provided by the customer. Mailing of the bill to the provided address shall constitute notice to the customer of the bill and its terms.
(E) Water service shall be disconnected as prescribed by 170 IAC 6-1-16, from those water customers who fail to pay the accrued fees within 60 days of billing. The service shall not be reconnected until all fees are paid, including the reconnect fee, late fees, attorney’s fees and other charges.
(F) Submission of any delinquent account to an attorney for collection shall entitle the Water Board to collect and recover reasonable attorney’s fees and court costs incurred by the Board.
§00-05-53-004 CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL AND BACKFLOW PREVENTION POLICIES
(A) DEFINITIONS: The following definitions apply to this section:
(1) Backflow: the flow of any foreign liquid, gas or other substance into the distributing pipelines of a potable supply of water from any source or sources other than the intended one.
(2) Backsiphonage: the backing up, or siphoning, of a foreign liquid, gas or other substance into a potable water system which occurs when the atmospheric pressure in the potable system is less than the atmospheric pressure on the foreign liquid, gas or other substance, creating a partial vacuum toward the potable system.
(3) Cross Connection: any physical arrangement whereby a public water supply distribution system is connected, directly or indirectly, either continuously or intermittently, with any secondary source of supply, sewer drain, conduit, pool, storage reservoir, plumbing fixture, or other device which contains any water, contaminated liquid, or other waste of unknown or unsafe quality that could impart a contaminant to the drinking water as a result of backflow caused by backpressure or backsiphonage.
(B) PROHIBITIONS: In order to protect the public water supply system from cross connections:
(1) Installation: No installation of public water supply piping or part thereof will be made in such a manner that it is possible for used, unclean, polluted or contaminated water, mixtures or substances to enter any portion of such piping from any tank, receptacle, equipment or plumbing fixture by reason of backsiphonage or any other cause, either during normal use and operation thereof or when any such tank, receptacle,
216
equipment or plumbing fixture is flooded or subject to pressure in excess of the pressure in the hot-or-cold water piping.
(2) Cross Connections: No person shall make a connection or allow one to exist between pipes or conduits carrying domestic water supplied by any public or private water supply service system, and any pipes, conduits or fixtures containing or carrying water from any other source or containing or carrying water which has been used for any purpose whatsoever, or any piping carrying chemicals, liquids, gases, or any substance, unless there is provided an approved backflow prevention device and unless the connection has been approved and permitted by the GEM Water Utility.
(3) Devices: No plumbing fixtures, device or construction will be installed or maintained or connected to any domestic water supply when such installation or connection may provide a cross connection between a distribution system of water for drinking and domestic purposes and water that may become contaminated by such plumbing fixture devices or construction unless there is provided a backflow prevention device which has been approved by the Commissioner of the Indiana Department of Environmental Management.
(C) CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL: In order to ensure proper precautions are taken, GEM Water Utility will perform the following:
(1) Regulation: The Utility will exercise reasonable vigilance to ensure that customers take proper steps to protect the public water system and will adopt rules and procedures to enforce this protection.
(2) Customer Installation: When the Utility determines that a backflow assembly is required, it will require the customer, as a condition of the provision of water, to install an approved backflow prevention device which is appropriate to the degree of the backflow hazard.
(3) Customer Expense: If the Utility determines that a backflow assembly is required for a customer, the customer is responsible for the expense of the device, installation of the device, all required testing, proper repair and maintenance of the assembly, and maintenance of adequate records of devices installed, testing, and repairs and maintenance. The customer will make these records available for inspection by the Utility upon request.
(4) List of Customers with Backflow Devices: The Utility will maintain a list of customers requiring backflow devices along with the type and location of each device.
(5) Testing Records: The Utility will obtain from each customer requiring backflow devices copies of all test reports and will maintain the three (3) most recent reports for review and inspection by IDEM.
(6) Inspection: The Utility and its agents have the right to enter upon the property of customers in order to perform inspections and investigations of backflow devices and existing conditions or hazards prior to, during and after installation of the devices in order to ensure compliance with this policy.
(D) COMPLIANCE WITH IDEM RULES: All customers of the Utility and persons performing work for the customers are required to comply with the Indiana Department of Environmental Management’s Cross Connection and Backflow Prevention rules and regulations, including but not limited to the provisions of Rule 10, as modified from time-to-time, all applicable provisions of the Indiana Plumbing Code, Indiana and federal law. When the IDEM rules conflict with the Indiana Plumbing Code, the customer and persons performing work for the customer must comply with IDEM’s rules.
217
(E) MANUFACTURER’S SPECIFICATIONS: All installations of backflow devices must be in accordance with manufacturer’s specifications.
(F) TAMPERING WITH INSPECTION TAGS: No person will tamper with, alter, modify or destroy an inspection tag placed by a backflow inspector on a device that has been tested.
(G) PIPE COLOR CODING: All water pipes in a building or industrial plant must be color coded and identified adequately by legends based on the Recommended Standards For Water Works: 2012 Edition or the American Standards Association Scheme For Identification of Piping Systems (ASA A13.1-1956).
(H) FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS: Fire Protection Systems (FPS) must comply with the rules of the Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission.
(I) RECOMMENDED DEVICES: A list of recommended types of backflow protection devices may be found in Appendix D of the IDEM Cross Connection Control and Backflow Prevention Manual
(J) PERMITS: No person will make a cross connection or allow one to exist, as defined by this section, until the person has applied for and obtained a permit for the same and provided for an approved backflow prevention device, as follows:
(1) Application: Permit applications must be submitted to the Utility prior to construction or installation of a backflow prevention device.
(2) Permit Fees: Applicants must tender to the Utility the applicable fee (see Fee Schedule) at the time of submission of the application.
(3) Incomplete Information: If the application is incomplete, as determined by the Utility, the Utility will notify the applicant in writing within 10 days of the submission of the application.
(4) Permit Denial: If the permit application does not comply with the rules and regulations of the Utility, the Utility may deny the application. The Utility will provide to the applicant within 30 days of the receipt of an application with complete information a written denial which states the reasoning.
(5) Permit Issued: If the permit application complies with the rules and regulations of the Utility, the Utility will issue to the applicant a permit for the installation of the device.
(6) Permit Term: Each permit will have a term of one (1) year from the date of issuance.
(7) Renewal of Permit: The holder of a permit must apply for a renewal of a permit issued by the Utility at least 30 days prior to the expiration of the existing permit and tender to the Utility the renewal fee required by the Fee Schedule. The Utility will either grant or deny the renewal within 30 days of receipt of a complete application.
(8) Inspections: Upon receipt of an application for a permit or renewal of an existing permit, the Utility will conduct any and all inspections necessary to render the decision. The applicant will be required to pay for these inspections, and the costs of inspection must be paid prior to the issuance or renewal of the permit.
(9) No Modifications: After the issuance of a permit or renewal of an existing permit, no person will remove, alter or modify the backflow device or water system. If a permit holder removes, alters, or modifies a device or system, the holder’s permit will be revoked.
218
(10) Appeals: If an applicant or permit holder is dissatisfied with a decision of the Utility, the applicant or holder may appeal the decision to the Cumberland Water Board by submitting to the Board Secretary within 30 days of the decision a written appeal which states the reasons why the applicant or holder believes the decision is incorrect.
(11) Hearing on Appeals: Within 30 days of the filing of a timely appeal, the Cumberland Water Board will conduct a hearing on the appeal. The applicant or holder must attend the hearing and has the right to present evidence in support of the appeal and to cross exam witnesses called by the Utility to support its decision.
(12) Findings by Water Board: Within 10 days of the appeal hearing, the Water Board will issue written findings and conclusions of its decision on the appeal.
(13) Appeal of the Water Board Decision: If the applicant or holder believes the decision of the Board is in error, the applicant or holder may appeal the Board’s decision by filing an appeal, within 30 days of the decision by the Board, with a court of competent jurisdiction.
(K) ENFORCEMENT: The Utility will issue a Notice of Violation to any person it determines has or is violating any provisions of this section. This Notice will state the nature of the violation, the action to be taken to correct the violation, the time during which the corrective action must be taken, and the fines, penalties and remedies available to the Utility if the violation is not corrected. If the violation is not corrected as provided for in the Notice, the Utility may exercise the following remedies, either separately or jointly:
(1) Fines: The violator will be subject to a fine in the amount of $500 per day for each day, beginning when the time for correction ends, until the violation is corrected.
(2) Injunction: The Utility is entitled to obtain from a court of competent jurisdiction an order enjoining the violation from the continued violation of this section.
(3) Attorney’s Fees: The Utility is entitled to collect from the violator any and all reasonable attorney’s fees it incurs in the prosecution of any enforcement action.
(4) Money Judgment: The Utility is entitled to obtain from a court of competent jurisdiction a money judgment equal to fines and attorney’s fees, as provided in this section.
(5) Remediation: The Utility is entitled to obtain from a court of competent jurisdiction an order allowing the Utility to:
(i) enter upon the property of the violator in order to remediate the violation; and,
(ii) obtain a money judgment against the violator for the expense incurred by the Utility in remediating the violation.
(6) Damages Suffered By Utility: The Utility is entitled to obtain from a court of competent jurisdiction a money judgment for any damages to its water supply, including but not limited to the cost of decontamination, inspection, testing, provisions of alternate water supply, and other damages, and for damages to its fixture, equipment and property caused by the violation of this section.
(7) Disconnection From System: The Utility is entitled to disconnect the violator’s water system from the Utility’s water system, without further notice if the violation is a danger to public health.
(8) Other Remedies: The Utility is entitled to all other remedies provided for by Indiana law for a violation of this section.
219
(Ord. 2016-15, passed 8-17-16)
Appendix
Utility Fee Schedule
APPLICATION & REVIEW
Sanitary Sewer (Chapter 50 of the Town Code)
Application & Review Fees
Engineering/ (Wessler)
Administrative Fee*
Plan Review
$400 for first 3 hours then $105/hour after
$150
Construction Inspection Fee
$50/EDU
Lift Station Plan Review
$400 for first 3 hours then $135/hour after
$150
Lift Station Inspection Fee
NA
Re-Review
$50/hour
Storm Water (Chapter 51 of the Town Code)
Application & Review Fees
Engineering/ (CrossRoads)
Administrative
Plan Review (Drainage, SWPPP, Erosion Control)*
$1,100 (see Plan Commission Fee Schedule for what this covers)
$50
Post Construction SWPPP
$350
$50
Permit Fee
NA
$50
Erosion Control Inspection
$50/inspection
Inspection Fees
$120/hr + $0.50/mile
$50/per inspection
NOI
NA
$50
Appeals to the Storm Water Utility Board
$350
$200
Water (Chapter 53 of the Town Code)
Application & Review Fees
Engineering/ (Wessler)
Administrative Fee*
Plan Review
$400 for first 3 hours then $105/hour after
$150
Construction Inspection Fee
$50/EDU
220
(Ord. 2016-16, passed 8-17-16)
Booster Station Plan Review
$400 for first 3 hours then $135/hour after
$150
Booster Station Inspection Fee
NA
Re-Review
$50/hour
*in the absence of a petition on file with the Plan Commission that includes this review
Cross Connection Control (Chapter 53)
Permit fee -- application
$40
Cross Connection Control (Chapter 53)
Permit fee -- annual renewal
$20
221
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
Chapter
70. TRAFFIC RULES
71. PARKING
72. TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
73. PARKING SCHEDULES
74. WAYFINDING DESTINATION SIGN POLICY
222
CHAPTER 70: TRAFFIC RULES
Section
General Provisions
00-07-70-01 Definitions; consistency with statutory law
00-07-70-02 Directions by police officer or firefighter
Control Devices; Compliance
00-07-70-20 Control devices; erection and establishment
00-07-70-21 Signal legend
00-07-70-22 Flashing signals
00-07-70-23 Turn markers
Operational Requirements
00-07-70-35 Stop streets
00-07-70-36 Speeding
00-07-70-37 Driving on sidewalks
00-07-70-38 Stopping required
00-07-70-39 Yielding required
00-07-70-40 Stopping before entering public way
00-07-70-41 One-way streets
00-07-70-42 U-turns
00-07-70-43 Restricted turns
00-07-70-44 Railroad crossings
00-07-70-45 Use of horns
00-07-70-46 Muffler required
00-07-70-47 Damage to streets
00-07-70-48 Parades and processions
Loads; Loading
00-07-70-60 Loading regulated
00-07-70-61 Load limits
00-07-70-99 Penalty
223
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 00-07-70-01 DEFINITIONS; CONSISTENCY WITH STATUTORY LAW.
Uniform Traffic Code definitions from I.C. 9-13-2 control, unless otherwise defined. This chapter shall be deemed to be consistent with applicable statutory law as amended from time to time.
(Ord. 2002-1, passed 1-2-2002)
§ 00-07-70-02 DIRECTIONS BY POLICE OFFICER OR FIREFIGHTER.
Officers of the Police Department and Fire Department, or such officers as are assigned by the Chief of the Police or Fire Department, are hereby authorized to direct traffic by voice, hand, or signal in conformance with traffic laws, provided that in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the Police or Fire Department may direct traffic as conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws. No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order, signal, or direction of a police officer, firefighter, or any person authorized by state law to direct traffic.
(Ord. 2002-1, passed 1-2-2002) Penalty, see § 00-07-70-99
CONTROL DEVICES; COMPLIANCE
§ 00-07-70-20 CONTROL DEVICES; ERECTION AND ESTABLISHMENT.
There shall be conducted, erected, and established services, signs, placards, signposts, semaphores, electrical automatic traffic signals, or other devices which may be deemed suitable for any nor all streets, intersections, or street crossings within the town for the protection of the traveling public and all persons using the public streets in the town.
(1995 Code, § 00-07-70-02) Penalty, see § 00-07-70-99
§ 00-07-70-21 SIGNAL LEGEND.
(A) Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic control signals exhibiting the words “go,” “caution,” or “stop,” or exhibiting different colored lights successively, the following colors only shall be used and the terms and lights shall indicate and apply to drivers of vehicles and pedestrians as follows.
(1) Green alone or green accompanied by the word “go.” Vehicular traffic facing the signal may proceed straight through or turn right or left, unless a sign at such place prohibits either turn. Vehicular traffic shall yield the right of way to other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully within a crosswalk at the intersection at the time such signal is exhibited.
224
(2) Yellow alone or yellow accompanied by the word “caution” when shown following the green or “go” signal. Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk at the intersection or at such point as may be indicated by a clearly visible line, but if such stop cannot be made safely, the vehicle may be driven cautiously through the intersection.
(3) Red along or red accompanied by the word “stop.” Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk at the intersection, or at such other point as may be indicated by a clearly visible line, and shall remain standing until green or “go” is shown along.
(4) Red with green arrow. Vehicular traffic facing such signal may cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movement indicated by such arrow, but shall yield the right of way to pedestrians lawfully within a crosswalk and to other traffic.
(B) In the event an official traffic control signal is erected and maintained at a place other than the intersection, the provisions of this section shall be applicable, except as to those provisions which by their nature can have no application. Any stop required shall be made at a sign or marking on the pavement indicating where the stop shall be made, but in the absence of any such sign or marking, the stop shall be made at or before the traffic signal.
(C) This section shall be deemed to be consistent with applicable statutory law as amended from time to time.
(Ord. 2002-1, passed 1-2-2002) Penalty, see § 00-07-70-99
§ 00-07-70-22 FLASHING SIGNALS.
Whenever flashing red or yellow signals are used, they shall require obedience by vehicular traffic as follows.
(A) Flashing red (stop signal). A red flashing signal is equivalent to a stop sign and means the driver must comply in the same manner.
(B) Flashing yellow (caution signal). A yellow flashing light indicates the driver should slow down and use caution when traveling through an intersection or other dangerous area where an accident can happen. Cross-traffic is required to yield the right-of-way; however, drivers should proceed with caution, watching for vehicles or pedestrians attempting to cross the intersection.
(Ord.2002-1, passed 1-2-2002) Penalty, see § 00-07-70-99
§ 00-07-70-23 TURN MARKERS.
When authorized markers, buttons, or other indicators are placed within or adjacent to an intersection indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall use any other course or disobey such directions.
(ord. 2002-1, passed 1-2-2002) Penalty, see § 00-07-70-99
225
OPERATIONAL REQUIREMENTS
§ 00-07-70-35 STOP STREETS.
The Town Council may designate certain streets and intersections as stop streets and intersections by placing stop signs on the streets or at the corners of intersections. Vehicles shall stop or go as directed by an automatic traffic signal installed and operating at any street or within any intersection, and vehicles shall come to a complete stop at any street or intersection where a stop sign is located.
(1995 Code, § 00-07-70-04) Penalty, see § 00-07-70-99
§ 00-07-70-36 SPEEDING.
(A) (1) The state traffic laws regulating the speed of vehicles shall be applicable upon all streets within the town, except where the Town Council, as authorized by state law, properly declares and determines, upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation, that certain speed regulations shall be applicable upon specified streets or in certain areas.
(2) In the event the Town Council establishes such speed limits, it shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle at a speed in excess of any speed so declared when signs are in place giving notice thereof.
(B) (1) On the basis of having performed an engineering and traffic investigation of all public highways within the jurisdictional limits and having thereby determined that certain speed regulations, either more restricted or greater than the speeds specified generally by statute for certain areas as set forth at I.C. 9-4-1-7k, were necessary and more reasonable upon specified streets or public ways, or portions thereof, it is hereby declared that the reasonable, safe, and proper maximum speed limits to be permitted on all town streets, alleys, and public ways shall be not greater than as set forth and established by this chapter.
(2) It shall be prima facie unlawful for any person operating or using a motor vehicle on a public way within this jurisdiction to drive such vehicle at a speed in excess of the speed so declared and fixed for such locations when signs are in place at all necessary locations giving notice thereof.
(3) Alteration of state prima facie speed limits is hereby declared to be accomplished within through the establishment herein of the below-specified speed limits on the following designated streets, or portions thereof, all as authorized by law. Any violation thereof, in a manner declared unlawful in division (B)(2) above, shall subject the violator to the terms, conditions, and penalties for “moving traffic violation” offenses as prescribed in this code.
(C) A schedule of speed limits is in Chapter 72, Traffic Schedules.
(Ord. 2002-1, passed 1-2-2002) Penalty, see § 00-07-70-99
§ 00-07-70-37 DRIVING ON SIDEWALKS.
226
The driver or operator of any vehicle shall not drive the vehicle across any curb or across or within any sidewalk or grassplot area, except at a permanent or temporary driveway and, in the latter instance, shall use due care not to break the curbing or cause other damage to property or injury to any person.
(Ord. 2002-1, passed 1-2-2002) Penalty, see § 00-07-70-99
§ 00-07-70-38 STOPPING REQUIRED.
(A) (1) When stop signs are erected, every driver shall come to a complete stop before the solid white line or crosswalk.
(2) If there is neither a solid white line nor a crosswalk, the driver shall come to a complete stop parallel to the top sign before entering the intersection, except when directed otherwise by an officer or traffic-control signal and shall enter the intersection only when it is safe to do so.
(B) A schedule of stop streets and one-way streets is in Chapter 72, Traffic Schedules.
(Ord.2002-1, passed 1-2-2002) Penalty, see § 00-07-70-99
§ 00-07-70-39 YIELDING REQUIRED.
(A) (1) All vehicles approaching a yield sign at any intersection shall approach the intersection with extreme caution and shall come to a complete stop in the event that other traffic is present on the preferential street at or near the intersection.
(2) The vehicle shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, in the event there is no crosswalk, at a clearly marked stop line; but if none, then at the point nearest the interesting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway.
(B) A driver having so yielded may proceed and the drivers of all other vehicles approaching the intersection shall yield to the vehicle so proceeding; provided, however, that if the driver is involved in a collision with a pedestrian at a crosswalk or a vehicle in the intersection after driving past a yield sign, such collision shall be deemed prima facie evidence of the driver’s failure to yield the right-of-way.
(Ord. 2002-1, passed 1-2-2002) Penalty, see § 00-07-70-99
§ 00-07-70-40 STOPPING BEFORE ENTERING PUBLIC WAY.
(A) The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway, lot, or building into a street or roadway shall stop the vehicle immediately prior to driving onto the sidewalk or, if no sidewalk exists, onto any street, roadway, or public way, yielding the right-of-way to any pedestrian or vehicular traffic as may be necessary to avoid a collision.
(B) If a driver is involved in a collision with a pedestrian at a crosswalk or a vehicle in the intersection after or while entering a public way, such collision shall be deemed prima facie evidence of the driver’s failure to yield the right-of-way.
(Ord. 2002-1, passed 1-2-2002) Penalty, see § 00-07-70-99
227
§ 00-07-70-41 ONE-WAY STREETS.
(A) Upon those streets and parts of streets and in those alleys hereinafter enumerated, vehicular traffic shall move in the indicated direction when signs indicating the direction are erected and maintained at every intersection on the portions of any such street where movement in the opposite direction is prohibited.
(B) A schedule of stop streets and one-way streets is in Chapter 72, Traffic Schedules.
(Ord. 2002-1, passed 1-2-2002) Penalty, se § 00-07-70-99
§ 00-07-70-42 U-TURNS.
The driver or operator of any vehicle shall not turn the vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction by a U-turn upon any street in a business district, or at any intersection where a left turn is prohibited, or at any place where an official traffic-control device or sign indicates that a U-turn shall not be made, nor shall the driver or operator of any vehicle so turn a vehicle, unless the movement can be made in safety and without interference with other traffic.
(Ord. 2002-1, passed 1-2-2002) Penalty, see § 00-07-70-99
§ 00-07-70-43 RESTRICTED TURNS.
(A) Whenever authorized signs are erected or placed indicating that no right, left, or U-turn is permitted at a certain place, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of any such sign or such direction by an officer.
(B) The making of such turns may be prohibited at any time or between certain hours of any day and may be permitted at other hours, in which event the prohibited hours shall be either directed by an officer or shall be plainly indicated on the signs or the signs may be removed when the turns are permitted.
(Ord. 2002-1, passed 1-2-2002) Penalty, see § 00-07-70-99
§ 00-07-70-44 RAILROAD CROSSINGS.
(A) (1) Whenever any driver approaches a railroad grade crossing under any of the circumstances stated in this section, the driver of the vehicle shall stop within 50 feet, but not less than ten feet, from the nearest rail of the railroad, and shall not proceed until the driver can do so safely.
(2) The foregoing requirements shall apply when:
(a) A clearly visible electric or mechanical signal device gives warning of the present approach or passage of a railroad train;
(b) A crossing gate is lowered, or a human flagperson gives or continues to give a signal to stop, indicating thereby the approach or passage of a railroad train;
228
(c) A railroad train approaching within 1,500 feet of the road crossing emits a signal audible from the distance, and such railroad train, by reason of its speed or nearness to the crossing, is an immediate hazard;
(d) An approaching railroad train is plainly visible and is in hazardous proximity to the crossing; and/or
(e) A stop sign is erected giving notice that a stop is required.
(B) (1) No person shall drive any vehicle through, around, or under any crossing gate at a railroad grade crossing while the gate is lowered across the roadway, or is in the process of being lowered or raised or does so while any barrier or sign bars passage and indicates a stop.
(2) No pedestrian shall cross any railroad when any barrier, sign, or gate indicates a stop.
(Ord. 2002-1, passed 1-2-2002) Penalty, see § 00-07-70-99
§ 00-07-70-45 USE OF HORNS.
It is unlawful:
(A) To sound any horn or signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle, or other vehicle in any street or public place of the town, except as a danger warning;
(B) The creation by means of any such signaling device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound;
(C) The sounding of any such device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time;
(D) The use of any signaling device, except one operated by hand, air, or electricity.;
(E) The use of any horn, whistle, or other device operated by engine exhaust; and/or
(F) The continued or repeated use of any such signaling device when traffic is for any reason held up, or in any parade, or in any group of vehicles.
(Ord. 2002-1, passed 1-2-2002) Penalty, see § 00-07-70-99
§ 00-07-70-46 MUFFLER REQUIRED.
Every motor vehicle shall at all times be equipped with a muffler in good working order and in constant operation to prevent the emission of excessive or unusual noise or annoying smoke, and no person shall use a muffler cutout, bypass, or similar device upon a motor vehicle on a public street or highway.
(Ord. 2002-1, passed 1-2-2002) Penalty, see § 00-07-70-99
229
§ 00-07-70-47 DAMAGE TO STREETS.
(A) It is unlawful to operate any automobile, motorcycle, or other kind of vehicle so out of repair, or so loaded, or in such manner as to come in contact with or damage the street and create unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling, or other noises.
(B) It is unlawful to deposit or abandon on a public way or other public land any part of a vehicle, including mufflers and tires, without giving notice to a municipal public safety official.
(C) It is unlawful to damage a public way by any act connected with or related to the operation of a vehicle.
(Ord. 2002-1, passed 1-2-2002) Penalty, see § 00-07-70-99
§ 00-07-70-48 PARADES AND PROCESSIONS.
No procession of 100 or more persons or 25 or more vehicles, except the forces of the United States Army or Navy, the military forces of this state, and the forces of the Police and Fire Departments, shall occupy, march, or proceed along any street in the Hancock County part of the town, except in accordance with a permit issued by the Chief of Police or the designee of the Police Chief and such other regulations as are set forth herein which may apply.
(Ord. 2002-1, passed 1-2-2002) Penalty, see § 00-07-70-99
LOADS; LOADING
§ 00-07-70-48 PARADES AND PROCESSIONS.
(A) Any vehicles, while loading or unloading goods, wares, or merchandise, or any material, within the business or congested district between the hours of 7:o00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., must park parallel with the curb and as close thereto as possible.
(B) Any vehicle, waiting at the curb and not engaged in loading or unloading, promptly shall give way to another vehicle desiring to load or unload goods, wares, merchandise, or other material, and no vehicle shall be left standing in any alley within the business or congested district between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. longer than is necessary for the purpose of loading or unloading goods, wares, merchandise, or other material.
(1995 Code, § 00-07-70-25) Penalty, see § 00-07-70-99
§ 00-07-70-61 LOAD LIMITS.
(A) It shall be unlawful, except as provided in division (B) below, for any person to drive or operate a motor vehicle weighing in excess of five tons upon any street or public way within the corporate limits of the town.
(B) Division (A) above shall not apply to the operation of vehicles for the purposes of local deliveries or on the streets set forth below:
230
(1) State or federal highways; and
(2) Warehouse Street, Wayburn, Muessing, South Munsie Street, and South Starter Street.
(1995 Code, § 00-07-70-26) (Am. Ord. 1986-7, passed 7-2-1986) Penalty, see § 00-07-70-99
§ 00-07-70-99 PENALTY.
(A) Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §00-01-10-99.
(B) Ay person violating § 00-07-70-36 of this chapter shall be fined as follows: $50 for 1-15 mph over limit, $75 for 16-20 mph, $100 for 21-25 mph, and $150 for 25+ mph.
(C) Any person violating §§ 00-07-70-02, 00-07-70-20 through 00-07-70-23, 00-07-70-35, and 00-07-70-37(B) shall be fined $50 for a first violation within a calendar year and at least $70 for additional violations of each section.
(D) Any person violating §§ 00-07-70-47(C) or 00-07-70-48 shall be fined $250.
(E) Violations of any section of this chapter shall be certified to the Indiana Bureau of Motor Vehicles as required by state law.
(Ord. 2002-1, passed 1-2-2002)
231
CHAPTER 71: PARKING
Section
General Provisions
00-07-71-01 Definitions; consistency with statutory law
00-07-71-02 Parking method
00-07-71-03 Parking prohibited
00-07-71-04 Limited parking
00-07-71-05 Prohibited stopping, standing, and parking
00-07-71-06 Obstructing traffic
00-07-71-07 Car doors
00-07-71-08 Truck and/or trailer parking
Specific Regulations
00-07-71-16 Metered parking
00-07-71-17 Placement of meters
00-07-71-18 Loading and unloading
00-07-71-19 Unauthorized parking in loading and unloading zones
00-07-71-20 Public carrier stops
00-07-71-21 Oversized vehicle parking
00-07-71-22 Exceptions to use
00-07-71-99 Penalty
Cross-reference:
Ordinance Violations Bureau, see Chapter 36
Parking Schedules, see Chapter 73
Police Department, see Chapter 33
Traffic Rules, see Chapter 70
Traffic Schedules, see Chapter 72
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 00-07-71-01 DEFINITIONS, CONSISTENCY WITH STATUTORY LAW.
(A) Uniform Traffic Code definitions from I.C. 9-13-2 control, unless otherwise defined.
232
(B) This chapter shall be deemed to be consistent with applicable statutory law as amended from time to time.
(Ord. 2002-2, passed 1-2-2002)
§ 00-07-71-02 PARKING METHOD.
(A) Method.
(1) Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, every vehicle stopped or parked upon a roadway where there are adjacent curbs shall be so stopped or parked with the curb-side wheels of the vehicle parallel to and within 12 inches of the curb.
(2) Except as provided for in division (B) below, vehicles parking must do so on the right-hand side of the roadway.
(B) Exception. Vehicles may park on either side of one-way streets, if not otherwise herein prohibited.
(Ord. 2002-2, passed 1-2-2002) Penalty, see § 00-07-71-99
§ 00-07-71-03 PARKING PROHIBITED.
(A) When signs are erected, if shall be unlawful for the driver or operator of any vehicle to park such vehicle or to permit it to be parked at any time, except as otherwise permitted I this chapter, in any of the places upon any of the streets enumerated in this section.
(B) Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit:
(1) The standing, at or adjacent to the curb of any streets enumerated in this section, of a passenger vehicle temporarily for the reasonable and expeditious loading or unloading of passengers, if the loading or unloading shall not consume more than five minutes.
(2) The standing, at or adjacent to the curb of any such streets, of a commercial vehicle, or of any vehicle being then actually used for a commercial purpose, whether occupied or not, temporarily for the reasonable and expeditious loading, unloading, delivery, or pickup of materials or merchandise, if the loading, unloading, delivery, or pickup shall not consume more than 20 minutes:
(3) The standing of a passenger or commercial vehicle upon any such roadway during any time in obedience to traffic signs or signals;
(4) The standing of a passenger or commercial vehicle upon any such roadway while such vehicle is temporarily disabled and during the time reasonably necessary for its removal therefrom, if the standing shall not consume more than 30 minutes; nor
(5) The standing of a regularly licensed taxicab or bus, respectively, within a regularly established taxicab stand or bus zone, as permitted in this code or other town ordinance, or while the taxicab or bus is taking on or discharging passengers in such zone or stand, the taking on or discharging of which does not consume more than five minutes’.
(Ord. 2002-2, passed 1-2-2002) Penalty, see § 00-07-71-99
233
§ 00-07-71-04 LIMITED PARKING.
When signs are erected in each block giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle in violation of a limited parking notice.
(Ord. 2002-2, passed 1-2-2002) Penalty, see § 00-07-71-99
§ 00-07-71-05 PROHIBITED STOPPING, STANDING, AND PARKING.
Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in compliance with law or the directions of a police officer, official traffic-control device, or markings on a street or curb, no person shall:
(A) Stop, stand, or park a vehicle:
(1) On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street;
(2) On a sidewalk;
(3) Within an intersection;
(4) Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction, when stopping, standing, or parking would obstruct traffic;
(5) On any railroad tracks;
(6) Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or within a highway tunnel;
(7) At any place where official signs prohibit stopping; nor
(8) At any place where official signs prohibit standing.
(B) (1) Park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or passengers:
(a) Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing; nor
(b) At any place where official signs prohibit parking.
(2) No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his or her control into any prohibited area or away from a curb at a distance that is unlawful.
(C) Stand or park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except momentarily to pick up or discharge a passenger or passengers:
(1) In front of a public or private driveway:
(2) Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant
234
(3) Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within 75 feet of that entrance (when properly sign-posted);
(4) Within ten feet of a crosswalk; nor
(5) Within 30 feet from any flashing signal, stop sign, or traffic-control signal.
(Ord. 2002-2, passed 1-2-2002)
(D) Stand or park a vehicle in a location along a roadway or in a public or private parking lot that has signage or other markings indicating that location to be parking for handicapped persons, unless a government-issued permit for handicapped parking is visibly displayed on the vehicle.
§ 00-07-71-06 OBSTRUCTING TRAFFIC.
(A) No person shall park any vehicle upon a street, alley, or other public roadway in a manner or under conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of the width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic.
(B) (1) Any vehicle found to be obstructing traffic on any public roadway shall be removed or caused to be removed by any law enforcement officer observing such violation.
(2) The owner of such vehicle shall be responsible for all fines, tow-ins, and storage charges resulting from such removal.
(Ord. 2002-2, passed 1-2-2002) Penalty, see § 0-07-71-99
§ 00-07-71-07 CAR DOORS.
(A) No person shall open the door of a motor vehicle on the side available to moving traffic, unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so.
(B) No person shall leave a door open on the side of a motor vehicle available to moving traffic for a period of time longer than necessary to load or unload passengers.
(Ord. 2002-2, passed 1-2-2002) Penalty, see § 00-07-71-99
§ 00-07-71-08 TRUCK AND/OR TRAILER PARKING.
(A) It shall be unlawful and shall be a violation of this chapter for any truck, truck-tractor, road tractor, trailer, semi-trailer and pole trailer as defined in this section to be parked or stored on or along the streets, roads or other public ways in the corporate limits of the town which are located in any residential zoning classification.
(B) Trucks, truck-tractors, road tractors, semi-trailers and pole trailers may, however, for the purpose of making delivery or picking up a load be so parked for not more than the minimum length of time necessary for the purpose of delivery or picking up a loan or while temporarily disabled for not to exceed 48 hours while so disabled.
235
(C) Whenever in this section the following terms are used, they shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them as follows:
POLE TRAILER. Any vehicle with motive power designed to be drawn by another vehicle and attached to the towing vehicle by means of a reach, or pole, or being boomed or otherwise secured to the towing vehicle, and ordinarily used for transporting long or irregular shaped loads such as poles, pipes, or structural members, capable, generally, of sustaining themselves as beams between the supporting connections.
ROAD TRACTOR. Any motor vehicle designed and used for drawing other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry a load thereon, either independently or any part of the weight of a vehicle or load so drawn.
SEMI-TRAILER. Any vehicle with or without motive power designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that some part of its weight and that of its load rests upon or is carried by another vehicle.
TRAILER. Any vehicle with or without motive power designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that no part of its weight rests upon the towing vehicle.
TRUCK. Any motor vehicle designed, used or maintained primarily for the transportation of property. The term TRUCK shall include any motor vehicle designed to be used primarily for drawing another vehicle and so constructed as to carry a load other than a part of the weight of the vehicle and load so drawn.
TRUCK-TRAILER. Any motor vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing other vehicles and not constructed as to carry a load other than part of the weight of the vehicle and load so drawn.
(D) This section shall not apply to the following:
(1) Trucks having a recommended load capacity of less than 2,000 pounds.
(2) Vehicles parked or stored on municipal, county, state or other publicly owned or operated property and along the streets adjoining such property;
(3) Vehicles parked or stored on lawful business or commercial property under and recognized as such pursuant to the zoning ordinances of the won and along the streets adjoining such property;
(4) Motor vehicles or trailers designed and used as a travel trailer, camper, motor home, vacation trailers, tent trailer, boat trailer, snowmobile trailer, motorcycle trailer, camping trailer, and for any similar purpose.
(Ord. 2010-3, passed 3-17-2010)
236
SPECIFIC REGULATIONS
§ 00-07-71-16 METERED PARKING.
(A) After establishment and designation of parking meter zones and the installation of meters, it shall be unlawful, during such times as are designated and marked, to park any vehicle in any parking meter zone without payment of the parking fee, or to permit ay vehicle to remain parked, after payment, for a period longer than designated on such meter.
(B) Lines shall be painted or placed upon the curb or street adjacent to each parking meter for the purpose of designating the parking space and the angle at which vehicles are to be parked. Each vehicle parking within any parking meter zone shall park within the line or marking so established. It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle across any line or marking or to park the vehicle in a position that the same shall not be entirely within the area designated by the lines or markings.
(C) It shall be unlawful for any person not authorized by the municipality to deface, injure, tamper with, open or willfully break, destroy, or impair the usefulness of any parking meter installed under the provisions of this subchapter.
(D) It shall be unlawful to deposit any slug, device, or other substitute for any coin in any parking meter.
(E) Where any signs are posted in any block of any street or in any public place, or any officers give orders, giving notice of any prohibited times or hours for any parking thereon, or in such portions thereof, or of other restrictions, persons shall take notice thereof and shall not use any parking meters, or remain in any spaces, during or at any place or times so prohibited. The Town Council, in its discretion, may give further notices at any time by so indicating on plates or signs attached to or near each parking meter.
(Ord. 2002-2, passed 1-2-2002) Penalty, see § 00-07-71-99
§ 00-07-71-17 PLACEMENT OF METERS.
(A) Parking meters shall be installed in the parking meter zone, as established by the Town Council, and shall be placed adjacent to the individual parking places hereinafter described.
(B) Each parking meter shall be placed or set to show or display by a signal whether the parking place adjacent to the meter is in use legally.
(C) Due allowance shall be given to clearance of alleys and street intersections and of fire hydrants, loading, taxicabs, bus zones, and other prohibitions or restrictions upon parking at various places within such parking meter zones and for specified sizes of vehicles, as may be prescribed by the Council.
(1995 Code, § 00-07-71-17) Penalty, see § 00-07-71-99
237
§ 00-07-71-18 LOADING AND UNLOADING.
(A) Any vehicles, while loading or unloading goods, wares, or merchandise, or any material, within a commercial district or other congested area between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., must park parallel with the curb and as close thereto as possible.
(B) Any vehicle waiting at the curb and not engaged in loading and unloading promptly shall give way to another vehicle desiring to load or unload goods, wares, merchandise, or other material, and no vehicle shall be left standing in any alley, within a commercial district or other congested area between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., longer than is necessary for the purpose of loading or unloading goods, wares, merchandise, or other material.
(C) In no case shall the stop for loading or unloading of materials exceed 30 minutes.
(Ord. 2002-2, passed 1-2-2002) Penalty, see § 00-07-71-99
§ 00-07-71-19 UNAUTHORIZED PARKING IN LOADING AND UNLOADING ZONES.
(A) Passenger zone. No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle for any purpose or period of time other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers in any place marked as a passenger curb loading zone during hours when the regulations applicable to such curb loading zone are effective, and then only for a period not to exceed three minutes.
(B) Freight zone. No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of time other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pick-up and loading of materials in any place marked as a freight curb loading zone during hours when the provisions applicable to such zones are in effect.
(Ord. 2002-2, passed 1-2-202) Penalty, see § 07-07-71-99
§ 00-07-71-20 PUBLIC CARRIER STOPS.
It shall be unlawful for the driver or operator of any vehicle, other than a bus or taxicab respectively, to park or stop any vehicle or to permit the vehicle to stand in or otherwise obstruct an officially designated bus stop zone or taxicab stand.
(Ord. 2002-2, passed 1-2-2002) Penalty, see § 00-07-71-99
§ 00-07-71-21 OVERSIZED VEHICLE PARKING.
It shall be illegal and unlawful for any person to park a vehicle with a capacity of more than one-half ton on any street or alley in the town, unless such person is in the act of loading or unloading cargo.
(Ord. 2002-2, passed 1-2-2002) Penalty, see § 00-07-71-99
238
§ 00-07-71-22 EXCEPTIONS TO USE.
(A) Whenever parking or stopping of any vehicle is prohibited between certain hours or during certain specified periods of time of any or all days upon certain designated streets, places, or portions thereof; is prohibited temporarily at any particular time; or is prohibited in an emergency, no driver or operator of any vehicle shall park or stop it or permit it to be parked, or to stand and remain at any such time in any place allotted for parking meter use, or any street or public place, or portions thereof, where parking meters have been installed and are in operation.
(B) Where any signs are posted in any block of any street or in any public place, or any officers give orders, giving notice of any prohibited times or hours for any parking thereon, or in such portions thereof, or of other restrictions, all persons shall take notice thereof and shall not use any parking meters, or remain in any spaces, during or at any place or times as so prohibited. The Town Council in its discretion, may give further notices at any time by so indicating on plates or signs attached to or near each parking meter.
(1995 Code, § 00-07-71-22) Penalty, see § 00-07-71-99
§ 00-07-71-99 PENALTY.
(A) Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 00-01-10-99.
(B) Any person in violation of §§00-07-71-02 through 00-07-72-07, except 00-07-71-05(A)(1) through (5) and (C)(1) through (3), 00-07-71-16, 00-07-71-17, and 00-07-71-20, shall be fined $12 for a first offense and at least $20 for subsequent offenses in the same calendar year.
(C) Any person in violation of §§ 00-07-71-05(A)(1) through (5) and (C)(1) through (3), 00-07-71-18 and 00-07-71-19, shall be fined $25 for a first offense and at least $35 for subsequent offenses in the same calendar year.
(D) Any person in violation of § 00-07-71-21 shall be fined $50.
(E) Any person violating any provisions of § 00-07-71-08 and any person who aids, abets or assists therein, shall be subject to a fine according to the following schedule:
First Offense
$100
Second Offense
$250
Third Offense
$400
Fourth and all other offenses
$500
(1) Each day in which such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense and violation of this chapter. In addition, after the fourth offense the town may elect to have the vehicle towed immediately in accordance with all ordinances of the town and the state.
239
(2) If the town elects to tow said vehicle(s), the owner of the vehicle(s) will be responsible for paying all towing and storage costs in addition to the fine.
(3) If the fine(s) are not paid within 30 days, the town may file a Code Enforcement action against the individual in violation. In this event, the individual will be responsible for attorneys fees and court costs in addition to the fine(s).
(Ord. 2002-2, passed 1-2-2002; Am. Ord. 2010-3, passed 3-17-2010; Am. Ord. 2010-15, passed 8-4-2010)
240
CHAPTER 72: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Schedule
I. Stop streets
II. Speed limits
III. One-way streets
SCHEDULE I. STOP STREETS
Stop Street
Stop Location
Ord. No.
Date Passed
All
Intersection New York and Hugo Streets
All
Intersection Michigan and Hugo Streets
All
Intersection Michigan and Monroe Streets
All
Intersection New York and Monroe Streets
All
U.S. 40
Abel Circle
Valley Brook Drive
1987-6
1-6-1988
Beckley Road
Buck Creek Road
Beechwood Drive
Oak Blvd. W. Drive, Hickory Drive
Berkshire Lane
Yorkshire Blvd. N. Drive
Berkshire Lane
Derbyshire Drive
Bremerton Drive
10th Street
Bremerton Circle
Bremerton Drive
Buck Creek Road
Intersection Buck Creek Road
Buck Creek Road
Valley Brook Drive
Buckley Blvd.
Buckley Road
1990-14
8-1-1990
Buckley Blvd.
Buck Creek Road
1990-14
8-1-1990
Buckley Court
Buckley Blvd.
1990-14
8-1-1990
Calzia Lane
Washington Cove Lane
1994-10
10-5-1994
Cobblefield Way
21st Street
Colmar Street
Munsie, Muessing, Wayburn, Starter
Constantino Lane
Washington Cove Lane
1994-10
10-5-1994
Constantino Lane
Washington Cove Way
1994-10
10-5-1994
Coolee Circle
Coolee Lane
Coolee Lane
Dunshire Drive
Cumberland Falls Drive
Water Fall Way and Ridge Run Way
241
Deanna Drive
Munsie Street
Derbyshire Drive N.
Yorkshire Drive
Derbyshire Drive S.
Yorkshire Blvd. (EB and WB)
Dunbar Circle N.
Dunbar Drive
Dunbar Circle S.
Dunbar Drive
Dunbar Court
Dunbar Drive
Dunbar Drive
Beckley and Hopkins Road
Dunshire Drive
Woodlark Drive
E. Harvest Glen Drive
Buck Creek Road
E. Harvest Glen Drive
N. Harvest Glen Court
E. St. Joseph Street
Bremerton Drive
Emory Drive
Valley Brook Drive
1987-6
1-6-1988
Fieldstone Court
Cobblefield Way
Granby Drive
Hopkins Road
Grebe Circle
Mace Drive
1986-12
12-29-1986
Heflin Street
Warehouse, Saxon, and Saturn (NB and SB)
Hickory Court
Hickory Drive
Hickory Drive
Oak Blvd. S. Drive, Oak Blvd. N. Drive, Hickory Court
Hickory Lane
Hickory Court
Hopkins Road
Buck Creek Road
Hopkins Road
E. Harvest Glen Drive
Hopkins Road (SE)
Intersection Hopkins and Beckley Roads
Hugo Street
10th, Michigan, and New York Streets
Huntington Circle
Lakeside Lane
1987-6
1-6-1988
Huntington Court
Huntington Drive
1987-6
1-6-1998
Huntington Drive
Lakeside Lane (both ends)
1987-6
1-6-1988
Kemp Circle
Mace Drive
1986-12
12-29-1986
Lakeside Lane
Buck Creek Road
1987-6
1-6-1988
Lakeside Lane
E. 21st Street
1987-6
1-6-1988
Mace Drive
Emory Drive
1986-12
12-29-1986
Mace Drive
Valley Brook Drive
Maple Court
Oak Blvd. S. Drive
242
Mayer Drive
Water Fall Way
Mayfield Street
Hopkins Road
Michigan Street
Bremerton Drive
Michigan Street
Muessing Street
Michigan Street
Washington Cove Way (EB and WB)
1994-10
10-5-1994
Monroe Street
10th, Michigan, and New York Streets
Muessing/Munsie Street
Saturn, Colmar, Welland Streets
Muessing Street
Saxon Street (NB and SB)
New York Street
Arthur Street
Niles Street
Munsie, Muessing, Wayburn, and Starter Streets
N. Buckingham Court
N. Manchester Drive
N. Cambridge Court
N. Winchester Drive
N. Concord Court
N. Manchester Drive
N. Hampton Court
N. Manchester Drive
N. Harvest Glen Cr.
E. Harvest Glen Drive
N. Manchester Drive
N. Buckingham Court
N. Manchester Drive
N. Concord Court
N. Manchester Drive
Salem Court
N. Threshing Court
E. Harvest Glen Drive
N. Winchester
N. Salem Court
Oak Blvd. N. Drive
700 W. Woodland E. and W. and Oak Blvd. W. Drive
Oak Blvd. S. Drive
700 W.
2005-04
7-6-2005
Oak Blvd. S. Drive
Hickory Drive and Woodland East Drive
2005-04
7-6-2005
Oak Blvd. W. Drive
Oak Blvd. N. Drive and Oak Court
2005-04
7-6-2005
Sandstone Court
Cobblefield Way
Saturn Street
Municipal Parking Lot
Saturn Street
Muessing, Munsie, Heflin, Starter, Wayburn
Saxon Street
Carroll Road, Heflin, Starter, Wayburn, Muessing
Starter Street
Warehouse, Saxon, and Saturn Streets
243
Sunrise Circle
Sunrise Drive
1987-6
1-6-1988
Sunrise Drive
Valley Brook Drive
Sunrise Court
Valley Brook Drive
1987-6
1-6-1988
Valley Brook Court
Valley Brook Drive
Valley Brook Court
E. 21st Street
Valley Brook Drive
Valley View Circle (NB and SB)
1990-4
3-7-1990
Valley Brook Drive
Intersection Buck Creek Road
1988-6
8-3-1988
Valley View Circle
Valley Brook Drive
1987-6
1-6-1988
Village Green Drive
100 n.
Warehouse Street
Carroll Road and Wayburn Streets
Waring Drive E.
E. 10th Street
Waring Drive W.
E. 10th Street
Washington Dove Lane
E. 10th Street
Water Fall Way
700 West Street
Waterview Circle
Valley Brook Drive
1987-6
1-6-1988
Wayburn Street
Welland, Saturn, Saxon, Warehouse Streets
Welland Street
Munsie and Muessing Streets
Westminster Court
N. Manchester Drive
Whidbey Court
Whidbey Drive
Woodlark Drive
E. 10th Street
Woodland East Drive
Oak Blvd. N. and Oak Blvd. S. Drives
Woodland West Drive
Oak Blvd. N. and Oak Blvd. S. Drives
9th Street
Muessing Street
10th Street
Washington Cove Lane
1994-10
10-5-1994
(Ord. 2000-6, passed 11-1-2000)
244
SCHEDULE II. SPEED LIMITS
(A) No motor vehicle or any other type of vehicular traffic shall travel along and upon the residential streets of the town at a speed greater than as follows:
Street
Location
Speed Limit
Buck Creek Road
All parts in the town
35 mph
All other residential streets
All parts of the town
20 mph
(B) Speed signs shall be erected along the streets of the town which show the speed limitations established herein.
(1995 Code, Ch. 72, Sch. II)
(C) Muessing Road, Tenth Street and German Church Road are roadways under the jurisdiction of Marion County and Washington Street is under the jurisdiction of the State of Indiana, thus the speed limits are not established by the town.
SCHEDULE III. ONE-WAY STREETS
Street
Location
Muncie Street
From Washington Street to Saturn Street
Municipal Drive
From park Lane to Washington Street
Park Lane
From the Post Office parking lot to Municipal Drive
245
CHAPTER 73: PARKING SCHEDULES
Scheduled
I. No parking zones
SCHEDULE I. NO PARKING ZONES
The following streets constitute no parking zones, no person shall park a vehicle along the following streets designated below.
Street
Location
Side
Ord. No.
Date Passed
Bremerton Drive
From 10th Street to Dunshire Drive
West
Coolee Lane
From Dunshire Drive to East St. Joseph
East
Dunshire Drive
From Bremerton Drive to Woodlark Drive
South
East St. Joseph
From Coolee Lane to Bremerton Drive
North
Waring Drive East
From 10th Street to Whidbey Court
West
Woodlark Drive
From 10th Street to New York Street
West
Waring Drive West
From Whidbey Court to 10th Street
East
Muncie Street
From Washington Street to Saturn Street
East
1990-18
11-7-1990
(1995 Code, Ch. 73, Sch. I) (Ord. 1990-18, passed 11-7-1990)
246
CHAPTER 74: WAYFINDING DESTINATION SIGN POLICY
Section
00-07-74-01 Policy for destinations to be listed on town wayfinding signs
00-07-74-02 Publicly owned and operated
00-07-74-03 Public services
00-07-74-04 Districts
00-07-74-05 Private businesses
00-07-74-06 Making a request
00-07-74-07 Appeals
§ 00-07-74-01 POLICY FOR DESTINATIONS TO BE LISTED ON TOWN WAYFINDING SIGNS.
(A) The town has undertaken a design process for wayfinding, or directional, signs that will be located throughout the town. These signs will designate public buildings and services, but may also provide directions to privately owned buildings that have not-for-profit uses. It is important for the Town Council to establish a policy on what destinations will be considered appropriate to be listed on the wayfinding signs.
(B) This is especially important since commercial businesses and other entities may very well likely wish to have their businesses or organizations on these signs.
(C) All buildings, services organizations, and/or businesses must be located within the town limits.
(D) The following sections will identify destinations that are permitted to be listed o these signs, the process to request and also to appeal these decisions.
(Ord. 2010-05, passed 4-21-2010)
§ 00-07-74-02 PUBLICLY OWNED AND OPERATED.
This category allows for all publicly (town, state, federal, county, township) owned facilities to be listed on signs. This category should be given a high priority for listing on wayfinding signs.
(A) Town owned and operated:
(1) Town Hall and Police Department.
(2) All town parks.
(3) Cumberland Pennsy Trail.
(4) Cumberland Buck Creek Trail.
(5) All future parks and trails.
247
(6) Cumberland wastewater treatment plant would not be listed for security purposes.
(B) State and federal building: Post Office.
(C) Other. None.
(Ord. 2010-05, passed 4-21-2010)
§ 00-07-74-03 PUBLIC SERVICES.
Public services may be operated and/or funded by public agencies or non-profit organization providing necessary service or address social needs of residents.
(A) Schools and educational facilities.
(1) There are currently no educational facilities located within the town. However, all township schools located within the town limits in the future should be given an opportunity to apply to be listed on signs. This should be the same for publicly-funded charter schools and higher education facilities with a minimum enrollment of 100 students.
(2) This section is not intended to include daycare centers, pre-schools, nursery schools, church related or religious schools, or similar uses. For profit educational facilities will not be included in the directional signage program.
(B) Libraries, museums and cultural facilities.
(1) There are currently no libraries, museums or cultural facilities located within the town.
(2) These types of facilities that are owned publicly or by non-profit organizations and open to the public on a daily basis shall be permitted to be listed on the signs.
(C) Hospitals.
(1) There are currently no hospitals within town limits. Publicly owned and funded hospitals shall be allowed to be listed on the signs.
(2) Privately funded hospital may be listed if they meet the minimum criteria of 100 in patient beds.
(D) Other.
(1) Bus stops.
(2) Farmers’ market.
(3) Public parking
(Ord. 2010-05, passed 4-21-2010)
248
§ 00-07-74-04 DISTRICTS.
(A) The town is located along the Historic National Road and is listed both locally and nationally as a historic district. These districts may be listed on the signs for visitors.
(B) Additionally, the town will identify commercial districts where groups of business are located and list the district name(s) to identify where their business is located.
(1) National Register District: Old Town Cumberland.
(2) Local Historic District:
(a) Cumberland Conservation District.
(b) St. John UCC.
(c) Other districts designated by the Indianapolis Historic Preservation Commission.
(3) Commercial Districts: Downtown Cumberland.
(Ord. 2010-05, passed 4-21-2010)
§ 00-07-74-05 PRIVATE BUSINESSES.
Private for profit businesses or organizations will not be permitted on the wayfinding signs.
(Ord. 2010-05, passed 4-21-2010)
§ 00-07-74-06 MAKING A REQUEST.
(A) Buildings not listed on signs that wish to be added may request to be listed on wayfinding signs. Only buildings/services listed as permitted in this policy will be permitted.
(B) This policy may be updated from time to time to address new services, buildings, or organizations that will or will not be permitted.
(1) Format and requests. Requests shall be made in writing to the Director of Planning and Development. Requests shall include the location of the business, statement of why request fits with this policy, and contact information for person making request.
(2) Process for review. When a request is received by the Director of Planning and Development, the request shall be reviewed, considered and a determination made within 30 days unless Town Council action is required. The standards for review shall be the statements put forth in this policy.
(3) Final decisions. Decisions by the Director of Planning and Development shall be committed to writing.
(Ord. 2010-05, passed 4-21-2010)
249
§ 00-07-74-07 APPEALS.
(A) Parties that believe their request was denied contrary to the permissions set forth in the Policy for destinations to be listed on wayfinding signs may appeal to the Town Council.
(B) Any business or organization that is explicitly prohibited in this policy may not appeal a decision of the Director of Planning and Development.
(1) Format to appeal. Requests shall include the location of the business, statement of why request fits with this policy, contact information for person making request, and reasons why believe request should have been approved by Director of Planning and Development. Appeals must be made within ten days of decision.
(2) Procedures and final decision. The Town Council shall address the appeal at the next available Town Council meeting or within 30 days of receipt of appeal. The Town Council’s decision is final.
(Ord. 2010-05, passed 4-21-2010)
250
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
Chapter
90. ABANDONED AND ILLEGALLY STORED VEHICLES
91. ANIMALS
92. FIRE PREVENTION
93. NUISANCES
94. PARKS AND RECREATION
95. STREETS; SIDEWALKS; BRIDGES
96. WEEDS AND VEGETATION
97. ALARMS
98. NO SMOKING
99. WATER CONSERVATION
100. UNSAFE BUILDING REGULATIONS AND REMEDIATION
Cumberland – General Regulations
251
CHAPTER 90: ABANDONED AND ILLEGALLY STORED VEHICLES
Section
Abandoned Vehicles
00-09-90-01 Definition
00-09-90-02 Statutory authority
00-09-90-03 Police Department; power
00-09-90-04 Town Marshal; power
Motor Vehicle Storage
00-09-90-15 Application and enforcement of storage provisions
00-09-90-16 Storing motor vehicles on private property
00-09-90-17 Compliance required; removal of vehicles
ABANDONED VEHICLES
§ 00-09-90-01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
ABANDONED VEHICLE.
(1) A vehicle located on public property illegal.
(2) A vehicle left on public property without being moved for three days.
(3) A vehicle left on public property in such a manner as to constitute a hazard or obstruction to the movement of pedestrian or vehicular traffic on a public right-of-way.
(4) A vehicle that has remained on private property without the consent of the owner or person in control of that property for more than 48 hours.
(5) A vehicle from which the engine, transmission, or differential has been removed or that is otherwise partially dismantled or inoperable and left on public property.
(6) A vehicle that has been removed by a towing service or public agency upon request of an officer enforcing a statute or an ordinance other than this chapter if the impounded vehicle is not claimed or redeemed by the owner or the owner’s agent within 20 days after the vehicle’s removal.
(7) A vehicle that is at least three model years old, is mechanically inoperable, and is left on private property continuously in a location visible from public property for more than 20 days.
252
§ 00-09-90-02 STATUTORY AUTHORITY.
(A) The provisions of this subchapter on abandoned vehicles are adopted pursuant to the authority of I.C. 9-22-1-32 and incorporate all of the authority allowed municipalities under this statute.
(B) Subject to any amendments to I.C. 9-22-1-1, this authority does not apply to the following:
(1) A vehicle in operable condition specifically adapted or constructed for operation on privately owned raceways.
(2) A vehicle stored as the property of a member of the armed forces of the United States who is on active duty assignment.
(3) A vehicle located on a vehicle sale lot.
(4) A vehicle located upon property licensed or zoned as an automobile scrapyard.
(5) A vehicle registered and licenses under I.C. 9-18-12 as an antique vehicle.
§ 00-09-90-03 POLICE DEPARTMENT; POWERS.
The Cumberland Police Department shall have the power to remove, store, and dispose of abandoned vehicles in accordance with the procedures of I.C. 9-22-1-1 through I.C. 9-22-1-32.
§ 00-09-90-04 TOWN COUNCIL; POWERS.
Subject to the approval of the Town Council, the Town Marshal shall have the authority to enter into towing contracts on behalf of the town; for the removal, storage, and disposition of abandoned vehicles and parts. The charges for towing and storage of abandoned vehicles shall be the amount the towing contractor is entitled to be paid under the terms of their towing contract with the town. The town may use any method allowed by statute to cities and towns for the disposal of abandoned vehicles or, by cooperative agreements with Indianapolis, Marion County or Hancock County, may use methods allowed by statute to first class cities and counties.
MOTOR VEHICLE STORAGE
§ 00-09-90-15 APPLICATOIN AND ENFORCEMENT OF STORAGE PROVISIONS.
(A) The provisions of this subchapter are supplemental to those of the subchapter “Abandoned Vehicles” and to any town zoning provisions that may apply to parking, storing or allowing motor vehicles or motor vehicle parts on private property. The provision of this subchapter shall not be enforced when such enforcement is in conflict with the provisions of the subchapter “Abandoned Vehicles” or any town zoning provision.
(B) This subchapter may be enforced by the Town Manager or his or her designee or the Town Marshal or his or her designee.
253
§ 00-09-90-16 STORING MOTOR VEHICLES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
(A) No motor vehicle or motor vehicle parts shall be parked, stored, or allowed to remain on any private property in the town, unless authorized in connection with an approved business, such as a service station, motor vehicle garage, or junkyard, existing in accordance with current zoning and parking regulations, or as allowed by this subchapter.
(B) (1) Motor vehicles and motor vehicle parts may be stored in a completely enclosed building upon private property within the town, provided the storage does not violate any zoning regulation.
(2) No motor vehicle may be parked, stored, or maintained on private property within the town, other than in an enclosed building, unless the vehicle meets all of the following requirements.
(a) The vehicle must have current license plates affixed.
(b) The vehicle must belong to the resident of the property where parked, stored, or maintained or to his or her guest, or to the title holders of the real property.
(c) The vehicle must meet all requirements (including, but not limited to, insurance and equipment requirements) to drive on public highways during both daytime and nighttime hours in the state.
(1995 Code, § 00-09-90-02) (Ord. 1992-9, passed 6-3-1992) Penalty, see § 00-01-10-99
§ 00-09-90-17 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED; REMOVAL OF VEHICLES.
(A) Motor vehicles not complying with the requirements provided in this subchapter shall be removed within 30 days after the landowner and/or resident has been notified to remove the same. Notice shall be effected by delivery of the same to the owner of the property or posting the same on the vehicle.
(B) Failure to comply with a removal notice within the time set may result in any or all of the following actions:
(1) A fine of $10 per day for each day the violation continues after notification; and/or
(2) Institution of a suit by the town seeking a permanent and mandatory injunction to enforce this subchapter, together with all costs and expenses, including attorneys’ fees, for maintaining the suit. (1995 Code, § 00-09-90-03) (Ord. 1992-9, passed 6-3-1992) Penalty, see § 00-01-10-99
254
CHAPTER 91: ANIMALS
Section
General Provisions
00-09-91-01 General provisions
00-09-91-02 Identification required
Regulated Activities
00-09-91-03 Confinement of cats and dogs
00-09-91-04 Dogs and cats in heat
00-09-91-05 Animals creating a nuisance
00-09-91-06 Humane treatment required
00-09-91-07 Vaccination required
00-09-91-08 Disposal of animals
00-09-91-09 Awarding live animals as prizes
00-09-91-10 Enticing animals to fight
00-09-91-11 Animals in crime
00-09-91-12 Animals in vehicle
00-09-91-13 Wild animals
00-09-91-14 Keeping farm animals
00-09-91-15 Curbing animals required
00-09-91-16 Vicious animals
00-09-91-17 Vehicular collisions with animals
00-09-91-18 Enticing animals
00-09-91-99 Penalty
255
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 00-09-91-01 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
This chapter shall be deemed to be consistent with applicable statutory law as amended from time to time.
(Ord. 2002-3, passed 1-2-2002)
§ 00-09-91-02 IDENTIFICATION REQUIRED.
(A) A person who owns a dog or cat in the town shall ensure that each dog or cat owned by that person bears a permanent means of identification at all times, such that the owner of a lost or stolen dog or cat can be ascertained quickly and easily. That person shall assure that any corresponding microchip identification numbers will be on record by the municipality.
(B) The means of identification required by this section shall be in addition to any tags required to be worn by dogs or cats by state law or other provision of this code and shall include either:
(1) A microchip implanted in the dog or cat which bears a registered identification number and which can be read by a standard microchip scanner; or
(2) A permanent tag attached to a durable collar worn at all times by the dog or cat and bearing the owner’s current name, address, and telephone number.
(C) Each veterinarian or other person in the municipality who implants microchips as contemplated in this section shall, at an interval of not less than once each month, send to the animal control agency of the municipality the names, addresses, and phone numbers of the owners of the dogs and cats, and the corresponding microchip identification numbers.
(D) The requirements of this section shall not apply to cats and dogs of less than three months of age.
(Ord. 2002-3, passed 1-2-2002) Penalty, see § 00-09-91-99
REGULATED ACTIVITIES
§ 00-09-91-03 CONFINEMENT OF CATS AND DOGS.
It shall be unlawful for the owner, or any other person having the possession, care, custody or control thereof, to permit any dog or cat to run at large upon public streets or walks or parks or upon private property, other than the dog or cat owner’s property, unless the dog be attached to a leash of not more than 12 feet in length, of sufficient strength to restrain the dog, and each dog or cat shall be kept under the control of the person accompanying it.
(Ord. 2002-3, passed 1-2-2002) Penalty, see § 00-09-91-99.
256
§ 00-09-91-04 DOGS AND CATS IN HEAT.
Every female dog or cat in heat shall be confined in a building or secure enclosure in such manner that the female dog or cat cannot come into contact with another animal, except for planned breeding.
(Ord. 2003-3, passed 1-2-2002) Penalty, see § 00-09-91-99
§ 00-09-91-05 ANIMALS CREATING A NUISANCE.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, or harbor within the town any animal which, by its frequent or habitual howling, yelping, barking, or making of other noises, shall create an annoyance or significant disturbance to the peace and tranquility of the neighborhood, or which by such noise interferes with the reasonable use and enjoyment of another person’s property, and such conditions are hereby declared to be a nuisance.
(B) No owner, keeper, or person harboring an animal shall fail to exercise proper care and control of his or her animals to prevent them from molesting passersby, chasing vehicles, or habitually attacking other domestic animals, and such conditions are hereby declared to be a nuisance.
(Ord. 2002-3, passed 1-2-2002) Penalty, see § 00-09-91-99
§ 00-09-91-06 HUMANE TREATMENT REQUIRED.
(A) Every owner or keep of an animal kept in the town shall see that such animal:
(1) Is kept in a clean, sanitary, and healthy manner and is not confined so as to be forced to stand, sit or lie in its own excrement; the person(s) responsible for animal(s) shall regularly, and as often as necessary to prevent odor or health and sanitation problems, maintain all animal areas or areas of animal contact;
(2) Has food that is appropriate for the species in adequate amounts to maintain good health, fresh potable drinking water where appropriate, shelter, and ventilation, including quarters that are protected from excessive heat and cold are of sufficient size to permit the animal to exercise and move about freely;
(3) Shall not be tethered by use of a choke collar, or on any collar too small for the size and age of the animal, nor by any rope, chain, or cord directly attached to the animal’s neck, nor by a leash less than 12 feet in length or of such unreasonable weight as to prevent the animal from moving about freely;
(4) Is protected against abuse, cruelty, neglect, torment, overload, overwork, or any other mistreatment;
(5) Shall provide the reasonably necessary medical care, in addition to the required rabies vaccination, which shall include vaccinations as required by accepted veterinary standards, and, if diseased or injured or exhibiting symptoms of disease, receives proper care and is segregated from other animals so as to prevent transmittal of the disease; and
(6) Is maintained in compliance with all applicable federal, state, and local laws.
257
(B) It shall be unlawful for a person to beat, starve, or otherwise mistreat any animal in the town or to fail to comply with any requirement of division (A) above.
(C) In the discretion of the enforcement authority, a person who violates any provision of this section for the first time may be given written notice of the practices or conditions which constitute the violation, and the enforcement authority shall in such instance direct remedies to such person where appropriate and provide a time period of no longer than 30 days within which to correct the violation(s) within the specified time period shall constitute prima facie evidence of a violation of this section.
(D) It shall be unlawful to throw or deposit poisoned meat, or any poison or poisoned or harmful substance, in any public place or on any private premises for the purpose of destroying any dog or other animal. However, this section does not prevent prudent use of commercially prepared toxins by an authorized public animal control or health officer, or by a private individual upon his or her own premises for purposes of eradicating rats, mice, or other vermin.
(Ord. 2002-3, passed 1-2-2002) Penalty, see § 00-09-91-99
§ 00-09-91-07 VACCINATION REQUIRED.
(A) Each dog and cat over the age of three months which is kept in the town shall have been vaccinated against rabies by a veterinarian within the preceding 365 days. It shall be unlawful for a person to own a dog or cat not in compliance with this section.
(B) Upon the vaccination of an animal, a certificate of rabies vaccination shall be issued at least in triplicate with one copy given to the animal owner. The certificate shall be presented upon request by any police officer. A metal vaccination tag shall be worn by the animal at all times.
(Ord. 2002-3, passed 1-2-2002) Penalty, see § 00-09-91-99
§ 00-09-91-08 DISPOSAL OF ANIMALS.
It should be unlawful for any person to dispose of or throw away any carcass, dead animal, animal blood, or parts of any carcass upon any street, alley, or public place or upon any lot within the town.
(Ord. 2002-3, passed 1-2-2002) Penalty, see § 00-09-91-99
§ 00-09-91-09 AWARDING LIVE ANIMALS AS PRIZES.
It shall be unlawful for a person to sell, offer for sale, trade, barter, or give away in the town any live animal as a novelty, prize for, or as an inducement to enter a place of amusement, or offer such vertebrate as an incentive to enter any business establishment or enter into any business agreement whereby the offer was made for the purpose of attracting trade for the establishment, other than establishments selling animals as their primary business.
(Ord. 2002-3, passed 1-2-2002) Penalty, see § 00-09-91-99
258
§ 00-09-91-10 ENTICING ANIMALS TO FIGHT.
It shall be unlawful for a person to incite, train to fight (other than a crime prevention dog), or set any animal to fighting another animal, or to incite combat between animals and humans in the town. It also shall be unlawful to attend or to be a spectator at organized animal fights.
(Ord. 2002-3, passed 1-2-2002) Penalty, see § 00-09-91-99
§ 00-09-91-11 ANIMALS IN CRIME.
It shall be unlawful for a person to make use of an animal in the commission or furtherance of any criminal act in the town.
(Ord. 2002-3, passed 1-2-2002) Penalty, see § 00-09-91-99
§ 00-09-91-12 ANIMALS IN VEHICLES.
(A) It shall be unlawful to leave a domestic animal unattended in a vehicle when the conditions in that vehicle would constitute a health hazard to the animal.
(B) It shall be unlawful for any animal to ride in the bed of a pickup truck on public streets, highways, and/or rights-of-way, unless the animal is securely caged and protected from the environment or unless the bed of the pickup truck is enclosed with a camper shell or other device and there is appropriate and sufficient ventilation.
(Ord. 2002-3, passed 1-2-2002) Penalty, see § 00-09-91-99
§ 00-09-91-13 WILD ANIMALS.
(A) It shall be illegal for any person to own, possess, harbor, keep, or make provisions for keeping a wild animal within the corporate limits, regardless of whether such wild animal is caged, penned, sheltered, or housed and regardless of whether or not such resident of the town has received a permit for possession of wild animals from the Department of Natural Resources of the State of Indiana or any other regulatory authority.
(B) It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, or harbor upon or within any property located within the corporate limits any poisonous or potentially dangerous snake, reptile, or insect or any other type of animal or marine life which has the propensity of causing serious harm to human beings.
(C) This section shall not be construed so as to apply to a zoological garden, theatrical exhibit, or circus, except that no theatrical exhibit or act shall be held in which animals are encouraged to perform through the use of chemical, electrical, or mechanical devices.
(Ord. 2002-3, passed 1-2-2002) Penalty, see § 00-09-91-99
259
§ 00-09-91-14 KEEPING FARM ANIMALS.
It shall be unlawful for any person to won, keep, or harbor upon his or her premises within the corporate limits any cow, pig, bull, horse, chicken, rooster, or other domestic farm animal.
(Ord. 2002-3, passed 1-2-2002) Penalty, see § 00-09-91-99
§ 00-09-91-15 CURBING ANIMALS REQUIRED.
(A) No person shall knowingly allow, except as provided in division (B) below, an animal to defecate on a public street or byway of any municipally owned or public land or buildings, or private property without permission of the land owner.
(B) (1) Division (A) above does not apply to guide dogs.
(2) For the purpose of this division, the following definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
GUIDE DOG shall mean any animal serving a blind person in an auxiliary ocular (eye) capacity.
(C) If an animal shall relieve itself as contemplated in division (A), the owner of the animal is not in violation of this section if that owner immediately removes any solid evidence of such relief to a waste container, or shall otherwise dispose of such evidence of relief in a manner inoffensive to reasonable public sensibilities.
(D) No person shall knowingly allow an animal to disperse waste material placed for public or private collection on any public street or byway or any municipally owned or public land or building or private property.
(Ord. 2002-3, passed 1-2-2002) Penalty, see § 00-09-91-99
§ 00-09-91-16 VICIOUS ANIMALS.
(A) For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
VICIOUS, FIERCE, OR DANGEROUS ANIMAL.
(a) Attacked a person without having been provoked by that person;
(b) Attacked another animal at some place other than its owner’s or keeper’s property; or
(c) Chased or approached a person, at some place other than its owner’s or keeper’s property, in a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack.
(B) It is unlawful for an owner or keep of a vicious, fierce, or dangerous animal to cause, suffer, or allow it to go unconfined and unrestrained on the owner’s or keeper’s premises, or to run at large, within the corporate limits.
260
(C) It is unlawful in the corporate limits for an owner or keeper of a vicious, fierce, or dangerous animal to walk any such animal or otherwise cause, suffer, or allow its presence upon a public street or byway, right-of-way, or municipally owned or public land or building, or upon private property without permission of the owner thereof.
(D) It shall be the duty of any person having authority to impound an animal forthwith to impound any vicious, fierce, or dangerous animal found unconfined or running at large in violation of this section.
(E) The owner of a vicious animal shall display, in a prominent place on his or her premises, a clearly visible warning sign indicating that there is a vicious animal on the premises. A similar sign is required to be posted on the pen or kennel of the animal.
(F) The owner or person in control of such dog must maintain liability insurance on the animal in an amount of at least $300,000 for personal injury. A certificate of the insurance must be available for viewing by any police officer upon the request of the officer.
(G) In addition to the penalty, if the violation results in the animal causing serious bodily injury to any person, the court upon request shall order the animal forfeited and/or destroyed.
(Ord. 2002-3, passed 1-2-2002) Penalty, see § 00-09-91-99
§ 00-09-91-17 VEHICULAR COLLISIONS WITH ANIMALS.
(A) A person whose vehicle causes injury or death to a domestic animal in the town shall stop at once, assess the extent of the injury to the extent that it is safe to do so, and immediately notify the animal’s owner, if known, or the animal care and control shelter, either directly or through a local law enforcement agency, together with a description of the animal struck, the location of the striking, and an estimate as to the condition of the animal after being struck, along with the rabies tag number of the animal, if it can be ascertained.
(B) The person shall not be required to report his or her name, as the only purpose of this requirement is to aid the stricken animal and notify its owner, if any.
(Ord. 2002-3, passed 1-2-2002) Penalty, see § 00-09-91-99
§ 00-09-91-18 ENTICING ANIMALS.
(A) It shall be unlawful for a person, not so authorized, to enter or invade the private premises of another person in the town to capture, entice, or take any animal out of the enclosure or premises of the owner, or to seize an animal at any place while the animal is accompanied by its owner or keeper.
(B) It shall be unlawful for a person, not so authorized, to entice any animal away from the premises of the person who owns or keeps the animal in the town, or to entice an animal from a street, alley, or public place in the town, with the intent to deprive the owner of the animal’s possession.
(Ord. 2002-3, passed 1-2-2002) Penalty, see § 00-09-91-99
261
§ 00-09-91-99 PENALTY.
(A) Any person violating § 00-09-91-06, other than divisions (B) and (D), will be fined $35 for a first offense and not less than $200 for subsequent offenses. Also, the court upon request may order forfeiture or other disposition of the animal involved. A judgment by the court which orders forfeiture or other disposition of the animal by the town or any third party shall include as a part of the judgment adequate provisions for the collection of costs of forfeiture or impoundment from the person found in violation.
(B) Any person violating § 00-09-91-06(B) and/or (D), or § 00-09-91-12, will be fined $100 for a first offense and not less than $200 for subsequent offenses. Also, the court upon request may order forfeiture or other disposition of the animal involved. A judgment by the court which orders forfeiture or other disposition of the animal by the town or any third party shall include as a part of such judgment adequate provisions for the collection of costs of forfeiture or impoundment from the person found in violation.
(C) Any person violating §§ 00-09-91-10, 00-09-91-13, or 00-09-91-15 will be fined $50 for a first offense and not less than $75 for subsequent offenses.
(D) Any person violating §§ 00-09-91-16 will be fined a minimum of $200, but not more than the amount allowed by the general penalty of this code.
(E) Any person violating any other sections of this chapter will be fined $35 for a first offense and not less than $50 for subsequent offenses.
(Ord. 2002-3, passed 1-2-2002)
CHAPTER 92: FIRE PREVENTION
Section
00-09-92-01 Adoption by reference of Indianapolis fire regulations
00-09-92-02 Provision of fire protection
00-09-92-03 Regulations
00-09-92-04 Enforcement
00-09-92-05 Open burning prohibited
00-09-92-06 Residential burning
00-09-92-07 Limited burning for special purposes
00-09-92-08 Burning for the purpose of training fire personnel
00-09-92-09 Liability
00-09-92-99 Penalty
§ 00-09-92-01 ADOPTION BY REFERENCE OF INDIANAPOLIS FIRE REGULATIONS.
The State of Indiana Fire Code is adopted and incorporated as part of this code of ordinances as fully as if set out at length herein.
(1995 Code, § 00-09-92-01)
262
§ 00-09-92-02 PROVISIONS OF FIRE PROTECTION.
(A) The Town Council may provide the town with fire protection by executing a contract with any duly organized fire company under the terms and conditions that may, in the judgment of the Council be necessary to provide adequate fire protection for the residents of the town.
(B) (1) The Council also may provide that a Town Fire Department be established, should it be in the best interest of the town.
(2) The establishment will be performed by enacting the ordinances which would provide for necessary personnel and equipment to adequately staff the Department. Until the enactment of those ordinances the Council shall delegate the responsibility for fire protection contractually, as provided herein.
(1995 Code, § 00-09-92-02)
§ 00-09-92-03 REGULATIONS.
It shall be the duty of the Town Council to provide for the enforceable regulations, by contract or otherwise, to ensure proper fire prevention. The regulations shall require necessary periodic inspections of public buildings, premises, and pubic thoroughfares for the purposes of ascertaining and causing to be corrected any conditions liable to cause fire or creating a fire hazard. The inspections shall not be deemed to include the interior of private dwellings.
(1995 Code, § 00-09-92-03)
§ 00-09-92-04 ENFORCEMENT.
This chapter is enforceable by any fire department authorized to provide service to any part of the town, the Police Department or the Town Manager or his or her designee.
§ 00-09-92-05 OPEN BURNING PROHIBITED.
(A) It shall be unlawful at all times, suffer, or allow any open burning on any real estate zoned or used for multiple-family dwellings, businesses, apartment complexes, or mobile home parks.
(B) It shall be unlawful to cause, suffer, or allow any open burning of any substance, other than wood products, at any place within the town, except as permitted by §§ 00-09-92-06 through 00-09-92-06, provided that no person shall cause, suffer, allow, or permit the emission into the atmosphere of any substance or combination of substances from the burning of wood products as allowed therein in quantities as to cause annoyance or constitute a nuisance as to interfere with the health or well-being of any individuals in their home or place of employment or recreation or as to interfere with the normal use and enjoyment of any place.
(1995 Code, § 00-09-92-05) (Ord. 1991-6, passed 9-4-1991) Penalty, see § 00-09-92-99
Cross-reference:
Prohibition against open burning on active construction sites, see town’s Building Code.
263
§ 00-09-92-06 RESIDENTIAL BURNING.
(A) Residents of single- or double-family dwellings located on one or more residential lots hall be permitted to burn openly only wood products originating on the premises only as hereinafter provided between the hours of 10:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. on days when the wind speed is greater than five mph, as given by the local office of the National Weather Service.
(B) Burning shall be more than 15 feet from any structure, in a noncombustible container, sufficiently vented to induce adequate primary combustion air, with enclosed sides, a bottom, and a mesh covering.
(C) Fires shall be attended at all times until completely extinguished.
(D) If a fire creates a nuisance or a health hazard, or produces any quantity of smoke or an offensive or obnoxious odor which adversely affects adjoining property owners, it shall be extinguished. (1995 Code, § 00-09-92-06) (Ord. 1991-6, passed 9-4-1991) Penalty, see § 00-09-92-99
§ 00-09-92-07 LIMITED BURNING FOR SPECIAL PURPOSES.
The open burning of wood products, which does not create a nuisance or a fire hazard and which is attended by a responsible person at all times until completely extinguished, may be permitted for the following purposes:
(A) Ceremonial fires and bonfire: a bonfire in connection with a religious ceremony, school pep rallies, scouting activities, and similar purposes;
(B) Camp fires and fires for cookouts;
(C) Fires required for personal comfort or a bonfire in connection with recreational activities, including, but not limited to, sledding and ice skating;
(D) Fires required for personal comfort or a bonfire in connection with recreational activities, including, but not limited to, sledding and ice skating;
(E) (1) Open burning of agricultural or residential vegetation, when it can be shown that the open burning is necessary and that no fire hazard will occur, provided the person intending to dispose of plat life by open burning shall obtain approval from the Town Council, with 14-day notice of the regular meeting date. The Council will then authorize the Building Commissioner to issue a permit. Also, the person responsible shall attain permission from the Fire Department that has jurisdiction.
(2) Any open burning permitted under the provision of division (E) shall be allowed only between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. and only at times when the forecast by the local weather service for wind speed is greater than five mph and less than 20 mph. The fire shall consist of plant life only.
(1995 Code, § 00-09-92-07) (Ord. 1991-6, passed 9-4-1991) (Am. Ord 96-2, passed 7-3-1996) Penalty, see § 00-09-92-99
264
§ 00-09-92-08 BURNING FOR THE PURPOSE OF TRAINING FIRE PERSONNEL
(A) The Town Council may authorize the intentional and controlled burning of structures within the town for the exclusive purpose of training Fire Department personnel concerning fire fighting and fire prevention.
(B) Persons responsible for burning as authorized hereunder shall remove the contents or portions of any structure or structures not to be burned and shall, consistent with the purpose and adequacy of the training involved, minimize the emission of smoke or other air contaminants.
(C) Authorization by the Building Commissioner shall be given only upon the basis if certification to the Commissioner of the necessity of the training as would be permitted hereunder, provided that the Commissioner may require compliance with general or special restrictions, standards, and qualifications as in his or her discretion are deemed advisable.
(1995 Code, § 00-09-92-08) (Ord. 1991-6, passed 9-4-1991)
§ 00-09-92-09 LIABILITY.
Any person who allows the accumulation or existence of combustible material, which constitutes or contributes to a fire causing air pollution, shall not be excused from responsibility therefor on the basis that the fire was accidental or an act of God.
(1995 Code, § 00-09-92-10) (Ord. 1991-6, passed 9-4-1991) Penalty, see § 00-09-92-99
§ 00-09-92-99 PENALTY.
Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined $95. Each day the violation occurs or continues shall be considered a separate offense.
(1995 Code, § 00-09-92-99) (Ord. 1991-6, passed 9-4-1991)
265
CHAPTER 93: NUISANCES
Section
General Provisions
00-09-93-01 Structures or things detrimental to health and safety
00-09-93-02 Health hazards prohibited
00-09-93-03 Offensive premises
00-09-93-04 Unsafe motor vehicles
Abatement; Enforcement
00-09-93-15 Abatement procedures
00-09-93-16 Enforcement by police
00-09-93-99 Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 00-09-93-01 STRUCTURES OR THINGS DETRIMENTAL TO HEALTH AND SAFETY.
No building, vehicle, structure, receptacle, yard, lot premises, or part thereof shall be made, used, maintained or operated in the town in any manner causing or producing any nuisance, or that shall be dangerous or detrimental to the public’s health, safety, and welfare. (1995 Code § 00-09-93-01) Penalty, see § 00-09-93-99
§ 00-09-93-02 HEALTH HAZARDS PROHIBITED.
(A) No substance, matter, or thing of any kind which is dangerous or detrimental to health, or which shall become noxious or injurious to public comfort, shall be allowed to exist in connection with any business or be used therein, or be used in any work or labor performed in the town.
(B) No nuisance shall be permitted to exist and continue in connection with any business, or in connection with any work or labor.
(1995 Code § 00-09-93-02) Penalty, see § 00-09-93-99
§ 00-09-93-03 OFFENSIVE PREMISES.
Any factory, yard, building, or structure of any kind which emits unwholesome smell or noises, or becomes foul, noxious, or offensive or injurious to public comfort or health, is hereby declared a public nuisance and may be abated.
(1995 Code § 00-09-93-04) Penalty, see § 00-09-93-99
266
ABATEMENT; ENFORCEMENT
§ 00-09-93-15 ABATEMENT PROCEDURES.
(A) In all cases where any public nuisance may be found or caused near or upon any public way or place or public property, it shall be the duty of the Town Manager or his or her designee to serve written notice upon the owner or occupant of any premises, or other person so causing the nuisance.
(1) The notice shall require the owner, occupant, or person to abate the nuisance within a reasonable time.
(2) If the owner or occupant of the premises, or other person causing the nuisance, cannot be found, the notice shall be posted on the premises.
(3) It shall not be necessary for the Town Manager or his or her designee to designate in the notice the manner in which a nuisance shall be abated, unless the Town Manager or his or her designees deems it advisable to do so.
(4) (a) If the owner or occupant of the premises, or other person causing the nuisance, refuses or neglects to abate the nuisance within the designated time after the notice is given, the person violating this section shall be fined as provide in § 00-01-10-99.
(b) In addition, the Town Manager or his or her designee may cause the nuisance to be abated either summarily or in any manner authorized by law, including the institution in the name of the town against the owner or occupant of the premises, or other person, of an action therefore and for the recovery of the amount of expense of abatement.
(B) Any public nuisance in the town may be summarily abated and removed by order of the Town Manager or his or her designee.
(1) The Town Manager or his or her designee shall have authority to take action on all complaints of anyone concerning nuisances, except where jurisdiction is exclusively conferred upon the Town Council, Police Department, the Fire Department, or other public officials for removal and abatement of those things which are declared either by this code, or other statutes, or by the common or state law, to be public nuisances or which constitute, from their nature and effects, nuisances per se.
(2) Where any legal proceedings become necessary to effect abatement, or to enjoin summary abatement, the Town Manager or his or her designee or other officials concerned shall refer the matter to the Town Attorney.
(1995 Code § 00-09-93-15) Penalty, see § 00-09-93-99
§ 00-09-93-16 ENFORCEMENT BY POLICE.
The Town Marshal and deputies are charged with the duty of enforcing the provisions of this chapter.
(1995 Code, § 00-09-93-16)
267
§ 00-09-93-99 PENALTY.
Any person who violates this chapter shall be subject to a fine of $95 and costs. Each day the violation occurs or continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(1995 Code, § 00-09-93-99)
268
CHAPTER 94: PARKS AND RECREATION
Section
00-09-94-01 General rules
00-09-94-02 Control of vehicles
00-09-94-03 Tennis facilities
00-09-94-04 Prohibited persons
00-09-94-05 Trail rules
00-09-94-99 Penalty
§ 00-09-94-01 GENERAL RULES.
(A) To provide for the safety and welfare of community residents in their use and enjoyment of the town’s public park facilities, it is necessary that the following rules and regulations be herein established and adhered to.
(B) The general rules shall be applicable to all park facilities.
(1) Animal owners may not allow their animals to be in the park unless the animal is on a leash and under human control.
(2) There shall be no littering of any nature. Any refuse or waste materials shall be deposited in the receptacle provided for that purpose. All feces from animals owned by humans shall be removed from the park by the animal’s owner or other person who brings or permits the animal to be in the park.
(3) No air rifles, firearms, or weapons of any description that could cause bodily harm shall be permitted within the park at any time.
(4) There shall be no motorcycles, motor bikes, or mini-bikes of any nature permitted within the part at any time.
(5) There shall be no alcoholic beverages possessed or consumed within the confines of the park.
(6) Commercial activities, including the soliciting of business, shall be prohibited in the park, except upon written approval of the Town Council.
(7) Defacing, damaging, or destroying any tree, bush, shrub, or any park property is expressly prohibited.
(8) All children under the age of eight years are prohibited from being within the park, unless accompanied and supervised by an adult.
(9) (a) From April 1 to October 31 of each year, parks shall be open to the public from dawn to dusk, except for any part of the park with facilities that are illuminated by park lights, which facilities shall be open from dawn to 10:00 p.m.
269
(b) From November 1 to March 31 of each year, parks shall be open to the public from dawn to dusk.
(c) The Park Superintendent or Police Department may close any park in response to the adverse weather unsuitable ground conditions, or for any other public safety-based reason.
(1995 Code, § 00-09-94-01) (Am. Ord. 2000-3, passed 5-3-2000) Penalty, see § 00-09-94-99
§ 00-09-94-02 CONTROL OF VEHICLES.
(A) It shall be unlawful and punishable by fine for anyone to operate a motor vehicle of any kind in and upon any public park ground, or area designated as such, which is located within the limits of the town.
(B) Motor vehicles shall only be operated along and upon specifically designated and marked public thoroughfares within the park, but otherwise are restricted from being operated in any other part or portion of the public park areas.
(1995 Code, § 00-09-94-02) Penalty, see § 00-09-94-99
§ 00-09-94-03 TENNIS FACILITIES.
The following special rules apply only to people using the tennis courts or the tennis facilities.
(A) Players shall wear tennis shoes at all times when using the tennis court.
(B) Only tennis players are allowed upon the tennis courts.
(C) Drinks or food are prohibited from being taken to the court area.
(D) Nets, once placed in the proper position for play, shall not be adjusted or altered.
(E) One hour of playing time shall be observed by all players, should others be waiting to play; and doubles should play rather than singles if there are players waiting for use of the courts.
(F) Bicycles, scooters, skateboards, motorcyles, or other similar vehicles are expressly prohibited from being used upon or along the surface of the tennis courts.
(1995 Code, § 00-09-94-03) (Am. Ord. 2000-3, passed 5-3-2000) Penalty, see § 00-09-94-99
§ 00-09-94-04 PROHIBITED PERSONS.
(A) The following individuals are prohibited from all parks, playgrounds and other recreational facilities owned, operated or managed by the town or its designees;
(1) Those individuals required by Indiana law to register with the State of Indiana Sex Offender Registry, published and disseminated by the Indiana Criminal Justice Institute; and
(2) Whose conviction, which requires such registration, occurs after the adoption of this section.
270
(B) The prohibition provided by this section terminates when the individual is no longer required by Indiana law to register with the State of Indiana Sex Offender Registry.
(Ord. 2009-12, passed 12-15-2009) Penalty, see § 00-09-94-99
§ 00-09-94-05 TRAIL RULES.
(A) Trail Rules.
(1) Trail hours are from dawn to dusk.
(2) Littering is prohibited. All trash must be placed within the appropriate receptacles or carried out by the user.
(3) Alcohol is prohibited on the trail.
(4) Pets must be on a short leach (no more than six feet in length).
(5) Pet waste must be cleaned up by owner of the pet.
(6) Keep to the right of the trail.
(7) When passing, communicate such by saying “Passing on the left”.
(8) Pedestrians have the right-of-way. All other users (bicycle riders, skaters, etc.) shall yield to pedestrians.
(9) Stop for cross traffic and obey all traffic and trail signage.
(10) Firearms are prohibited, except when necessary for Police Officers.
(11) Motorized vehicles, except in the case of maintenance and public safety, are prohibited.
(12) If snow or rain render any segment of the trail impassable by foot or bike, please refrain from using it.
(13) Advertising along the trail is prohibited, except for town approved trail related signage.
(B) Trail Etiquette.
(1) Share the trails, don’t block the entire trail. If in a group, walk single file to allow others to pass when present.
(2) Be courteous of other users.
(3) Do not trespass on private property adjacent to the trail.
(4) Do not disturb the natural environment along the trail.
(Ord. 2010-13, passed 8-4-2010)
271
§ 00-09-94-99 PENALTY.
(A) Any person who violates §§ 00-09-94-01 and 00-09-94-03 shall be subject to a fine of $25 and costs and §00-09-94-02 shall be subject to a fine of $95 and costs. In addition to any fine, violators of this chapter may be required to pay to the town the cost of any property damage sustained by the park’s grounds or facilities as a result of violation.
(B) Any person who violates § 00-09-94-04 shall be fined $200 for each violation. The town, through its employees and agents, may enforce this chapter using all legal means, including but not limited to actions for the collection of money, injunctive relief, and other remedies in the Circuit and Superior Courts of Hancock or Marion Counties, Indiana, or other courts of competent jurisdiction.
(Am. Ord. 2009-12, passed 12-15-2009)
272
CHAPTER 95: STREETS; SIDEWALKS; BRIDGES
Section
General Provisions
00-09-95-01 Applicability of provisions
00-09-95-02 Acceptance of streets and bridges
00-09-95-03 Construction, inspection, acceptance, and bond release
00-09-95-04 Appeal from administrative action
00-09-95-05 Alternate bonding procedure
00-09-95-06 Supervision of maintenance and repair work
00-09-95-07 Permit required to construct or lay pavement
00-09-95-08 Repairs
00-09-95-09 Defects
Prohibited Conduct
00-09-95-20 Injury to new pavement
00-09-95-21 Obstruction
00-09-95-22 Barricades
00-09-95-23 Private use
00-09-95-24 Encroachments
00-09-95-25 Advertisements; notices
00-09-95-26 Burning leaves and rubbish
Minimum Standards
00-09-95-40 Variance required
00-09-95-41 General requirements
00-09-95-42 Minimum standards for street design
00-09-95-43 Minimum standards for street construction
00-09-95-44 Bridges
00-09-95-45 Driveways
00-09-95-46 Street name signs
00-09-95-47 Drainage
00-09-95-48 Plans
Cuts or Excavations for Installation of Utilities
00-09-95-60 Plans and specifications
00-09-95-61 Duty to replace payment; liability
00-09-95-62 Permit required; fee
Overhanging Canopies; Signs
00-09-95-75 Permit
00-09-95-76 Bond
00-09-95-77 Construction
00-09-95-78 Height
273
00-09-95-79 Inspection
00-09-95-99 Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 00-09-95-01 APPLICABILITY OF PROVISIONS.
This chapter shall apply only to streets and bridges located within the geographic area of the town which are under the control and jurisdiction of the town for maintenance. Whenever this chapter makes reference to the requirements of Marion County or agencies of the Marion County government, those provisions shall be interpreted as incorporating the currently applicable requirements and responsible agencies of Marion County. Procedures involving Marion County agencies shall not be applicable to the Hancock County part of town. Whenever any provision of this chapter is in conflict with an applicable provision of the town’s subdivision control ordinance, the conflicting provision of this chapter shall not be applicable.
(1995 Code, § 00-09-95-01)
§ 00-09-95-02 ACCEPTANCE OF STREETS AND BRIDGES.
On or after the effective date of this section, all streets and bridges not constructed by the town shall be accepted by the Town Council for maintenance only when the requirements of this chapter are met.
(1995 Code, § 00-09-95-02)
§ 00-09-95-03 CONSTRUCTION, INSPECTION, ACCEPTANCE, AND BOND RELEASE.
(A) Inspection of construction of streets and bridges.
(1) Execution of inspection agreement. Before construction begins, the developer shall execute an agreement with the Town Council, which will provide that:
(a) The Council will employ an inspector to inspect the construction work to ensure it meets the requirements of the approved construction plans;
(b) The developer will reimburse the town for the cost of inspection services determined at the time of execution of the agreement;
(c) Upon completion of construction, the inspector will certify to the town and the developer as to the compliance of the construction with the requirements of the approved construction and/or approved change orders; and
(d) No action respecting the acceptance of the construction and release of the improvement bond pursuant to division (A)(1)(b) above or § 95.0500-09-95-05(B) shall be taken until the developer has reimbursed the town in full for the inspection services.
(2) Inspection of construction.
(a) All construction of streets and bridges shall be inspected and certified pursuant to the agreement executed under division (A)(1) above.
274
(b) The developer shall furnish the town necessary copies of the approved construction plans.
(c) If construction already has begun on the effective date of this chapter, the developer may continue to provide his or her own construction inspection. The developer then shall furnish, with his or her application for acceptance under division (B) below, a certification by a professional engineer, registered in the state, that the construction will be inspected by the town.
(B) Acceptance of construction.
(a) All construction of streets and bridges shall be inspected and certified pursuant to the agreement executed under division (A)(1) above.
(b) The developer shall furnish the town necessary copies of the approved construction plans.
(c) If construction already has begun on the effective date of this chapter, the developer may continue to provide his or her own construction inspection. The developer then shall furnish, with his or her application for acceptance under division (B) below, a certification by a professional engineer, registered in the state, that the construction will be inspected by the town.
(B) Acceptance of construction.
(1) Acceptance request. Upon completion of construction, the developer, or the developer’s authorized representative, shall may written application for acceptance to the town.
(2) Acceptance of construction and release of improvement bond. If, by law, the street and bridge construction require approval and bonding by the Marion County Department of Metropolitan Development, the procedure of this division shall be followed. Otherwise, the procedure of § 00-09-95-05 shall apply.
(a) Upon receipt of notice of satisfactory completion from the town, the Town Manager or his or her designee shall take appropriate action to accept the streets and bridges and to notify the Marion County Department of Metropolitan Development that the performance has been completed to the Transportation Board’s satisfaction and that claims against any improvement bond by the Department of Transportation and the Transportation Board are released.
(b) Before acceptance, the Town Council shall determine that a maintenance bond meeting the requirements of the Marion County Department of Metropolitan Development has been posted with the department.
(C) Release of maintenance bond.
(1) (a) Not more than six months nor less than four months before expiration of the maintenance bond, the Town Manager or his or her designee shall inspect the streets and bridges covered by the bond.
275
(b) If no deficiencies are found, the Town Manager or his or her designee shall notify the developer, in writing, that he or she has no objection to the release of the maintenance bond. Failure of the Town Manager or his or her designee to so notify the developer before the expiration date of the bond shall be deemed the town’s release of all claims against the bond.
(c) If deficiencies are found to exist, the following steps shall be taken.
1. The Town Manager or his or her designee shall notify the developer in writing, by first class U.S. Mail of the specific deficiencies, requesting necessary corrective action and informing the developer that the maintenance bond release will be withheld until the deficiencies are corrected.
2. If the developer has not acknowledged receipt of the deficiency notice and/or has not taken any corrective action within 60 days of the transmittal of the first notice pursuant to division (C)(1)(c)1. above, the Town Manager or his or her designee shall transmit to him or her, by first class U.S. mail, a second and final notice containing the same information as the first notice.
3. When the developer has corrected all the deficiencies, he or she shall notify the town in writing and the Town Manager or his or her designee shall make a new inspection within 14 days. If any deficiencies have not been corrected to the Commissioner’s satisfaction, the town shall notify the developer in the same manner as the original notice pursuant to division (C)(1)(c)1. above and, if necessary, division (C)(1)(c)1. above and, if necessary, division (C)(1)(c)2. above.
4. a. In the event the developer does not correct the deficiencies to the Town Manager of his or her designee’s satisfaction, the town shall be empowered to have the deficiencies corrected at its own expense and to secure reimbursement therefor from the developer and/or bonding company.
b. Before taking that action, written notice of intent to do it shall be transmitted to the developer and the bonding company by first class U.S. mail.
5. a. When all deficiencies have been corrected to the Town Manager or his or her designee’s satisfaction in accordance with the criteria in effect at the time of design approval, and any financial liabilities of the developer and/or bonding company to the Town Manager or his or her designee arising pursuant to division (C)(1)(c)4. above, have been satisfied, the town shall prepare a written document stating this fact and approving release of its interest in the maintenance bond.
b. The document shall be transmitted to the developer and the bonding company by first class U.S. mail.
(2) Notice, made in accordance with division (C)(1) above, shall be deemed constructive notice upon all affected parties, whether or not they actually receive the notice.
(1995 Code, § 00-09-95-03) Penalty, see §00-09-95-99
276
§ 00-09-95-04 APPEAL FROM ADMINSTRATIVE ACTION.
(A) Any person or firm affected by the exercise of any discretionary authority delegated by this code to any official of the Street Department, who objects to the decision made or action taken by the official, shall be entitled to a hearing before the Town Council.
(B) The person or firm desiring the hearing shall file with the Town Manager or his or her designee a written statement of the objection and the Commissioner shall call it to the attention of the Council.
(C) The Council shall hold the hearing shall file with the Town Manager or his or her designee. The person or firm making the objections shall be given notice of the time, place, and date of the hearing at least ten days before it.
(D) After hearing the testimony of the objector and the official who made the decision or action objected to, the Council may confirm, reverse, modify and confirm as modified the decision or action of the official in any manner consistent with the discretionary authority delegated by this code to that official.
(1995 Code, § 00-09-95-04)
§ 00-09-95-05 ALTERNATIVE BONDING PROCEDURE.
(A) In general. In the event the streets or bridges to be accepted for maintenance by the town do not, by him or her, require approval and bonding by the Marion County Department of Metropolitan Development, the provisions of this section shall apply to all matters pertaining to bonding in lieu of the provisions of § 00-00-95-03.
(B) Posting of improvement bond.
(1) If the right-of-way for the streets and/or bridges is to be dedicated and recorded before construction, the applicant shall file an improvement bond with the town.
(2) The bond shall:
(a) Run jointly and severally to the town and its Street Department;
(b) Be in an amount equal to 100% of the construction cost estimated by the Street Department;
(c) Provide surety and principal satisfactory to the Street Department;
(d) Specify that the construction of the streets or bridges shall be done in accordance with the applicable terms and conditions of this chapter and in accordance with construction plans approved under § 00-09-95-41; and
(e) Run until and terminate upon:
1. Acceptance of the streets and bridges for the Street Department by action of the Town Council; and
2. Posting of a maintenance bond in accordance with division (D) below.
277
(C) Acceptance of construction and release of improvement bond. Upon receipt of notice of satisfactory completion of construction from the Street Department and the posting of a maintenance bond in accordance with division (D) below, the Town Council shall take appropriate action to accept the streets or bridges and to release any improvement bond which has been posted with the Street Department.
(D) Posting of maintenance bond. Before acceptance of construction and release of any improvement bond pursuant to division (C) above, the applicant shall file a maintenance bond with the Street Department. The bond shall:
(1) Run jointly and severally to the town and its Street Department;
(2) Be in an amount equal to 100% of the construction cost estimated by the Street Department;
(3) Provide surety and principal satisfactory to the Street Department;
(4) Warrant that workmanship and materials used in the construction of the streets or bridges meet the applicable terms and conditions of this ordinance and complies with the construction plans approved under § 00-09-95-41; and
(5) (a) Provide that, for a period of three years after the release of the improvement bond pursuant to division (B) above, the applicant or the applicant’s approved principal will make necessary repairs to the streets or bridges in accordance with the warranty of division (D)(4) above.
(b) It also shall provide that the term of three years shall be extended by the surety until a satisfactory release has been effected pursuant to division (E) below.
(E) Maintenance bond release procedure. The maintenance bond release procedure shall follow § 00-09-95-03, except that no notices to the town will be made and the maintenance bond will be released by the Street Department.
(1995 Code, § 00-09-95-05) Penalty, see § 00-09-95-99
§ 00-09-95-06 SUPERVISION OF MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR WORK
All maintenance and repair of public streets, alleys, sidewalks, curbs, and other public ways shall be under the supervision of the Town Manager or his or her designee, who is charged with the enforcement of all ordinance provisions relating to those public places, except traffic ordinances, and is hereby authorized to enforce the ordinances.
(1995 Code, § 00-09-95-06)
§ 00-09-95-07 PERMIT REQUIRED TO CONSTRUCT OR LAY PAVEMENT.
(A) (1) It shall be unlawful to construct or lay any pavement on any public street, sidewalk, alley, curb, or other public way, or to repair the same, or cut any curb or existing pavement, without having first secured a permit therefor.
(2) Application for the permit shall be made to the Town Manager or his or her designee.
278
(3) It shall state the location of the intended cut, pavement, or repair, the extent thereof, and the person or firm who is to do the work.
(4) No permit shall be issued except where the work will confirm to this chapter.
(B) All curb cuts in the public thoroughfares of the streets in the town shall be regulated by the provisions of the Marion County Code as it pertains to street cuts and bonding and surety requirements.
(1995 Code, § 00-09-95-07) Penalty, see § 00-09-95-99
§ 00-09-95-08 REPAIRS.
All public street, alley, sidewalk, and curb pavement shall be repaired in a workmanlike manner of approved materials.
(1995 Code, § 00-09-95-09) Penalty, see § 00-09-95-99
§ 00-09-95-09 DEFECTS.
Every town officer and employee who becomes cognizant of any defect in any street, alley, or sidewalk, or any obstruction thereof, shall report it to the Town Manager or his or her designee as soon as possible.
(1995 Code, § 00-09-95-10)
PROHIBITED CONDUCT
§ 00-09-95-20 INJURY TO NEW PAVEMENT.
It shall be unlawful to walk upon, or drive any vehicle or animal upon, or damage any newly laid street, sidewalk, or curb pavement while it is guarded by a warning sign or barricade, or to otherwise knowingly damage any soft or newly laid pavement.
(1995 Code, § 00-09-95-08) Penalty, see § 00-09-95-99
§ 00-09-95-21 OBSTRUCTION.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to cause, create, or maintain any obstruction of any street, alley, sidewalk, or other public way, except as many be specified by this chapter or by the order of the Town Manager or his or her designee.
(1995 Code, § 00-09-95-11) Penalty, see § 00-09-95-99
§ 00-09-95-22 BARRICADES.
(A) (1) Any person, firm, or corporation laying or repairing any pavement on a street, sidewalk, or other public place, or making an excavation in the same, shall maintain suitable barricades to prevent injury of any person or property by reason of the work.
(2) The barricades shall be protected by lights attached thereto from sundown to sunup.
(B) It shall be unlawful to disturb or interfere with any barricade or lights lawfully placed to protect or mark any pavement, excavation, obstruction, or opening in any public street, alley, or sidewalk.
279
(1995 Code, § 00-09-95-12) Penalty, see § 00-09-95-99
§ 00-09-95-23 PRIVATE USE.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation:
(A) To use any street, sidewalk, or other public property as a space for the display of goods or merchandise for sale; or
(B) To write or make any sign or advertisement on any public places.
(1995 Code, § 00-09-95-13) Penalty, see § 00-09-95-99
§ 00-09-95-24 ENCROACHMENTS.
It shall be unlawful to erect or maintain any building or structure which encroaches upon any public street or right-of-way.
(1995 Code, § 00-09-95-14) Penalty, see § 00-09-95-99
§ 00-09-95-25 ADVERTISEMENTS; NOTICES.
It shall be unlawful to attach any sign, advertisement, or notice to any tree, shrub, telephone pole, or any other structure in any public way or place.
(1995 Code, § 00-09-95-15) Penalty, see § 00-09-95-99
§ 00-09-95-26 BURNING LEAVES AND RUBBISH.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to burn any leaves, paper rubbish, or other substances upon any of the public streets or sidewalks in the town.
(1995 Code, § 00-09-95-16) Penalty, see § 00-09-95-99
MINIMUM STANDARDS
§ 00-09-95-40 VARIANCE REQUIRED.
Upon written application to the Town Manager or his or her designee with supporting reasons and data, a variance from the requirements of this subchapter, based upon good engineering judgment, may be granted by the Town Council. This variance, if granted, shall apply only to the particular streets or bridges between the specified limits named in the application.
(1995 Code, § 00-09-95-25)
§ 00-09-95-41 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
(A) Plans. All streets as designated and labeled upon a proposed plat, instruments of dedication, or construction plans shall be graded, constructed, and surfaced in accordance with the satisfactory construction plans and specifications submitted therefor by the developer in accordance with the following specifications and requirements.
(1) Preparation of plans. Plans for the streets and bridges shall be prepared over the seal and signature of a professional engineer or land survey licensed by the state.
280
(2) Presentation of plans for approval. Plans shall be submitted for review and approval to the various departments that are to assume final maintenance responsibility for the completed work in accordance with the procedures published by that department. In cases of overlapping responsibility, duplicate copies of transmittal letters and plans may be requested by the Town Manager or his or her designee.
(B) Starting of construction.
(1) Work shall not be started until plans have been approved by all agencies having jurisdiction over the phase of construction. Copies of various approvals shall be submitted to all agencies involved upon request.
(2) Written notice shall be given to all affected agencies, in accordance with their procedures, sufficiently in advance of the start of construction so that those employees charged with the responsibility of inspection may be properly notified. For the Town Manager or his or her designee, written notice shall be given within a minimum of three days in advance of construction; where construction has ceased for 90 days, renotification is required.
(3) Neither the Town Manager or his or her designee nor any other affected agency of government shall be obligated to accept any work started before approval of plans in accordance with division (A) above and notification pursuant to division (B)(2) above. Should a request for acceptance of the work be made, the criteria and requirements for acceptance shall be those in force and effect on the date of the request. Any remedial work determined necessary for acceptance by the Town Manager or his or her designee or any other affected department shall be done at the developer’s expense.
(C) Governing specifications. Unless otherwise provided in this chapter or on the plans and specifications supplied for the project, the Indiana State Highway Commission Standard Specifications, current at the time of construction plan approval, shall apply to all work performed and to any materials used in all improvements which are to be dedicated to the town for maintenance.
(D) Length of plan approval validity. In the event construction of a street or bridge is not initiated within two years and work completed within four years after the approval of construction plans, the plans shall be presented to the Town Manager or his or her designee for re-review and certain design features may be required to be changed due to changes in design criteria.
(1995 Code, § 00-09-95-26) Penalty, see § 00-09-95-99
§ 00-09-95-42 MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR STREET DESIGN.
(A) Designation of street classification. The designation of street classification shall be approved by the Town Manager or his or her designee in accordance with definitions of classification as specified by the Department of Metropolitan Development.
(B) Pavement width and length.
(1) The minimum width of residential local street pavement, including gutters and curbs, shall be 26 feet when the density is two and one-half or less lots per gross acre of the total project. If the density is greater than two and one-half lots per gross acre of the total project, the minimum width, including gutters and curbs, shall be 30 feet. The maximum total length of a
281
dead-end street shall be 650 feet, as measured from the intersection and the radius point of the cul-de-sac.
(2) All permanently dead-ended streets shall be terminated by cul-de-sacs. The minimum radius of cul-de-sacs on local streets and the minimum radius of curb entering and leaving the turnaround area shall be shown on Standard Plan 22-01, Type 1. Temporarily dead-ended streets may be permitted in cases in which they are proposed to be and should logically be extended beyond the limits of the plat, but are not yet constructed beyond the limits of the plat. Adequate easements for turnarounds shall be provided for temporarily dead-ended streets which extend greater than one lot deep.
(3) The minimum width of residential collector street pavement, including gutters and curbs, shall be 36 feet back-to-back of curbs.
(4) The minimum width of a street within an area zoned non-residential or multi-family shall be 36 feet back-to-back of curbs.
(5) The minimum radius of cul-de-sacs on all streets not covered by division (B)(2) above and the minimum radius of curb entering and leaving the turnaround area shall be shown on Standard Plan 22-01, Type 2.
(C) Minimum right-of-way. The greater of the following shall be the minimum right-of-way required.
(1) The right-of-way as set forth for future use in the Marion County Thoroughfare Plan Ordinance 69-CPS-R5, as amended.
(2) Local streets: 50 feet; 500 foot radius from center of cul-de-sac.
(3) Collector streets: 70 feet.
(4) In areas not zoned under the Dwelling District Zoning Ordinance of Marion County at the time of submission of plans for approval: 70 feet.
(5) The right-of-way set forth in Marion County Metropolitan Subdivision Control Ordinance 58-A0-13, as amended.
(6) Divided streets and one-way streets: as determined by the Marion County Department of Transportation.
(D) Pavement crown. The pavement crown for all streets shall be computed at a rate of one-fourth inch per foot.
(E) Grades.
(1) Maximum grades.
(a) The maximum grade of expressways and primary and secondary thoroughfares shall be as determined by the Marion County Department of Transportation.
(b) The maximum grade for collector streets shall not exceed 5%.
282
(c) The maximum grade for local streets shall not exceed 7%, except short local streets (not to exceed 600 feet in total length) where maximum grade shall not exceed 12%.
(d) The maximum grade for cul-de-sacs within the turning area shall not exceed 3%.
(2) Minimum grades. The minimum grade of all streets shall be 0.5%.
(F) Design speeds. The design speed is that speed used for design of streets as set forth in various texts, handbooks, and the like for highway design. It is intended that, through controls, both legal and geometric, the operating speed of a typical vehicle will be at or below the current 30 mph legal speed limit for urban districts as set forth in state statutes.
(1) The design speed for collector streets shall be 30 mph.
(2) The design speed for local streets shall be 20 mph.
(3) The design speed for all other streets shall be as determined by the Town Council.
(G) Minimum stopping sight distances.
(1) The stopping sight distance for collector streets shall be 240 feet.
‘
(2) The stopping sight distance for local streets shall be 125 feet.
(3) The stopping sight distance for all other streets shall be as determined by the Town Council.
(H) Street alignment.
(1) The minimum lengths of vertical curves shall be as shown in Standard Plan 26-01.
(2) Vertical curve shall be considered at all intersections of grade, and the maximum grade change without a vertical curve shall be based on comfort and as shown in Standard Plan 26-01. At intersections, the break in the grade may be 4% maximum conforming to the crown at the cross street.
(3) (a) The minimum centerline radius for a horizontal curve shall be as shown below for the various streets.
1. Collector: 200 feet.
2. Local: 150 feet.
3. Short local (650 feet or less in length): 100 feet.
(b) These radii are less than the minimum for the various design speeds set forth in division (F) above. The minimum radii are being used to discourage higher operating speeds than those which may be obtained using the theoretical minimum radii based on design speed.
283
(4) Street width shall be uniform or uniformly tapered for widening through curves. Bulges on curves or at “two leg” intersections shall not be acceptable.
(5) The minimum tangent between reversed minimum radii curves shall be 100 feet. In no case may a tangent distance less than 50 feet be permitted, except for very large (more than 1,000 feet) radii curves which may be reversed with no tangent between curves.
(I) Intersections.
(1) An intersection shall have three or more street approaches whose center lines intersect in a common point.
(2) Street curbs at intersections shall have the greater of the following as a minimum radius.
(a) Between two local streets: 20 feet.
(b) If one or more streets is classified as a collector street: 25 feet.
(c) If one or more streets is designated as a thoroughfare in the Marion County Thoroughfare Plan Ordinance 69-CPS-RS, as amended, see division (I)(5) below.
(3) Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as is possible; no intersection shall be at an angle of less than 75 degrees.
(4) Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 150 feet shall not be permitted.
(5) Intersections of local and collector streets with thoroughfares shall be in accordance with appropriate sections of the Department of Transportation Access Control Manual and be approved by the Town Council.
(6) The following shall be required as a provision of the covenants of all final plats:
“No fence, wall hedge, or shrub planting, which obstructs sight lines, shall be placed or permitted to remain on any corner lot within the triangular area formed by the street property lines and a line connecting points 25 feet from the intersection of the property lines extended at the intersections of a collector street and a local street. The above restrictions for the intersection of two local streets shall be a triangle with legs equal to 15 feet. The same sight line limitations shall apply to any lot, the corner of which is at the intersection of a street property line with an alley line. No trees shall be permitted to remain within such distances of such intersections, unless the foliage line is maintained a sufficient height to prevent obstruction of such sight lines.”
(J) Sidewalks.
(1) In all platted subdivisions, the necessity of sidewalk installation shall be governed by the Marion County Metropolitan Subdivision Control Ordinance 58-AO-13, as amended, and any waivers thereof shall be obtained from the Town Council before submission of construction plans for approval. A copy of the waiver shall be submitted with construction plans. For all other streets and bridges, the necessity of sidewalk installation shall be determined by the Council.
284
(2) The minimum width of sidewalks shall be four feet from the back of the curb.
(K) Driveways.
(1) When shown on construction plans, each driveway shall be designed to meet the following requirements:
(a) The Marion County Department of Transportation Access Control Manual; and
(b) The provisions of § 95.45.
(2) If driveways are not to be installed as a part of the construction, a note to that effect shall be placed on the plans.
(1995 Code, § 00-09-95-27) Penalty, see § 00-09-95-99
§ 00-09-95-43 MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR STREET CONSTRUCTION.
(A) General requirements.
(1) Minimum requirements for street construction shall be in accordance with standard specifications of the State Highway Commission of Indiana, 1978 edition, or subsequent superseding edition, hereinafter referred to as the Standard Specifications, unless otherwise required by this statute.
(2) All Standard Specification section number references are based on the 1978 edition.
(3) A copy of the current edition of the se Standard Specifications is on file at the town hall, Office of the Clerk-Treasurer.
(4) Construction tolerances and testing shall be in accordance with the criteria and methods set out in Standard Plans 70-01 and 70-02.
(B) Preparation of subgrades for rigid and flexible pavements. The subgrade shall be prepared in compliance with § 207 of the Standard Specifications.
(C) Rigid pavement (plain cement concrete) thickness.
(1) The minimum thickness of concrete pavement for local streets shall be six inches.
(2) The minimum thickness of concrete pavement for residential collector streets shall be seven inches.
(3) The minimum thickness of concrete pavement for commercial and industrial collector streets shall be eight inches. If it is anticipated the street will have a greater than 10% truck traffic (average daily), the thickness shall be nine inches.
(4) The minimum thickness of concrete pavement for all other streets shall be as determined by the Town Council.
(D) Rigid pavement materials and methods of construction.
285
(1) Plain cement concrete pavement shall be constructed in accordance with § 501 of the Standard Specifications, except as provided below.
(2) Materials shall comply with § 901 and subsections 903.01, 903.02, and 912.01 of the Standard Specifications. Concrete shall be machine finished, except on widened portions, intersections, or other places where hand finishing will be permitted if authorized by the Town Manager or his or her designee.
(3) Conditioning of subgrade shall be in accordance with § 501.07 of the Standard Specifications.
(4) All joints shall be constructed in accordance with § 501.14 of the Standard Specifications, except:
(a) Weakened plane or dummy transverse contraction joints shall be placed not to exceed 20 feet spacing. Transverse contraction joints may be either formed or sawed dummy groove, ribbon or pre-molded strip type. One of the above-named joints shall be placed at every catch basin and manhole in line of pavement. The location of manholes in the pavement shall determine the exact location of joints. All joints must extend throughout side strips and curbs.
(b) Expansion joints, with approved dowel bar assembly, shall be placed at street intersections and where shown on the plans.
(c) Whenever the width between forms of the pavement under construction is greater than 13 feet, longitudinal joints shall be constructed so as to divide the pavement into strips not to exceed 15 feet each.
(5) Finishing machines or vibrating strikeboards of design other than as specified in the Standard Specifications will be permitted only if work of equal quality as set out in these specifications is obtained in the opinion of the Town Manager or his or her designee.
(6) Curing with approved impervious membrane or sealing compounds will be permitted if authorized by the Town Manager or his or her designee.
(7) All concrete shall be air entrained.
(E) Flexible pavement (full depth asphalt) thickness.
(1) The minimum thickness of full depth hot asphalt concrete or hot asphalt emulsion for local collector streets shall be seven and one-half inches.
(2) The minimum thickness of full depth hot asphalt concrete or hot asphalt emulsion for residential collector streets shall be nine and one-half inches.
(3) The minimum thickness of full depth hot asphalt concrete or hot asphalt emulsion for commercial and industrial collector streets shall be 11 and one-half inches. If it is anticipated the street will have greater than 10% truck traffic (average daily), the thickness shall be 12 and one-half inches.
286
(4) The minimum thickness for full depth hot asphalt concrete or hot asphalt emulsion for all other streets shall be as determined by the Town Council.
(F) Flexible pavement materials and methods of construction.
(1) (a) Hot asphalt emulsion and hot asphalt concrete pavements shall be in accordance with §§ 402 and 403, respectively, of the Standard Specifications. These pavements shall consist of one inch wearing surface and the rest of the total asphalt section as described in division (E) above, shall be base, placed in three and one-half inch maximum compacted lifts. The hot asphalt emulsion surface shall be Type mixture and base shall be either No. 4, No. 5, or No. 53B mixture. The hot asphalt concrete surface shall be Type B mixture and base shall be either No. 4, No. 5, or No. 53B mixture.
(b) Construction joints in the same plane shall not be located within 50 feet of a joint in the preceding lift.
(2) Materials shall comply with subsections 902.01 through 902.04, 903.01, and 903.02 of the Standard Specifications.
(G) Other paving materials. Upon application to the Director of the Department of Transportation with supporting data from field tests, permission may be granted by the Department of Transportation to use other paving materials that have shown satisfactory performance.
(H) Alternate pavement thickness.
(1) Upon application to the Town Council, with supporting data from field tests, alternate or lesser pavement thickness than those set forth in divisions (C) and (E) above may be approved by the Town Council.
(2) Based upon experience in the vicinity of a proposed street or with soil of a similar nature, the Town Manager or his or her designee may require a pavement thickness greater than the minimums specified in parts three and five, unless supporting data to the contrary is supplied.
(I) Curb and gutter.
(1) Curb and gutter shall be required for all streets.
(2) Curb and gutter shaper shall be in accordance with Standard Plan §12-01.
(3) Construction requirements shall comply with subsection 605.04 of the Standard Specifications.
(4) Materials and conditioning of subgrade shall be in accordance with the provisions of division (D)(3) above.
(J) Sidewalk. Sidewalks shall be a minimum of four inch thickness of Portland cement concrete, conforming to subsections 604.02 and 604.03 of the Standard Specifications and be shown on Standard Plan 14-01.
287
(K) Parkstrip.
(1) The parkstrip (the area between the curb and the sidewalk) shall be constructed in accordance with subsection 604.08 of the Standard Specifications and be shown on Standard Plan 14-01.
(2) The materials shall comply with subsections 913.01 and 913.03 through 913.05 of the Standard Specifications.
(1995 Code, § 00-09-95-27) Penalty, see § 00-09-95-99
§ 00-09-95-44 BRIDGES.
(A) Plans for bridges, or structures having clear spans of 20 feet or greater, shall be reviewed separately from the street plans. Construction may be separate or combined with the adjacent street at the discretion of the developer.
(B) The bridge shall be designed to meet the criteria set forth in the A.A.S.H.O. Standard Specifications for highway bridges in effect at the time of design, and shall be designed for HS-20 loading.
(C) (1) In order for the Town Council to review the plans for a bridge crossing a waterway of any size, copies of acceptance of the waterway opening by the various other governmental agencies having jurisdiction over stream crossings at the time of design shall be submitted along with the plans.
(2) These agencies, include, but are not limited to, the Indiana Department of Natural Resources, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and the Department of Public Works of the Consolidated City of Greater Indianapolis.
(D) In the event that construction of the bridge is not initiated within two years and work completed without four years after the approval of construction plans, the plans shall be presented to the Town Council for re-review, and certain design features may be required to be changed due to changes in the design criteria.
(1995 Code, § 00-09-95-29) Penalty, see § 00-09-95-99
§ 00-09-95-45 DRIVEWAYS.
(A) Permits.
(1) Approved construction plans will be required instead of an access or driveway permit when the construction is to connect a proposed public street to another proposed public street or to an existing public street.
(2) Driveway permits are required for individual or commercial driveways and private streets to be connected to streets which have been, or are proposed to be, accepted by the town.
(B) Construction.
(1) Private residential driveways shall be constructed in accordance with Standard Plan 16-01, and parts C, four, and six herein.
288
(2) Commercial driveways and their acceleration and deceleration lanes shall be constructed in accordance with the Department of Transportation Access Control Manual and parts C, three, four, five and six herein.
(1995 Code, § 00-09-95-30) Penalty, see § 00-09-95-99
§ 00-09-95-46 STREET NAME SIGNS.
(A) Location. At least two street name signs shall be installed on one post at each street intersection to be located on the northeast corner thereof, whenever possible, and on the parkstrip between the street and sidewalk at a point approximately six inches from the sidewalk.
(B) Material and installation. Street name signs shall conform with Standard Plan 43-01.
(1995 Code, § 00-09-95-31) Penalty, see § 00-09-95-99
§ 00-09-95-47 DRAINAGE.
(A) General provisions.
(1) The type and location of all pipes, culverts, bridges, and the like intended to carry storm water within street right-of-ways shall be approved by the Town Manager or his or her designee. Evidence shall be presented at the time of presenting the street plans for approval that application has been made to the appropriate other governmental agencies having jurisdiction over drainage for approval of the size and other hydraulic criteria. The Town Manager or his or her designee shall review and approve any drainage structure whose failure could seriously affect the street itself.
(2) The Town Council also must review and approve the overall drainage plan.
(B) Culverts.
(1) Culverts shall be constructed and installed whenever necessary to provide adequate drainage, in accordance with the satisfactory construction plans and specifications therefor submitted to the developer.
(2) The location and size of driveway culverts shall be determined at the time construction plans are prepared for the entire subdivision. However, the minimum size of the culverts shall be no less than 12 inches, but in no case less than that specified by the approved construction plans and specifications therefor submitted.
(3) Pipe and sections (metal or concrete) shall be used for driveway culverts. She Standard Plans 32-01 and 32-02.
(C) Storm drainage.
(1) Within street right-of-ways, all surface water shall be drained by enclosed drainage systems. All pipes, culverts, interjectional drains, drop inlets, bridges, pipe end sections, and similar or related installations necessary to provide adequate surface water drainage of the area, shall be constructed and installed in accordance with the approved plans and specifications
289
submitted therefore by the developer to the various governmental agencies having jurisdiction over drainage.
(2) Storm drainage and surface water installations, including roof down spouts, shall not be connected to or empty into sanitary sewer systems.
(D) Drainage design criteria for streets.
(1) Inlet or catch basin spacing shall be designed using the following criteria.
(a) The quantity of water (Q) in cubic feet per second shall be determined for the area to be drained by the inlet in accordance with the methods outlined by the Marion County Department of Public Works.
(b) Rainfall intensity-duration-frequency used in these calculations shall be taken from information supplied by the Weather Bureau for Indianapolis, Indiana. Copies of charts showing these curves for the years of 1903 to 1951 are on file with the Marion County Department of Transportation.
(c) For a two-year design storm, there shall be one unflooded lane, 12 feet wide on local streets, and two unflooded lanes, 22 feet wide on collector streets. On other streets, the amount of flooding shall be as determined by the Town Council.
(d) A check shall be made to insure that, for a ten-year design storm, the now is the street shall, at no location, be above the top of the curb. If necessary, the inlet spacing shall be adjusted accordingly.
(2) A catch basin, or other type of approved debris retainer, shall be located so as to intercept debris collected by the drainage system constructed as part of the particular development, immediately before intersection with a previously-constructed collector storm sewer. In cases where various streets within a development are to be drained into a collector storm sewer constructed as part of the development project, debris retainers must be constructed on each line serving the individual streets immediately prior to their intersection with the collector line.
(3) Main line storm and sanitary sewers, as standard practice, shall not be placed under pavement, except that minimal near right angle crossings shall be permitted, provided adequate provisions are made for backfilling.
(4) The minimum velocities used in designing storm sewers shall be as required by the Marion County Department of Public Works.
(5) Materials and construction requirements for manholes, inlets, and pipes shall be in accordance with § 715 of the Standard Specifications or as specified by the Marion County Department of Public Works.
(6) The use of under drains to reduce the accumulation of subsurface water shall be required in all depressed or sag areas. These drains shall meet the requirements of Standard Plan 30-03.
(1995 Code, § 00-09-95-32) Penalty, see § 00-09-95-99
290
§ 00-09-95-48 PLANS.
(A) The Standard Plans, showing details of practices and designs for portions of streets and/or bridges for which acceptance may be requested of the Town Council, are adopted and incorporated as part of this code of ordinances as fully as if set out at length herein.
(B)(1) These Standard Plans are hereby declared the official Standard Plans for the town for the purpose of achieving uniformity of construction methods, materials, and appearance.
(2) The plans must be followed in construction of applicable portions of streets and bridges to be accepted by the Town Manager or his or her designee’s Board, unless written permission for the deviation therefrom is given by the Town Council.
(3) The various applicable Standard Plans, with their effective dates, shall be listed on all construction plans submitted for approval to the Council.
(C)(1) The Town Manager or his or her designee is hereby granted the power and authority to revise the Standard Plans, to delete any of them, and/or to adopt new Standard Plans, when in his or her judgment, the revisions, deletions, or additions shall be necessary or helpful in order to give guidance to developers and to achieve the purpose of this subchapter.
(2) Any new or revised Standard Plan adopted after the effective date of this subchapter shall become effective on the date stated thereon, which shall be a minimum of 30 days after its approval by the Town Manager or his or her designee, and shall apply to all construction plans submitted for approval after such effective date.
(3) The Town Council shall make reasonable efforts to give notice of all new or revised Standard Plans to all person or firms who may be affected thereby, or who shall request notice.
(1995 Code, § 00-09-95-33) Penalty, see § 00-09-95-99
CUTS OR EXCAVATIONS FOR INSTALLATION OF UTILITIES
§ 00-09-95-60 PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS.
(A) Any person, firm, or corporation locating a conduit, pipe line or electrical wiring under the surface of any street, avenue, alley, or public grounds or parts thereof shall present to the Town Council, or its designated officer, a written statement specifying all streets, avenues, alleys, or public grounds or parts thereof in which conduits are to be located, the size and portions of the streets, the size of the conduit to be used, and distance from the surface of the street to the top of the conduit.
(1) The statement shall be accompanies by a map, profile, and specifications which shall show the proposed location, with reference to the grade lines, the surface of the streets, the dimensions and materials of the conduit, and the manholes, appliances, and connections to be used therewith.
(2) The map, profile, and specifications shall be referred at once to the Town Manager or his or her designee for suggestions with reference to the proposed location of the conduits in respect to other improvements; the proposed location shall be changed, as may be found necessary and directed by the Town Council, or its designated officer, after a report from the Town Manager or his or her designee.
291
(3) The map, profile, or specifications shall be furnished by and at the expense of the person, firm, or corporation constructing the conduit and, after being corrected or changed as may be found necessary, together with the original statement referred to above, shall be filed in the office of the Clerk-Treasurer. The conduit shall be constructed in accordance with the statement, map, profile, and specifications as approved.
(B) Upon the application of any person, firm or corporation constructing a conduit, and the recommendation of the Town Manager or his or her designee, a change may be made in the location or material of any conduit or method of construction; provided the change is approved by resolution of the Town Council and the company making the change, on or before the completion of the conduits, files with the Clerk-Treasurer an amended statement, map, profile, and specification describing the conduit as changed.
(1995 Code, § 00-09-95-45) Penalty, see § 00-09-95-99
§ 00-09-95-61 DUTY TO REPLACE PAVEMENT; LIABILITY.
(A) In the location, construction, or repair of conduits, pipe lines, or writing, no unnecessary excavation or obstruction shall be made, placed or continued.
(1) Any excavation obstruction made or placed in any street, avenue, alley, or public grounds at any time for any purpose by the person, firm, or corporation constructing the conduit, or their agents, servants, or contractor, shall be properly guarded.
(2) Any pavement cut or removed at any time or for any purpose shall be speedily replaced and put in proper repair under the supervision of and based on the acceptance of the work by the Town Manager or his or her designee.
(B) (1) Any company liable therefore shall pay all damages for injuries to persons or property, of any person as well as to the town, resulting from or occasioned by, or growing out of, negligence or improper excavation or the repairs.
(2) The liable company shall fully indemnify and save harmless the town from all claims, actions, or suits, at law or in equity, of any kind or nature, for damages to persons or property resulting from, occasioned by, or growing out of the functions of the company, or its servants, agents, or contractors:
(a) To properly guard any excavation or obstruction at any time for any purpose made, placed, or caused in any street, alley, avenue, or public ground;
(b) The omission to properly or speedily repair and repave any openings; or
(c) To keep such pavement in proper repair so far as repair may be made necessary by the interference of such pavement caused by the location, construction, use, or repair of conduits, wires, poles, or pipes.
(1995 Code, § 00-09-95-46) Penalty, see § 00-09-95-99
292
§ 00-09-95-62 PERMIT REQUIRED; FEE.
(A) No cut, excavation, or removal of material shall be made in any street, alley, avenue, or public grounds by any person, firm, or corporation until a permit for the cut, excavation, or removal of materials has been obtained from the Town Manager or his or her designee. The Commissioner shall make available applications for the work and, upon application, shall issue a permit for it.
(B) The fee for permits described in division (A) above shall be $25 per cut. No fee shall be charged to town-owned facilities. The fee shall be paid to the General Fund and made payable to the Clerk-Treasurer.
(1995 Code, § 00-09-95-47) Penalty, see § 00-09-95-99
OVERHANGING CANOPIES; SIGNS
§ 00-09-95-75 PERMIT.
(A) No person, firm or corporation shall erect or maintain any sign, signboard, or canopy over any street, sidewalk, alley, or other public way in the town without having first obtained a permit therefore. Permits for signs, canopies, or signboards may be issued by the Building Commissioner upon payment of the fee. The permit shall designate the location and type of the structure.
(B) The annual fee for the permit described in division (A) above shall be $10 for each overhanging sign or canopy.
(1995 Code, § 00-09-95-55) Penalty, see § 00-09-95-99
§ 00-09-95-76 BOND.
Each person, firm, or corporation maintaining a sign or canopy, as described in § 00-09-95-75, shall file with the Clerk-Treasurer a bond or indemnity policy in the sum f $50,000 conditioned to indemnify the town for any loss, damage, or liability that may result from the construction or maintenance of the sign or canopy. The bond or indemnity policy shall have sureties as may be approved by the Council.
(1995 Code, § 00-09-95-56) Penalty, see § 00-09-95-99
§ 00-09-95-77 CONSTRUCTION.
All signs and canopies extending over any public sidewalk, street, alley, or other public place must be securely fastened and constructed so there will be no danger of it being dislodged by wind or falling from other causes. No sign or canopy shall be erected or maintained extending over any public sidewalk, street, alley, or other public place in a location as to obstruct the view of any traffic light or other traffic sign or signal or approaching vehicles.
(1995 Code, § 00-09-95-57) Penalty, see § 00-09-95-99
293
§ 00-09-95-78 HEIGHT.
(A) The lowest part of any canopy, sign, or of any awning or any support thereof which extends over any public way shall be at least eight feet above the level of the walk or public way over which it extends.
(B) No such sign shall be maintained over any public way used by vehicles in any part of its support or if the sign is less than 15 feet above the level of the public way.
(1995 Code, § 00-09-95-58) Penalty, see § 00-09-95-99
§ 00-09-95-79 INSPECTION.
(A) It shall be the duty of the Building Commissioner to inspect or cause to be inspected every sign, or canopy or awning which extends over any sidewalk, street, alley, or other public way.
(B) If the sign is not constructed in a safe manner, the Building Commissioner shall report the fact to the owner of the sign or the owner or occupants of the premises on which it is fastened.
(C) If the condition of the sign is not corrected to comply with the provisions of this code within ten days after the notice, it shall be removed by the Fire Department on order of the Building Commissioner made to the Fire Chief.
(1995 Code, § 00-09-95-59) Penalty, see § 00-09-95-99
§ 00-09-95-99 PENALTY.
Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine not to exceed $2,500. Each day the violation occurs or continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(1995 Code, § 00-09-95-99)
CHAPTER 96: WEEDS AND VEGETATION
Section
00-09-96-01 Unlawful growth
00-09-96-02 Cutting or removal
00-09-96-03 Collection of cost of abatement and lien
§ 00-09-96-01 UNLAWFUL GROWTH.
(A) Violation. It is unlawful for the owner of any real estate in the town to:
(1) Allow it to become overgrown with weeds or grass which exceed a height of one foot; or
(2) Allow noxious plants to grow on the real estate.
294
(B) Policy. Because growths of weeds or grass which exceed a height of one foot or noxious plants at any height leads to increased presence of insects and vermin, conceals dangerous conditions of the land, adversely affects the property and adjacent properties, and otherwise adversely affects the public health, safety and welfare, it is the policy of the town to prohibit such conditions and to take all necessary action to remove such conditions.
(C) Definition. The following definitions apply to this chapter:
NOXIOUS PLANTS. For purposes of this section, the term “noxious plants” shall include:
(a) Candadian thistle (Cirsium arvense);
(b) Johnson grass;
(c) Sorghum alumun (sorghum halrphense);
(d) Bur cucumber (sicyos angulatus);
(e) Shatter cane (sorhum bicolor); and
(f) Marijuana (cannibus saliva).
WEEDS or GRASSES. For purposes of this section, the term WEEDS and GRASS shall include all weeds, grasses and growing plants which exceed a height of one foot, except agricultural crops, hay and pasture, garden plants, ornamental grasses and plants used for landscape purposes, wild flowers, and wetland and/or drainage vegetation.
(D) Nuisance. Vegetation prohibited by this section constitute a nuisance. The town is authorized to abate such nuisances as provided for in this chapter.
(Ord. 2009-06-01, passed 6-17-2009)
§ 00-09-96-02 CUTTING OR REMOVAL.
(A) Administration. The Planning and Building Department shall be responsible for the administration of this chapter.
(B) Notice to correct. If the town finds a violation of this chapter, it shall mail to the property owner, at the address provided to the County Auditor for tax statements, a notice to correct the violation. This notice shall advise the owner of the violation, describe the action to be taken by the owner to correct the violation, advise the owner that he or she has ten days to correct the violation, advise the owner of the town’s remedies if the owner fails to correct, advise the owner of his or her right to appeal the determination of violation and provide a form notice of appeal, and notify the owner of any other information which, at the town’s discretion, will further comply with the town’s ordinances.
(C) Appeal. If the owner contests the determination by the town that a violation exists, the owner may appeal this determination by filing with the Clerk-Treasurer a notice of appeal within seven days of the owner’s receipt of the notice to correct. If the owner cannot be found using the address from the Auditor, the owner shall be deemed to have received the notice to correct two days after the notice was mailed by the town.
(D) Procedure for appeal of notice to correct. The Town Council shall conduct an evidentiary hearing of the Planning and Building Department’s determination not earlier than 20 days after the filing of the notice of appeal and not later than 40 days after notice of appeal is
295
filed. At this hearing, the Planning and Building Department shall have the burden of proving the violation. The violation must be proved by a preponderance of the evidence. The owner and the Planning and Building Department may be represented by attorneys, and shall have the right to call witnesses and to confront them, to subpoena witnesses in order to compel their attendance at the hearing, and to present exhibits and other evidence for the Council’s consideration. The Council shall issue written findings of fact and conclusions not more than ten days after the hearing and then mail the same to the parties. If the Council determines that a violation existed, the Planning and Building Department may exercise its remedies as provided herein. If the Council determines that no violation existed, the notice to correct shall be deemed void and have no force and effect.
(E) Remedies. In the event that the violator or owner fails to correct the violation as provided for in the notice, the town shall have all of the following remedies:
(1) Fine. The town may fine the violator the sum of $100 for each day the violation remains unabated. The first day the fine can be assessed is the first day after the expiration of the ten-day cure period which begins on receipt by the violator of the notice to correct. The town is not required to provide to the violator any further notice or document as a precondition to assessing the fine. The fine will continue to accrue until the violation is corrected as provided for in the notice. The town shall notify the violator of the fine due, and the violator shall have 30 days from receipt of the notice to pay the fine to the Clerk-Treasurer. If the violator fails to pay the fine within 30 days, the town may file in a court having jurisdiction a complaint for the collection of the fine which accrues due to the violation.
(2) Town correction. The Town may obtain a court order from the court which authorizes the town and its agents to enter upon the violator’s real property, correct the violation at the town’s expense, collect the cost of correction from the property owner, and take all other action necessary to enforce the Town Code.
(3) Lien. If the town corrects the violation and incurs the expense of such corrective work, the town shall be entitled to a lien on the real property of the violator in an amount to the town’s cost of correction and expenses incurred in the prosecutor of the enforcement action.
(4) Attorney’s fees and litigation expenses. If the town brings an enforcement action under this under this section, the violator shall be liable for any and all reasonable attorney fees, court costs and litigation expenses incurred by the town in the enforcement action. The town shall notify the violator of these costs in the notice of fine, and the violator shall have 30 days from receipt of the notice to pay said sum to the Clerk-Treasurer. If the violator fails to pay the costs, the town may file an action in a court of competent jurisdiction a complaint for the collection of these fees, costs and expenses.
(5) Administrative fee. If the town cuts or removes the prohibited vegetation, it shall be entitled to an administrative fee in the amount of $250. The violator shall pay this fee with the fine and other costs in the same manner as prescribed herein. If the violator fails to pay the costs, the town may file an action in a court of competent jurisdiction a complaint for the collection of these fees, costs and expenses.
(6) Other remedies. The town shall also have any other remedy provided for by Indiana law or town ordinance. The town may exercise one or more remedies without waiving its other available remedies.
(Ord. 2009-06-01, passed 6-17-2009)
296
§ 00-09-96-03 COLLECTION OF COST OF ABATEMENT AND LIEN.
(A) Collection. If the town abates the violation, the Clerk-Treasurer shall notify the owner, as provided for herein for the notice to abate, of the actual costs of abatement, and the amount of the administrative costs. If the owner fails to pay the costs and fee within 30 days, the Clerk-Treasurer shall certify the unpaid amount to the appropriate County Auditor, plus any additional administrative costs incurred in the certification.
(B) Lien. The appropriate County Auditor shall place the total amount certified on the real estate tax duplicate for the property affected. The appropriate County Treasurer shall collect the amount certified as delinquent taxes and disperse the funds collected to the town’s general fund.
(C) Appeal of fine or costs. Within seven days of receiving from the town notice of fines and expenses due, the violator may file an appeal of the Town’s determination by filing with the town Council a notice of appeal. If the violator fails to appeal, he or she waives the right to contest the amount claimed due by the town. The appeal process shall be the same process provided for in this chapter for appeals of the town’s determination of a violation.
(Ord. 2009-06-1, passed 6-17-2009)
297
CHAPTER 97: ALARMS
Section
00-09-97-01 General provisions
00-09-97-02 Excessive false alarms prohibited
00-09-97-03 Prolonged externally sounding alarms prohibited
00-09-97-04 Automatic alarm notification devices prohibited
00-09-97-99 Penalty
Cross-reference:
Police Department, see Chapter 33
§ 00-09-97-01 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
This chapter shall be deemed to be consistent with applicable statutory law as amended from time to time.
(Ord. 2002-04, passed 1-2-2002)
§ 00-09-97-02 EXCESSIVE FALSE ALARMS PROHIBITED.
(A) It shall be unlawful for a person who owns or controls property in the municipality equipped with an alarm system to issue, cause to be issued, or permit the issuance to any municipal public safety personnel of more than two false alarms in a calendar year.
(B) Provided, however, a calculation of the number of false alarms under this section shall include the first four false alarms issued within 30 days after the date the alarm system is first monitored.
(Ord. 2002-04, passed 1-2-2002) Penalty, see § 00-09-97-99
§ 00-09-97-03 PROLONGED EXTERNALLY SOUNDING ALARMS PROHIBITED.
It shall be unlawful for an alarm system located in the municipality not to have an automatic reset system which silences the externally sounding alarm within 15 minutes after reactivation.
(Ord. 2002-04, passed 1-2-2002) Penalty, see § 00-09-97-99
§ 00-09-97-04 AUTOMATIC ALARM NOTIFICATION DEVICES PROHIBITED.
It shall be unlawful to sell, install, use or permit the use of any device connected to an alarm system which automatically sends a prerecorded message or coded signal directly to a law enforcement agency indicating the activation of the alarm system.
(Ord. 2002-4, passed 1-2-2002) Penalty, see § 00-09-97-99
298
§ 00-09-97-99 PENALTY.
Penalties for violating this chapter are:
(A) Any person violating § 00-09-97-02 shall be fined $25 for their first violation within a calendar year, $50 for their second violation within a calendar year, $100 for their third violation within a calendar year, and $200 for fourth and subsequent violations within a calendar year;
(B) Any person violating § 00-09-97-03 shall be fined $50; and
(C) Any person violating § 00-09-97-04 shall be fined $200.
(Ord. 2002-4, passed 1-2-2002)
CHAPTER 98: NO SMOKING
Section
00-09-98-01 Definitions
00-09-98-02 Application to town property
00-09-98-03 Smoking prohibited in public places and parks
00-09-98-04 Smoking prohibited in places of employment
00-09-98-05 Reasonable distance
00-09-98-06 Places where smoking is not regulated
00-09-98-07 Declaration of establishment as non-smoking
00-09-98-08 Posting of signs
00-09-98-09 Enforcement
00-09-98-10 Non-retaliation
00-09-98-11 Other applicable laws
00-09-98-99 Penalty
§ 00-09-98-01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
BAR. Any establishment:
(1) Used primarily for the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption by guests of the premises and in which the sale of food is merely incidental to the sale of alcoholic beverages, including but not limited to taverns, nightclubs and cocktail lounges; and
(2) Which employs persons 21 years of age and older.
ENCLOSED AREA. All space between a floor and ceiling that is enclosed on all sides by solid walls or windows (exclusive of doorways), which extend from floor to ceiling.
299
PARK. Any place owned, leased or operated by the town as a park or trail, recreation facility, or open space which is open to the public.
PERSON. Any individual, firm, partnership, association, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind.
PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT. Any enclosed area under the control of a public or private employer which employees normally frequent during the course of employment, including but not limited to work areas, private offices, employees lounges, restrooms, conference and classrooms, cafeterias and hallways.
PUBLIC PLACE. Any enclosed area used by the general public, including but not limited to retail stores and financial institutions, department stores, banks, laundromats, beauty and barber shops, retail food production and marketing establishments, retail service establishments, and other commercial establishments, regardless of whether a fee is charged for admission to the place.
RESTAURANT. Any establishment used or held out to the public as having food available for payment to be consumed on the premises, including but not limited to coffee shops, cafeterias, cafes, luncheonettes, sandwich stands, and soda fountains. The term RESTAURANT shall include a bar area within a restaurant.
RETAIL TOBACCO STORE. Retail store utilized primarily for the sale of tobacco products and accessories and in which the sale of other products is merely incidental. This term does not include retail stores where food or beverages are sold.
SMOKE OR SMOKING. The act of lighting, carrying, inhaling from, or leaving a lighted or smoldering cigar, cigarette, or pipe of any kind.
(Ord. 2007-07, passed 11-21-2007)
§ 00-09-98-02 APPLICATION TO TOWN PROPERTY.
All facilities, including all buildings, parkland, grounds and vehicles, owned, leased or operated by the town shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 2007-07, passed 11-21-2007)
§ 00-09-98-03 SMOKING PROHIBITED IN PUBLIC PLACES AND PARKS.
Smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed public places within the town, including but not limited to, the following places:
(A) Aquariums, galleries, libraries, and museums.
(B) Areas available to and customarily used by the general public in businesses and nonprofit entities patronized by the public, including but not limited to, professional offices, banks, laundromats, hotels and motels.
(C) Bars.
(D) Bingo facilities.
300
(E) Convention facilities.
(F) Elevators.
(G) Facilities primarily used for exhibiting a motion picture, stage, drama, lecture, musical recital, or other similar performance.
(H) Health care facilities.
(I) Licensed childcare and adult day care facilities.
(J) Lobbies, hallways, and other common areas in apartment buildings, condominiums, trailer parks, retirement facilities, nursing homes and other multiple-unit residential facilities.
(K) Parks and rails.
(L) Polling places.
(M) Public transportation facilities, ticket, boarding, and waiting areas of public transit depots.
(N) Restaurants.
(O) Restrooms, lobbies, reception areas, hallways, and other common-use areas.
(P) Retail stores.
(Q) Rooms, chambers, places of meeting or public assembly, including school buildings, under the control of an agency, board, commission, committee or council of the town, or a political subdivision of the state when a public meeting is in progress, to the extent the place is subject to the jurisdiction of the town.
(R) Schools.
(S) Services lines.
(T) Shopping malls.
(U) Sports arenas, including enclosed places in outdoor arenas.
(V) Bowling alleys and centers.
(W) Roller skating facilities.
(Ord. 2007-07, passed 11-21-2007) Penalty, see § 0-09-98-99
301
§ 00-09-98-04 SMOKING PROHIBITED IN PLACES OF EMPLOYMENT.
Smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed areas within places of employment. This includes, but is not limited to, common work areas, auditoriums, classrooms, conference and meeting rooms, private office, elevators, hallways, medical facilities, cafeterias, employee lounges, stairs, restrooms, and all other enclosed facilities.
(Ord. 2007-07, passed 11-21-2007) Penalty, see § 0-09-98-99
§ 00-09-98-05 REASONABLE DISTANCE.
Smoking shall be prohibited within 50 feet from an enclosed area where smoking is prohibited by this chapter, so as to ensure tobacco smoke does not enter into establishments designated as smoke-free under this chapter through entrances, windows, ventilation intakes or other means.
(Ord. 2007-07, passed 11-21-2007) Penalty, see § 0-09-98-99
§ 00-09-98-06 PLACES WHERE SMOKING IS NOT REGULATED.
The prohibitions of this chapter shall not apply to the following:
(A) Private residence, except when sued as a licensed childcare, adult day care, or health care facility.
(B) Hotel and motel rooms that are rented to guests and are designated as smoking rooms; provided, however, that not more than 25% of rooms rented to guests in a hotel or motel may be so designated. The status of rooms as smoking or nonsmoking may not be changed, except to add additional nonsmoking rooms.
(C) Retail tobacco stores; provided that smoke from these places does not infiltrate into areas where smoking is prohibited under the provisions of this chapter.
(D) Outdoor areas of places of employment.
(E) Any business that:
(1) Is exempt from federal income taxation under 26 U.S.C. Section 501(c);
(2) Is a club as that term is defined by I.C. 7.1-3-20-2, or a FRATERNAL CLUB as that term is defined by I.C. 7.1-3-20-7.
(3) Holds a beer, liquor or wine retailers’ permit under the laws of this state; and
(4) Provides food or alcoholic beverages only to its bona fide members and their guests.
(F) None of the areas in divisions (A) through (F) of this section shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter if the smoke from smoking enters any area where smoking is otherwise prohibited by this chapter.
(Ord. 2007-07, passed 11-21-2007)
302
§ 00-09-98-07 DECLARATION OF ESTABLISHMENT AS NON-SMOKING.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, an owner, operator, manager, or other person in control of an establishment, facility, or outdoor area may declare that entire establishment, facility, or outdoor area as a non-smoking place. Smoking shall be prohibited in any place in which a sign conforming to the requirements of § 00-09-98-08 is posted.
(Ord. 2007-07, passed 11-21-2007)
§ 00-09-98-08 POSTING OF SIGNS.
(A) Every public place and place of employment where smoking is prohibited by this chapter shall have posted at every entrance a conspicuous sign clearly stating that smoking is prohibited.
(B) Any establishment exempted under § 00-09-98-06(C), (D), or € shall clearly and conspicuously post the following sign at every entrance: “Warning – This is a smoking establishment.”
(Ord. 2007-07, passed 11-21-2007)
§ 00-09-98-09 ENFORCEMENT.
(A) This chapter shall be enforced by the Town Manager or his/her designee.
(B) Any citizen who desires to register a complaint under this chapter may initiate enforcement with the Town Manager or his/her designee.
(C) The Health Department, Fire Department, or their designees may, while an establishment is undergoing otherwise mandated inspections, inspect for compliance with this chapter.
(D) An owner, manager, operator, or employee of an establishment regulated by this chapter shall inform persons violating this chapter of the appropriate provisions thereof.
(Ord. 2007-07, passed 11-21-2007)
§ 00-09-998-10 NON-RETALIATION.
No person or employers shall discharge, refuse to hire or in any manner retaliate against any employee, applicant for employment, or customer because such employee, applicant, or customer exercise any right to a smoke-fre3e environment afforded by this chapter.
(Ord. 2007-07, passed 11-21-2007)
§ 00-09-08-10 OTHER APPLICABLE LAWS.
This chapter shall not be interpreted to permit smoking where it is otherwise restricted by other applicable laws or to supersede any local laws which are more restrictive.
(Ord. 2007-07, passed 11-21-2007)
303
§ 00-09-98-99 PENALTY.
(A) A person who smokes in an area where smoking is prohibited by the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction, punishable by a fine of $50.
(B) A person who owns, manages, operates, or otherwise controls a public place or place of employment and who fails to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction, punishable by:
(1) A fine of $100 for a first violation.
(2) A fine of $200 for a second violation within one year.
(3) A fine of $500 for each additional violation within one year.
(C) Each day on which a violation of this chapter occurs shall be considered a separate and distinct violation.
(Ord. 200707, passed 11-21-2007)
CHAPTER 99: WATER CONSERVATION
Section
00-09-99-01 Application
00-09-99-02 Definitions
00-09-99-03 Voluntary conservation
00-09-99-04 Declaration of need; notice
00-09-99-05 Mandatory water conservation; exemptions
00-09-99-06 Violations
00-09-99-07 Enforcement
00-09-99-08 Violations subject to admission and payment
00-09-99-09 Severability
§ 00-09-99-01 APPLICATION.
This Ordinance applies to the use of water from Citizens Energy Group, or its successors (hereinafter referred to as Citizens Water) that occurs within the town of Cumberland, Indiana.
§ 00-09-99-02 DEFINITIONS.
As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section.
(A) Advisory conditions means conditions under which voluntary conservation measures are appropriate due to decreased supplies in the Citizens Water reservoirs, or other
304
circumstances have reduced the amount of treated water available to customers, as determined by Citizens Water. Advisory conditions may be either.
(1) Water Shortage Watch Advisory: a voluntary reduction in water use, particularly discretionary use, including lawn watering to no more than one (1) time per week; or
(2) Water Shortage Alert Advisory: a voluntary reduction in water use, particularly during peak demand, including halting lawn watering for a specific period of time.
(B) Customer means an individual, firm, corporation, government agency or other entity being supplied with water utility service by Citizens Water at a location within the Town of Cumberland.
(C) Citizens Water means Citizens Water, a division of Citizens Energy Group, or its successors in interest.
(D) Mandatory conservation means compliance with Town of Cumberland imposition of requirements that are designed to reduce certain kinds and types of water use all as set forth herein.
(E) Normal conditions means conditions under which water supply and treatment capacity are adequate to meet demand.
(F) Treated water means water treated in a manner that it is suitable for human consumption or for another designated use.
(G) Vegetable garden means a garden where substantially all of the plants are suitable and grown primarily for human consumption.
(H) Voluntary conservation means compliance with the Town of Cumberland request to reduce water use.
(I) Water shortage emergency means occurrence wherein Mandatory Conservation measures are appropriate due to the levels in either of the Citizens Water reservoirs having been reduced to less than their designed drawdown curves or less than an estimated twenty-five (25) percent of their annual drawdown design capacities, groundwater wells not functioning properly due to reduced groundwater levels or the existence of other circumstances that have reduced the amount of treated water available to customers, as determined by Citizens Water.
(J) Water user means a customer or other individual, firm, corporation, government agency, or other entity using water from Citizens Water system within the Town of Cumberland.
(K) Water shortage warning means an occurrence wherein mandatory conservation measures are appropriate due to the levels in either of the Citizens Water reservoirs having been reduced to less than their designed drawdown curves or less than an estimated fifty (50) percent of their annual drawdown design capacities, groundwater wells not functioning properly due to reduced groundwater levels, or the existence of other circumstances that have reduced the amount of treated water available to customers, as determined by Citizens Water.
305
§ 00-09-99-03 VOLUNTARY CONSERVATION.
During normal conditions and advisory conditions, water users should follow the voluntary consideration measures as found in the Wise Water Use Policy and other policies adopted by the Citizens Water and approved by the Town of Cumberland.
§ 00-09-99-04 DECLARATION OF NEED; NOTICE.
(A) Upon determining that the Citizens Water system is in a condition of water shortage, the Town Manager of the Town of Cumberland may declare the existence of a water shortage warning or water shortage emergency, whereupon the respective water conservation measures described in Section 5 of this Chapter shall apply until the water warning or emergency is terminated. Whenever the Town Manager finds that some or all of the conditions that gave rise to the declaration of a water warning or water emergency no longer exist, he/she may declare the water warning or water emergency terminated.
(B) Notice of the declaration or termination of a water shortage warning or water shortage emergency shall be made by publication in a newspaper of general circulation. Notice shall be deemed effective upon publication.
§ 00-09-99-05 MANDATORY WATER CONSERVATION; EXEMPTIONS.
(A) During a water shortage warning, it shall be unlawful for a water user to cause, permit, allow, do, or engage in any of the following actions:
(1) Sprinkling, watering, or irrigating of grasses;
(2) Washing cars, trucks, trailers, mobile homes, railroad cars or any other type of mobile equipment, except as required by applicable local, state, or federal law for health or safety reasons; and
(3) Filling empty swimming pools;
(B) During a water shortage emergency, it shall be unlawful for a water user to cause, permit, allow, do, or engage in any outdoor water use with the exception of the watering of vegetable gardens using a bucket or pail.
(C) The following water users and water uses shall be exempt from the prohibitions contained in divisions (A) and (B) of this section: Nurseries, provided water use is limited to the amount essential to preserve inventories.
(1) Nurseries, provided water use is limited to the amount essential to preserve inventories; and
(2) Growing crops on farms, provided the water use is limited to the amount essential to prevent a reduction in yield.
(D) The following water users and water uses may be exempted by the Town Manager from the prohibitions contained in subsections (A) and (B) of this Section:
306
(1) Automatic commercial car washes, provided a majority of the water used is recycled;
(2) Manual commercial car washes, provided only a handheld hose equipped with a shut-off nozzle is utilized; and
(3) Golf courses, provided tee boxes and greens are watered only on an every other day schedule that begins on Monday of each week and fairways are watered only once per week on Thursday.
(4) Any watering of property owned or controlled by the Town of Cumberland as directed by the Town Manager or Town Manager’s designee where such watering is necessary or appropriate for asset preservation.
§ 00-09-99-06 VIOLATIONS.
(A) Each customer shall be responsible for compliance with Section 5 of this Chapter with respect to the premises where the customer receives water service. If the identity of the water user cannot be ascertained, the customer shall be prima facie liable for violations that occur on such premises.
(B) A person’s first and second violations of Section 5 of this Chapter in any twelve (12) month period shall be subject to an admission of violation and payment of the designated civil penalty though the Ordinance Violations Bureau.
(C) Any person who violates the provisions of this Chapter shall be guilty of an infraction, punishable by a fine of not more than:
First offense: Written Warning
Second offense within a year: $250
Third and subsequent offense with a year: $500
The payment of a penalty for the violation of any provision of this Chapter shall not excuse the violation or permit to continue nor shall such payment be held to prevent the enforced correction of the prohibited conditions. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which such violation occurs or continues.
(D) With respect to violations not resolved under Section 3 of this Chapter, including a person’s subsequent violations of Section 5 in a twelve (12) month period, the Town Manager may refer the matter to a court of competent jurisdiction for enforcement action.
(E) All monies collected from violation of this chapter shall be deposited in the General Fund of the town.
§ 00-09-99-07 ENFORCEMENT.
This chapter shall be enforced by the Town of Cumberland and any other designee at the direction of the Town Manager.
307
§ 00-09-99-08 VIOLATIONS SUBJECT TO ADMISSION AND PAYMENT.
Violations of the Ordinance provisions set forth herein are designated as subject to admissions of violation and payment of the designated civil penalty through the Ordinance Violations Bureau of the Town of Cumberland in an amount not exceeding any limitation under I.C. 33-36-2-3 in accordance with the procedures of this Article.
§ 00-09-99-09 SEVERABILITY.
Should any provision (section, paragraph, sentence, clause, or any other portion) of this Ordinance be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid for any reason, the remaining provision or provisions shall not be affected, if and only if such remaining provisions can, without the invalid provision or provisions, be given the effect intended by the Council in adopting this Ordinance. To this end the provisions of this Ordinance are severable.
(Ord. 2014-15, adopted ____________)
CHAPTER 100: UNSAFE BUILIDNG REGULATIONS AND REMEDIATION
Section
00-09-100-01 Unsafe Building Law Incorporated by Reference.
00-09-100-02 Administrator and Hearing Authority.
00-09-100-03 Unsafe Building and Unsafe Premises Defined.
00-09-100-04 Substantial Property Interest Defined.
00-09-100-05 Order, Notice, Hearing and Corrective Action.
00-09-100-06 Establishment of Unsafe Building Fund.
00-09-100-07 Public Nuisance.
§ 00-09-100-01. UNSAFE BUILDING LAW INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE.
Indiana’s Unsafe Building Law, I.C. 36-7-9-1 through 29, is incorporated by reference as the Town’s Unsafe Building Ordinance. All proceedings for the inspection, repair, and removal of unsafe buildings shall be governed by the state law and this chapter. If any of these provisions conflict with the state Unsafe Building Law, the state law controls.
§ 00-09-100-02. ADMINISTRATOR AND HEARING AUTHORITY.
(A) Administering Department. The Cumberland Planning and Development Department is designated as the department responsible for administering this ordinance.
(B) Enforcement Authority. The Cumberland Director of Planning and Development (“the Director”) is designated as the “enforcement authority” as provided in I.C. 36-7-9-2.
(C) Hearing Authority. The Cumberland Town Council is designated as the “hearing authority” for purposes of conducting hearings under I.C. 36-7-9-7 and for taking any other action authorized by the Unsafe Building Law.
308
§ 00-09-100-03. “UNSAFE BUILDING” AND “UNSAFE PREMISES” DEFINED.
For purposes of this ordinance, the term “unsafe building” has the definition in I.C. 36-7-9-4. In particular, the term means a building or structure, or any part of a building or structure, that is:
(1) in an impaired structural condition that makes it unsafe to a person or property;
(2) a fire hazard;
(3) a hazard to public health;
(4) a public nuisance;
(5) dangerous to a person or property because of a violation of a statute or ordinance concerning building conditions or maintenance; or
(6) vacant and not maintained in a manner that would allow human habitation, occupancy, or use under the requirements of a statute or an ordinance.
As further provided in I.C. 36-7-9-4, an unsafe building and the tract of real property on which the unsafe building is located are considered unsafe premises. A tract of real property that does not contain a building or structure, not including land used for producing agriculture, is considered an unsafe premises if the tract of real property is:
(1) a fire hazard;
(2) a hazard to public health;
(3) a public nuisance; or
(4) dangerous to person or property because of a violation of a statute or an ordinance.
§ 00-09-100-04. “SUBSTANTIAL PROPERTY INTEREST” DEFINED.
The definition of “substantial property interest” in I.C. 36-7-9-2 is incorporated herein. In particular, the term means any right in real property that may be affected in a substantial way by actions authorized by this chapter, a fee interest, a life estate interest, a future interest, a mortgage interest, or an equitable interest of a contract purchaser.
§ 00-09-100-05. ORDER, NOTICE, HEARING, AND CORRECTIVE ACTION.
The procedures in I.C. 36-7-9-5 through 29, and any other applicable provisions of I.C. 36-7-9, are incorporated herein and govern the procedures for enforcing this ordinance. The following provisions are intended to provide a summary of the statutory procedures and in no way restrict those procedures or the available relief and remedies.
(A) Issuance of Order.
Upon discovery of an unsafe premise, the Director may issue an order requiring corrective or remedial action as provided in I.C. 37-7-9-5(a). The order must contain the information specified in I.C. 37-7-9-5(b). The ordered action must be reasonably related to the condition of the unsafe premises and the nature and use of nearby properties. The order supersedes any permit relating to building or land use, whether that permit is obtained before or after the order is issued. The order must allow a sufficient time, of between 10 days and 60 days, from the time when notice of the order is given, to accomplish the required action. If the order allows more than 30 days for accomplishing the action, the order may require that a substantial beginning be made in accomplishing the action within 30 days.
The Director may issue an order that modifies a previously issued order, and may rescind a previously issued order, even if the order has been affirmed by the Town Council.
309
(B) Hearing and Action by Town Council.
1. Except as provided below, the Town Council must hold a hearing for each order the Director issues. The hearing must be held no earlier than 10 days after notice of the order is given, unless proper action is taken for a different hearing date as provided in I.C. 36-7-9-7(b). Persons with an interest in the proceedings who appear at the hearing are entitled to present evidence, cross-examine opposing witnesses, and present arguments.
At the conclusion of the hearing, the Council may affirm, rescind, or modify the Director’s order. But, unless the person to whom the order was issued, or the person’s counsel, is present at the hearing, the Council may modify the order only in a manner that makes its terms less stringent. The Council may grant additional time to accomplish action required by the order, as provided in I.C. 36-7-9-7(f). If the Council affirms or modifies an order, it shall issue a continuous enforcement order, as provided in I.C. 36-7-9-7(g).
If the Council affirms an order and finds that there has been a willful failure to comply with the order, the Council may impose a civil penalty not exceeding $5,000. The Council may, in its discretion, reduce or strike a penalty. The Council may impose additional penalties, not to exceed $5,000 per penalty, if the Council finds that 1) significant work on the premises to comply with the affirmed order has not been accomplished, and 2) the premises have a negative effect on property values or the quality of life of the surrounding area or the premises require the provision of services by local government in excess of the services required by ordinary properties, as provided in I.C. 36-7-9-7(e).
The Council shall make a written record of its decisions and its supporting findings. The record of the Council’s findings and action shall be available to the public upon request, but neither the Director nor the Council is otherwise required to give any person notice of its findings and action.
2. The Council is not required to hold a hearing relating to an order by the Director to seal an unsafe building (I.C. 36-7-9-5(a)(2)); for extermination of vermin (I.C. 36-7-9-5(a)(2)); for removal of trash, debris, fire hazardous material, or a public health hazard (I.C. 36-7-9-5(a)(4)); or to repair or rehabilitate an unsafe building (I.C. 36-7-9-5(a)(5)). However, a person holding a fee interest, life estate interest, mortgage interest, or equitable interest of a contract purchaser in the unsafe premises may request a hearing by the Council relating to such an order. Such a request must be made within 10 days after notice is given. If a hearing is timely requested, the Council shall conduct a hearing. If a hearing is not timely requested, such orders become final 10 days after notice is given.
(C) Judicial Review.
The Council’s decision concerning an order or its imposition of a civil penalty is subject to judicial review by the circuit or superior court of Hancock County, as provided in I.C. 36-7-9-8. The petition for judicial review must be filed with the court within 10 days after the date the action was taken.
(D) Emergency Action Without Order or Notice.
If the Director finds it necessary to take emergency action concerning an unsafe building or unsafe premises in order to protect life, safety, or property, he may take necessary action to
310
remove an immediate danger without first issuing an order or giving notice, as provided in I.C. 36-7-9-9.
(E) Proceedings for Corrective Action, Recovery of Costs, and Related Matters.
All proceedings concerning the enforcement of orders issued under this ordinance, including hiring contractors to take action necessary to bring a property into compliance, liability for costs of work performed, the Town’s recovery of costs related to the enforcement action – including seeking a judgment from a court and imposing a lien – and all related matters, shall be governed by the terms of the Unsafe Building Law, including but not limited to the procedures in I.C. 36-7-9-10 through 13.5.
(F) Required Notices.
All notices issued under this ordinance shall be given as provided in I.C. 36-7-9-25. This includes notice of orders, of hearings continued without a specified date, of statements that public bids are to be let, and of claims for payment.
(G) Recording of Orders.
The Director shall record in the office of the Hancock County Recorder orders for demolition and removal of part of an unsafe building (I.C. 36-7-9-5(a)(6)), for demolition and removal of an unsafe building for the reasons specified in I.C. 36-7-9-5(a)(7), or modifying a previously issued order (I.C. 36-7-9-6(a)), and other related orders as provided in I.C. 36-7-9-26.
§ 00-09-100-06. ESTABLISHMENT OF UNSAFE BUILDING FUND.
(A) Pursuant to I.C. 36-7-9-14 there is hereby created a new fund, the Unsafe Building Fund.
(B) Money for the fund may be received from any source, including appropriations by local, state, or federal governments, and donations. The following money shall be deposited in the fund:
1. Money received as payment for or settlement of obligations or judgments under I.C. 36-7-9-9 through 13 and 17 through 22;
2. Money received from bonds posed under I.C. 36-7-9-7;
3. Money received in satisfaction of receivers’ notes or certificates issued under I.C. 36-7-9-20 and purchased with money from the unsafe building fund;
4. Money received for payment of settlement of civil penalties or fines imposed under I.C. 36-7-9-7; and
5. Money received from the collection of special assessments under I.C. 36-7-9-13.5.
(C) Money in the fund may be used for the expenses incurred in carrying out the purpose of the Unsafe Building Law and this ordinance, including:
1. The cost of obtaining reliable information about the identity and location of each person who owns a substantial property interest in unsafe premises;
2. The cost of an examination of an unsafe building by a registered architect or registered engineer not employed by the Town of Cumberland;
3. The cost of surveys necessary to determine the location and dimensions of real property on which an unsafe building is located;
311
4. The cost of giving required notices;
5. The bid price of work by a contractor under I.C. 36-7-9-10 or I.C. 36-7-9-17 through 22;
6. The cost of emergency action under I.C. 36-7-9-9; and
7. The cost of notes or receivers’ certificates issued under I.C. 36-7-9-20.
§ 00-09-100-07. PUBLIC NUISANCE.
All buildings or portions thereof within the town which are determined by the Director to be unsafe as defined in this ordinance are declared to be public nuisances and, in addition to the remedies provided herein, the Town may seek the abatement of such nuisances under any applicable Town ordinance or state statute governing nuisances.”
312
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Chapter
110. PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
111. AMUSEMENT DEVISES
112. TAX ABATEMENT
313
CHAPTER 110: PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
Section
00-11-110-01 Definitions
00-11-110-02 Permit required for peddlers
00-11-110-03 Permit application and fee
00-11-110-04 Revocation of permits
00-11-110-05 Appeal procedure
00-11-110-06 Prohibited solicitation
00-11-110-07 Other prohibited activity
00-11-110-99 Penalty
§ 00-11-110-01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
CHARITABLE. For patriotic, philanthropic, social service, health, welfare, benevolent, educational, civic, cultural or fraternal purpose.
PEDDLER. Any person who goes upon the premises of any private residence, not having been invited by the occupant thereof, carrying or transporting goods, wares, merchandise or personal property of any nature and offering the same for sale.
SOLICITOR. Any person who goes upon the premises of any private residence, not having been invited by the occupant thereof, for the purpose of taking or attempting to take orders for the sale of goods, merchandise, wares, or other personal property of any nature for future delivery, or for services to be performed in the future.
§ 00-11-110-02 PERMIT REQUIRED FOR PEDDLERS.
(A) No person shall engage in activities as a peddler or solicitor in the town, unless that person has a valid permit therefore, issued by the Clerk-Treasurer of the town.
(B) The requirement for a permit shall not be applicable to any person who engages in canvassing or other solicitation activities for the benefit of a political, charitable or religious organization or cause provided that such persons present town officials, upon request, information that verifies the political, charitable or religious purpose of their activities.
314
§ 00-11-110-03 PERMIT APPLICATION AND FEE.
(A) Upon request for a permit, the Clerk-Treasurer shall provide each peddler or solicitor with an application form which shall include questions regarding the applicant’s principal place of business, nature of sales and product, background and history, and such other information as the Clerk-Treasurer deems relevant for the town’s assurance that lawful conduct will be maintained.
(B) Upon completion and submission of the application form to the Clerk-Treasurer, along with payment of a $25 permit fee, the applicant shall receive a peddler/solicitor permit.
(C) Each individual engaging in the activities of a peddler or solicitor must have his or her own permit and show that permit upon request by any town official or individual with whom they are doing business in the town as a peddler or solicitor.
(D) Each permit is valid for a period of 90 days from the date of its issuance.
§ 00-11-110-04 REVOCATION OF PERMITS.
Any permit issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked by the Clerk-Treasurer or the Town Manager on behalf of the town for any of the following causes:
(A) Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement provided on the permit application form;
(B) Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in connection with the selling of goods, wares, merchandise or services:
(C) Conducting business in an unlawful manner or in a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public; and/or
(D) Any violation of the requirement of this chapter.
§ 00-11-110-05 APPEAL PROCEDURE.
Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Clerk-Treasurer, Town Manager or other town official in regard to the need for a permit, the satisfactory completion of an application for a permit, the revocation of a permit or any other matter involving the enforcement of this chapter, shall have a right to appeal to the Town Council. After hearing an appeal, the other of the Town Council on the appeal shall be final.
§ 00-11-110-06 PROHIBITED SOLICITATION.
(A) It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to go upon any premises and ring the doorbell upon or near any door, or to create any other sound to secure an audience with the occupant of the premises, for the purposes of engaging in the activities of peddling or soliciting, if either:
315
(1) It is between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m.; or
(2) There is a notice posted at the premises to prohibit peddling or soliciting as provided in division (B) below.
(B) A notice to prohibit peddling or soliciting should be posted in close proximity to the main entrance to the premises so as to be readily visible to and readable by persons approaching that entrance. The notice shall include the words “no peddling,” “no soliciting” or other worse to the same effect.
§ 00-11-110-07 OTHER PROHIBITED ACTIVITY.
(A) In addition to the other activity prohibited by this chapter, it shall be unlawful for a person to sit, stand or move within or upon a public street, roadway, or highway, or a median between two streets, roadways or highways, or within the public right-of-way not exceeding 50 feet from the traveled portion of any intersection controlled by an automatic traffic signal or stop sign, for the purpose of or while engaged in:
(1) Soliciting, or peddling, selling, advertising, donating or distributing any product, property or service including but not limited to tickets, handbills newspaper, or other printed material, to or from an occupant of a vehicles in a roadway or pedestrian thereon; or
(2) Conversation or discourse with an occupant of a vehicle in the public street, roadway or highway.
(B) It shall be unlawful for a person by oral or written means to solicit, or to peddle, sell, advertise, donate or distribute any product, property, or service, including but not limited to tickets, handbills, newspapers, or other printed material, to an occupant of a motor vehicle or to engage in conversation or discourse with an occupant of a motor vehicle within or upon a public street, roadway or highway, or a median between two public streets, roadways or highways, or within the public right-of-way not exceeding 50 feet from the traveled portion of any intersection controlled by an automatic traffic signal or stop sign, so as to:
(1) Endanger the safety or welfare of an occupant of a vehicle within or upon a public street, roadway or highway, or a pedestrian within the immediate vicinity;
(2) Impede the free flow of vehicular traffic on the public street, roadway or highway;
(3) Obstruct or distract the view of the operator of any such vehicle within or upon the public street, roadway or highway.
(C) As used in this chapter, PANHANDLING means any solicitation made in person upon any public street, roadway or highway, median between streets, roadways or highways, or within the public right-of-way not exceeding 50 feet from the traveled portion of any intersection controlled by an automatic traffic signal or stop sign, in which a person requests an immediate donation of money or other gratuity from another person, and includes, but is not limited to seeking donations:
(1) By vocal appeal or for music, singing or other street performance; and
316
(2) Where the person being solicited either receives nothing in return for a donation or receives an item of little or no monetary value in exchange for a donation, under circumstances where a reasonable person would understand that the transaction is in substance a donation.
(3) Panhandling shall not include the act of passively standing or sitting, nor performing music, singing or other street performance with a sign or other indication that a donation is being south, without any vocal request other than in response to an inquiry by another person.
(D) It shall also be unlawful to engage in an act of panhandling:
(1) After sunset or before sunrise;
(2) When either the panhandle or the person being solicited is located in any of the following locations:
(a) At a bus stop;
(b) In a motor vehicle which is on a public street, roadway or highway;
(c) In a sidewalk café; or
(d) Within 20 feet of an automatic teller machine or entrance to a bank, credit union or financial institution.
(3) In an aggressive manner, including any of the following actions:
(a) Touching the solicited person without eh solicited person’s consent;
(b) Soliciting a person which such person is standing in line and waiting to be admitted to a commercial establishment;
(c) Blocking the path of a person being solicited, or the entrance to any building or vehicle;
(d) Following behind, ahead or alongside a person who walks away from the panhandler after solicited;
(e) Using profane or abusive language, either during the solicitation or following a refusal to make a donation, or making any statement, gesture or other communication which would cause a reasonable person to be fearful or feel compelled; or
(f) Panhandling in a group of two or more persons.
(Ord. 2009-13, passed 12-15-2009)
§ 00-11-110-99 PENALTY.
(A) Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a fine of $50 for each violation.
317
(B) Any person who violates § 00-11-110-07 shall be fined $200 for each violation. The town, through its employees and agents, may enforce § 00-11-110-07 using all legal means, including but not limited to actions for the collection of money, injunctive relief, and other remedies in the Circuit or Superior Courts of Hancock or Marion Counties, Indiana, or other courts of competent jurisdiction.
(Am. Ord. 2009-13, passed 12-15-2009)
CHAPTER 111: AMUSEMENT DEVICES
Section
General Provisions
00-11-111-01 Gambling devise prohibited
00-11-111-02 Definition
Licenses
00-11-111-15 Required
00-11-111-16 Issuance
00-11-111-17 Affixing to machine
00-11-111-99 Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
00-11-111-01 GAMBLING DEVICES PROHIBITED.
Pursuant to laws of the state, the presence or use of any type of lawfully defined, illegal gambling device within the corporate limits of the town is hereby expressly prohibited. Establishment of this code shall hereby authorize immediate seizure and destruction of any illegal gambling devices, wherever found within the town, by the Town marshal or th Marshal’s duly designated representatives.
(1995 Code, § 00-11-113-01) Penalty, see § 00-11-111-99
§ 00-11-111-02 DEFINITION.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
318
AMUSEMENT DEVICES. The term includes, but is not limited to: recreational alleys or other similar games of sport; pinball machines of any nature; jukeboxes, phonographs, or other playback equipment for the reproduction of musical recordings; mechanical projection equipment or electronically televised devices and/or any electronically operated games or devices used for recreational, sport, or entertainment purposes.
(1995 Code, § 00-11-113-02)
LICENSES
§ 00-11-111-15 REQUIRED.
The owner of any amusement device that is made available for public use or group use in any establishment other than a residence shall obtain and maintain a license for the amusement device and comply with the provisions of this chapter.
(1995 Code, § 00-11-113-10) Penalty, see § 00-11-111-99
§ 00-11-111-16 ISSUANCE.
(A) The Clerk-Treasurer shall issue a license for the operation of amusement devices upon application therefor.
(1) Each owner or lessee of mechanical amusement equipment shall pay a fee of $25 to acquire a license from the town for operation and use of each device within the corporate limits of the town.
(2) The license shall be good for one full calendar year or until the end of the calendar year in which initial application is made. The license shall remain in full force and effect for that period of time, provided it shall comply with the provisions of this chapter at all times.
(B) For renewal purposes, the license fee for each device shall be due and payable on or before January 1 of each year. This fee shall be paid directly to the Clerk-Treasurer.
(1995 Code, § 00-11-113-11) Penalty, see § 00-11-111-99
§ 00-11-111-17 AFFIXING TO MACHINE.
(A) All licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter shall bear an expiration date. Each license certificate shall be numbered and shall be placed in a conspicuous place on each amusement device operated in the town. No amusement device shall be operated without a current license certificate fixed in a prominent position thereon.
(B) The Clerk-Treasurer shall keep a register of each person, firm, or corporation owning or operating an amusement device licensed under this chapter, together with the license number of each amusement device. The records shall be open to inspection at all reasonable hours and shall be a matter of public record.
(1995 Code, § 00-11-113-12) Penalty, see § 00-11-111-99
319
§ 00-11-111-99 PENALTY.
Any person who fails to have a license for an amusement device shall be subject to a fine of $95. Any person who has licensed amusement devices who violated the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to revocation of their license or licenses.
CHAPTER 112: TAX ABATEMENT
Section
00-11-112-01 Authorization
00-11-112-02 Eligible Projects
00-11-112-03 Factors for Consideration of Property Tax Abatement
00-11-112-04 Targeted Businesses
00-11-112-05 Other Requirements
00-11-112-06 Applications
00-11-112-07 Guidelines for Abatement Period of Time
§ 00-11-112-01 AUTHORIZATION
Property tax abatement is authorized under Indiana Code 6-1.1-12.1-1. Indiana code allows these abatements for a period of 1 to 10 years when attributed to redevelopment or rehabilitation activities in Economic Revitalization Areas. The Town Council decides whether or not to designate areas as Economic Revitalization Areas, after receiving a recommendation from the Redevelopment Commission.
§ 00-11-112-02 ELIGIBLE PROJECTS
Project will be considered for abatement only if the proposed new investment is at least $1 Million and development has not begum and/or equipment has not been ordered or the equipment will be new to the State of Indiana. The proposed use must be a permissible use under the applicable zoning restrictions. If the use is not permissible the appropriate variance or rezoning must be on file at the time application is made. The Town Council will not consider abatement for speculative projects unless there are exceptional circumstances. Used identified in IC 6-1.1-12.1-3€ are ineligible for tax abatement.
§ 00-11-112-03 FACTORS FOR CONSIDERATION OF PROPERTY TAX ABATEMENT
The following factors for considering and evaluating application for Economic Revitalization Areas and Tax Abatement will be used to determine the length of abatement:
1. The number of full-time equivalent permanent jobs created and the associated wages/salaries
2. The number of full-time equivalent permanent jobs retained and the associated wages/salaries
3. Results in investment in real or personal property and the level of that investment
4. Increases the property tax base
5. Avoid environmental harm or involves remediating or removing environmentally hazardous materials and/or substances
320
6. Results in providing community benefits
7. Results in supporting a Women/Minority Business Enterprise certified in accordance with 25 IAC 5
8. Any need for additional public infrastructure or other additional public support for the project will be considered in determining the length of the abatement. Support of additional infrastructure will be considered as a local incentive to the company applying
9. The time period of depreciation of equipment will be considered in the length of abatement for equipment
10. Economic Revitalization Areas (ERAs) designated by the Town Council for personal property will include a Memorandum of Understanding that may provide for the repayment to the Town of all or a portion of the tax savings realized through the designation in the event that the ERA is terminated because the property is removed from the Town or the company is unable to fulfill its obligation for job and salary targets under the abatement request.
11. A limited tax abatement may be considered in a Tax Increment Finance (TIF) District
§ 00-11-112-04 TARGETED BUSINESSES
The Town of Cumberland will offer additional consideration for businesses within certain target businesses. Target Businesses include green technology, advanced manufacturing, life sciences, and high tech.
§ 00-11-112-05. OTHER REQUIREMENTS
The applicant for tax abatement or an authorized representative must attend all Redevelopment Commission and Town Council meetings where the application for tax abatement will be discussed.
Property owners receiving tax abatement are required to file forms pursuant to state law on an annual basis by the dates required by the Town/State law with the Town Clerk Treasurer for each year during which tax abatement is received. The Clerk-Treasurer will send a notice of the information required for filing with the Hancock County Auditor. The Town staff will report annually to the Town Council on the granted abatement(s).
§ 00-11-112-06. APPLICATIONS
The applicant must provide reasons why the project site qualifies as an Economic Revitalization Area as defined under Indiana Code including factors like lack of development; cessation of growth, deterioration of improvements, or character of occupancy, age, obsolescence, substandard buildings, or other factors. The application shall also include the total amount of investment to be made in real and personal property, the number of new full-time jobs being created, the average wage of the new employees, and infrastructure requirements for the taxpayer’s investment.
§ 00-11-112-07. GUIDELINES FOR ABATEMENT PERIOD OF TIME
The length of the abatement period for real and personal property abatement will be considered based on the guidelines listed in this policy and determined in the attached Application Score Sheet. The Town uses a scoring system as a guide for determining the appropriate length of time for tax abatements. IN general, manufacturing and technology based
321
business real estate and some equipment may qualify for a 6 – 10 year abatement while most equipment and office real estate will qualify for 3 – 7 years of abatement. For projects that do not meet the threshold for tax abatement, demonstrated community involvement in the form of voluntary labor or financial support will be looked upon favorably. Borderline projects that provide community support may be awarded one (1) point for community projects they participate in. Community projects include projects associated with the Town, schools, United Way, seniors, etc. Involvement or intended involvement must be documented.
322
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
Chapter
130. GENERAL OFFENSES
323
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL OFFENSES
Section
00-13-130-01 Congregating
00-13-130-02 Discharging firearms
00-13-130-03 Littering
00-13-130-04 Noise
00-13-130-99 Penalty
§ 00-13-130-01 CONGREGATING.
(A) It shall be unlawful for anyone to congregate upon any street, alley, sidewalk or other public place in the town, in such numbers or in such manner so as to hinder or obstruct unreasonably the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles thereon or the free access to the entrance to any building open to the public.
(B) This section shall not apply to any public meeting of the citizens of the town, or to any persons lawfully engaging in a labor strike.
(1995 Code, § 00-13-130-02) Penalty, see § 00-13-130-99
§ 00-13-130-02 DISCHARGING FIREARMS.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to shoot any firearm within the limits of the town.
(B) This section shall not apply to any legally appointed officer performing his or her duty, nor to any person when acting in defense of his or her own person, family or property.
(C) Any use or display of firearms or other deadly weapons that do, or ten to, endanger persons or property and prevent the free and unfettered use of the public streets, alleys, sidewalks, or other public place within the corporate limits of the town is prohibited.
(1995 Code, § 00-13-130-04)
(D) For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
DEADLY WEAPON. A firearm, an electric stun gun, dart gun, bow or other device for shooting arrows, a fixed blade knife or a knife with a folding blade of four inches or more.
FIREARM. Any weapon that is capable of or designed to or that may readily be converted to expel a projectile by means of an explosion, including any weapon commonly referred to as a pistol, revolver, handgun, rifle, shotgun or gun.
Penalty, see § 130.00
324
§ 00-13-130-03 LITTERING.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to cast or deposit upon any public street, alley, sidewalk, or other public place within the corporate limits of the town any dirt, filth, offal, noisome or filthy liquids, carcasses of dead animals, vegetable matter, manure, garbage, ashes, shavings, straw, papers, scraps, iron, boards, timber, rags, tacks, nails, glass, tin, tin cans, hoops, or other refuse matter of any kind.
(1995 Code, § 00-13-130-07) Penalty, see § 00-13-130-99
§ 00-13-130-04 NOISE.
(A) Making, or continuing, or causing or aiding to be made or continued, any loud, unnecessary, or unusual noises which annoy, injure, or endanger the comfort, repose, health, or safety of others, unless the making or continuing is necessary for the protection or preservation of property or the health, safety, life, or limb of some person, is hereby declared unlawful and a public nuisance.
(B) The following acts within the town are declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance; but, their enumeration shall not be taken as being all-inclusive:
(1) Sounding horns excessively and unreasonably when there is no apparent need for such action;
(2) Using vehicles with noise-making apparatus;
(3) Using sound trucks or public address systems when they are not being employed for purposes of community service by an authorized town official or his or her designated representative; and/or
(1995 Code, § 00-13-130-09)
(4) Operating radios and other equipment or devices that produce music or other vocal sounds at volume levels which may reasonably distract, intrude upon or otherwise adversely affect persons who have sought exposure to the sounds.
Penalty, see § 00-13-130-99
§ 00-13-130-99 PENALTY.
Any person who violates §§ 00-13-130-01, 00-13-130-03 and 00-13-130-04 shall be subject to a fine of $25 and costs and § 00-13-130-02 shall be subject to a fine of $95 and costs.
325
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
Chapter
150. Building Code
151. Trailers and Trailer Parks
152. Flood Damage Prevention
153. Zoning Code
154. Public Health, Safety and General Welfare Relative to
Construction Activity
155. Fees
156. Permit Application, Inspection and Completion Requirements
157. Subdivision Control Ordinance
326
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING CODE
Section
00-15-150-01 Title
00-15-150-02 Purpose
00-15-150-03 Authority
00-15-150-04 Scope
00-15-150-05 Adoption of Rules by Preference
00-15-150-06 Application for Permits
00-15-150-07 Permit Required
00-15-150-08 Other Ordinances
00-15-150-09 Fees
00-15-150-10 Review of Application
00-15-150-11 Inspections
00-15-150-12 Inspection Assistance
00-15-150-13 Entry
00-15-150-14 Stop Work Order
00-15-150-15 Certificate of Occupancy
00-15-150-16 Workmanship
00-15-150-17 Violations
00-15-150-18 Right of Appeal
00-15-150-19 Remedies
00-15-150-20 Penalties
00-15-150-21 Effective Date
§ 00-15-150-01 TITLE.
This ordinance and all ordinances supplemental or amendatory hereto, shall be known as the “Building Code of the Town of Cumberland, Indiana,” may be cited as such, and will be referred to herein as “this code.”
§00-15-150-02 PURPOSE.
The purpose of this code is to provide minimum standards for the protection of life, health, environment, public safety and general welfare, and for the conservation of energy in the design and construction of buildings and structures.
§00-15-150-03 AUTHORITY.
The Building Commissioner is hereby authorized and directed to administer and enforce all of the provisions of this code. Whenever it is provided in this code that an action must be done to the approval of or subject to the direction of the Building Commissioner, or any other officer of the Town of Cumberland, such a provision shall be construed to give such officer only the discretion of determining whether compliance with this code has occurred. No such provision shall be construed as giving any officer discretionary powers as to what this code shall be, or power to require conditions not prescribed by this ordinance or other Town ordinances or
327
to enforce this code in an arbitrary or discriminatory manner. Any variance from adopted building rules are subject to approval under IC 22-13-2-7(b).
§ 00-15-150-04 SCOPE.
The provisions of this code apply to the construction, alteration, repair, use, occupancy, and additions to all buildings and structures, other than industrialized building systems or mobile structures certified under Indiana Code 22-15-4, as amended, in the Town of Cumberland, Indiana.
§ 00-15-150-05 ADOPTION OF RULES BY REFERENCE.
(A) Building rules of the Indiana Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission as set out
in the following Articles of Title 675 of the Indiana Administrative Code are hereby incorporated by reference in this code and shall include later amendments to those Articles as the same are published in the Indiana Register, as a final rule, or the Indiana Administrative Code with effective dates as fixed therein:
(1) Article 13 Indiana Building Code
Fire and Building Safety Standards
(2) Article 14 Indiana Residential Code
(3) Article 16 Indiana Plumbing Code
(4) Article 17 Indiana Electrical Code
(5) Article 18 Indiana Mechanical Code
(6) Article 19 Indiana Energy Conservation Code
(7) Article 20 Indiana Swimming Pool Code
(8) Article 22 Indiana Fire Code
Fire and Building Safety Standards
(B) Copies of adopted rules, codes and standards are on filed in the office of
the Building Commissioner.
§ 00-15-150-06 APPLICATION FOR PERMITS.
No building permit shall be issued for the foregoing purposes, unless the application for a permit is accompanied by a plat sketch of the proposed location showing lot boundaries, and by plans and specifications showing the work to be done. In addition, a copy of a Design Release, issued by the State Building Commissioner and the State Fire Marshall pursuant to Indian Code 22-15-3, shall be provided to the Building Commissioner before issuance of a permit for construction covered by such Design Review.
§ 00-15-150-07 PERMIT REQUIRED.
A permit shall be obtained before beginning construction, alteration or repair of any building or structure, the cost of which exceeds five hundred dollars ($500.00), using forms furnished by the Building Commissioner, and all fees required by this code shall be paid to the Town of Cumberland.
328
§ 00-15-150-08 OTHER ORDINANCES.
All work done under any permit shall be in full compliance with all other ordinances pertaining thereto, and in addition to the fees for permits, there shall be paid the fees prescribed in such ordinances.
§ 00-15-150-09 FEES.
Permits required by Section 7 of this ordinance shall be issued upon the prior payment of an application and inspection fee as established, from time to time, by the Town Council of the Town of Cumberland, Indiana. The owner of the property subject to the permit or inspection and, if different, the applicant shall be jointly and severally liable for such fee. Failure to pay such fee shall be grounds for refusing to issue the requested permit or conduct the requested inspection thereto.
§ 00-15-150-10 REVIEW OF APPLICATION.
Prior to the issuance of any building permit, the Building Commissioner shall:
(1) Review all building permit applications to determine full compliance with the
provisions of the code.
(2) Review all building permit applications for new construction or substantial improvements to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding.
(3) Review all building permit applications for major repairs within flood
plain area having special flood hazards to determine that the proposed repair (1) uses construction materials and utility equipment that are resistant to flood damages, and 92) uses construction methods and practices that will minimize flood damage.
(4) Review building permit applications for new construction or substantial improvements within the flood plain area having special flood hazards to assure that the proposed construction (including prefabricated and mobile homes) (1) is protected against flood damage, (2) is designed (or modified) and anchored to prevent floatation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure, flood damages, and (3) uses construction methods and practices that will minimize flood damage.
§ 00-15-150-11 INSPECTIONS.
After the issuance of any building permit, the Building Commissioner shall make, or shall cause to be made, inspections of the work being done as are necessary to insure full compliance with the provisions of this code and the terms of the permit. Re-inspections of work found to be incomplete or not ready for inspection are subject to assessment of re-inspection fees as prescribed by this code.
§ 00-15-150-12 INSPECTION ASSISTANCE.
The Building Commissioner may call upon the assistance of the Fire Chief of the Warren Township Fire Department, or his designated representative, the Fire Chief of the Buck Creek
329
Township Fire Department, or his designated representative, or the Fire Chief of the Sugar Creek Township Fire Department, or his designated representative, as the case may be according to their jurisdiction within the Town of Cumberland, in the inspection of fire suppression, detection and alarm systems. Where such assistance is rendered, the respective Fire Chief shall provide the Building Commissioner with a written report regarding such inspections.
§ 00-15-150-13 ENTRY.
The Building Commissioner or his duly authorized representative may, upon the presentation of proper credentials, enter at reasonable times any building, structure or premises in the Town of Cumberland, Indiana, to perform any duty imposed upon him by this code.
§ 00-15-150-14 STOP WORK ORDER.
The Building Commissioner may, whenever any work is being done contrary to the provisions of this code, order the work stopped by notice in writing served on any persons engaged in the doing or causing such work to be done. Upon service, any such persons shall forthwith stop such work until authorized by the Building Commissioner to proceed with the work.
§ 00-15-150-15 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.
No certificate of occupancy for any building or structure constructed after the adoption of this code shall be issued unless such building or structure was constructed in compliance with the provisions of this code. It shall be unlawful to occupy any such building or structure unless a full, partial, or temporary certificate of occupancy has been issued by the Building Commissioner.
§ 00-15-150-16 WORKMANSHIP.
All work on the construction, alteration and repair of buildings and other structures shall be performed in a good and workmanlike manner according to accepted standards and practices in the trade.
§ 00-15-150-17 VIOLATIONS.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, whether as owner, lessee, sub-lessee, or occupant, to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, improve, remove, convert, demolish, equity, use, occupy or maintain any building or structure, other than fences, in the Town of Cumberland, Indiana, or cause or permit the same to be done, contrary to, or in violation of, the provisions of this code.
§ 00-15-150-18 RIGHT TO APPEAL.
All persons shall have the right to appeal any order of the Building Commissioner first through the Board of Zoning Appeals of the Town of Cumberland, Indiana, and then to the Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission of Indiana in accordance with the provisions of Indiana Code 22-13-2-7 and Indiana Code 4-21.5-3-7.
330
§ 00-15-150-19 REMEDIES.
Upon the determination of the Building Commissioner that a violation of this ordinance has occurred, the Town Attorney shall bring a cause of action in a court of competent jurisdiction for mandatory and injunctive relief in the enforcement of and to secure compliance with any order or orders of the Building Commissioner. The cause of action shall be brought in the name of the Town of Cumberland, Indiana. Any such cause of action may be joined with an action to recover the penalties provided for in this code, including reasonable attorney fees of the Town of Cumberland, Indiana.
§ 00-15-150-20 PENALTIES.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of this code, or shall fail to perform any duty lawfully enjoined, or shall fail, neglect or refuse to obey any lawful order given by the Building Commissioner in connection with the provisions of this code shall be subject to the penalties for violation prescribed herein. For each such violation, failure or refusal, such person, firm or corporation shall be fined a sum not less than Ninety-Five Dollars ($95.00) and not more than Two Thousand Five Hundred Dollars ($2,500.00). Each day such unlawful activity is continued shall constitute a distinct and separate offense.
§ 00-05-150-21 EFFECTIVE DATE.
This code shall be in full force and effect from and after its adoption by the Town Council of Town of Cumberland, and approval by the Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission of Indiana, and publication as required by law.
(Adopted by Cumberland Town Council on May 1, 2002 – Ordinance No. 2002-9)
331
CHAPTER 151: RECREATIONAL VEHICLES AND
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS
Section
00-15-151-01 Definitions
00-15-151-02 Prohibition
00-15-151-03 Parking
00-15-151-04 Authorized Sites
00-15-151-99 Penalty
§ 00-15-151-01 DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicated or requires a different meaning.
Recreational Vehicle. Any vehicle or structure designed and constructed to permit occupancy thereof as sleeping quarters for one or more persons or the conduct of any business or profession, occupation or trade. The vehicle or structure may be designed so that it is or may be mounted on wheels and used as conveyance on highways or city streets, or propelled or drawn by its own or other motive power. Recreational Vehicle does not include a device used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
Recreational Vehicle Camp. Any park, site, lot, recreational vehicle park, recreational vehicle court, court camp, parcel or tract of land designed, maintained or intended for the purpose of supplying a location or accommodations for any recreational vehicle. It shall include all building used or intended for use as part of the appurtenances thereof, whether a charge is made for the use of the recreational vehicle camp and its facilities or not.
Recreational Vehicle Camp shall not include automobile or recreational vehicle sales lots on which unoccupied recreational vehicles are parked for the purposes of inspection and sale.
(’83 Code, Section 5-1-1; Amended By Ordinance 96-1, Effective 5-1-96)
§ 00-15-151-02 PROHIBITION
Any recreational vehicle camp, park site, recreational vehicle park, recreational vehicle court, parcel or tract of land designed or maintained for the uses defined in Section 00-15-151-01 shall be unlawful within the corporate limits of the Town
(’83 Code, Section 5-1-2; Amended By Ordinance 96-1, Effective 5-1-96) Penalty, See Section 00-15-151-99.
332
§ 00-15-151-03 PARKING
(A) No recreational vehicle, other than one temporarily parked or transient, shall be parked, located or used for residence or business purposes upon any lot, parcel or tract of real estate within the corporate limits of the Town.
(B) No recreational vehicle without wheels or one which is immovable may be placed on a foundation or situated permanently for residence or business purposes on any real estate within the corporate limits of the Town.
(’83 Code, Section 5-1-3; Amended BY Ordinance 96-1, Effective 5-1-96) Penalty, See Section 00-15-151-99.
§00-15-151-04 AUTHORIZED SITES
(A) Storage or parking of recreational vehicles in the open is subject to the following conditions
(1) In any zone district, the wheels or transporting devises of any recreational vehicle shall not be removed except for repairs, nor shall such vehicle be otherwise permanently affixed to the ground in a manner that would prevent ready removal of these types of mobile structures
(2) Recreational vehicles may be stored or parked by the owner thereof behind or alongside the principal building in such a manner that no part of any such vehicle shall project beyond the front setback or side setback lines of the lot.
(3) Not more than one recreational vehicle will be permitted to be parked or stored in the open on residential property at any one time; however, one additional vehicle is permitted for visitation for 7 consecutive days and not to exceed 14 days in any one year.
(4) At no time shall such parked or stored recreational vehicle be occupied or used for living, sleeping, or housekeeping purposes, except as provided for visitations in division (3) above.
(Ordinance 96-1, Effective 5-1-96)
§ 00-15-151-99 PENALTY.
Any person, firm or corporation who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be fine not less than $10 nor more than $100 for such offense. Each day a violation occurs or continues shall be separate offenses.
(’83 Code, Section 5-1-6; Amended By Ordinance 96-1, Effective 5-1-96)
333
Chapter 152. REGULATION OF DEVELOPMENT IN FLOOD HAZARD AREAS
Section
00-15-152-01 Statutory Authorization
00-15-152-02 Findings of Fact
00-15-152-03 Statement of Purpose
00-15-152-04 Objectives
00-15-152-05 Definitions
00-15-152-06 Lands to Which this Ordinance Applies
00-15-152-07 Basis for Establishing Regulatory Flood Data
00-15-152-08 Establishment of Floodplain Development Permit
00-15-152-09 Compliance
00-15-152-10 Abrogation and Greater Restrictions
00-15-152-11 Discrepancy between Mapped Floodplain and actual Ground Elevations
00-15-152-12 Interpretation
00-15-152-13 Warning and Disclaimer of Liability
00-15-152-14 Penalties for Violation
00-15-152-15 Designation of Administrator
00-15-152-16 Permit Procedures
00-15-152-17 Duties and Responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator
00-15-152-18 General Standards
00-15-152-19 Specific Standards
00-15-152-20 Standards for Subdivision Proposals
00-15-152-21 Critical Facility
00-15-152-22 Standards for Identified Floodways
00-15-152-23 Standards for Identified Fringe
00-15-152-24 Standards for SFHAs without Established Base Flood Elevation and/or Floodways/Fringes
00-15-152-25 Standards for Flood Prone Areas
00-15-152-26 Designation of Variance and Appeals Boards
00-15-152-27 Duties of Variance and Appeals Board
00-15-152-28 Variance Procedures
00-15-152-29 Conditions for Variances
00-15-152-30 Variance Notification
00-15-152-31 Historic Structures
00-15-152-32 Special Conditions
00-15-152-33 Severability
§ 00-15-152-01. STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.
The Indiana Legislature has in IC 36-7-4 granted the power to local government units to control land use within their jurisdictions. Therefore, the Town Council of the Town of Cumberland does hereby adopt the following floodplain management regulations.
334
§ 00-15-152-02. FINDINGS OF FACT.
(A) The flood hazard areas of the Town of Cumberland are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare.
(B) These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy in flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods or hazardous to other lands which are inadequately elevated, inadequately flood-proofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages.
§ 00-15-152-03. STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
It is the purpose of this ordinance to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
(A) Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities.
(B) Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction.
(C) Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of flood waters.
(D) Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase erosion or flood damage.
(E) Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands.
(F) Make federally subsidized flood insurance available for structures and their contents in the Town by fulfilling the requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program.
§ 00-15-152-04. OBJECTIVES.
The objectives of this ordinance are:
(A) To protect human life and health.
(B) To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects.
(C) To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally
undertaken at the expense of the general public.
335
(D) To minimize prolonged business interruptions.
(E) To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains,
electric, telephone, and sewer lines, streets, and bridges located in floodplains.
(F) To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of
flood prone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas.
§ 00-15-152-05. DEFINITIONS.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this ordinance shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this ordinance it's most reasonable application.
A zone means portions of the SFHA in which the principal source of flooding is runoff from rainfall, snowmelt, or a combination of both. In A zones, floodwaters may move slowly or rapidly, but waves are usually not a significant threat to buildings. These areas are labeled as Zone A, Zone AE, Zones A1-A30, Zone AO, Zone AH, Zone AR and Zone A99 on a FIRM. The definitions are presented below:
Zone A: Areas subject to inundation by the one-percent annual chance flood event. Because detailed hydraulic analyses have not been performed, no base flood elevation or depths are shown.
Zone AE and A1-A30: Areas subject to inundation by the one-percent annual chance flood event determined by detailed methods. Base flood elevations are shown within these zones. (Zone AE is on new and revised maps in place of Zones A1-A30.)
Zone AO: Areas subject to inundation by one-percent annual chance shallow flooding (usually sheet flow on sloping terrain) where average depths are between one and three feet. Average flood depths derived from detailed hydraulic analyses are shown within this zone.
Zone AH: Areas subject to inundation by one-percent annual chance shallow flooding (usually areas of ponding) where average depths are between one and three feet. Average flood depths derived from detailed hydraulic analyses are shown within this zone.
Zone AR: Areas that result from the decertification of a previously accredited flood protection system that is determined to be in the process of being restored to provide base flood protection.
Zone A99: Areas subject to inundation by the one-percent annual chance flood event, but which will ultimately be protected upon completion of an under-construction Federal flood protection system. These are areas of special flood hazard where enough progress has been made on the construction of a protection system, such as dikes, dams, and levees, to consider it complete for insurance rating purposes. Zone A99 may only be used when the flood protection system has reached specified statutory progress toward completion. No base flood elevations or depths are shown.
336
Accessory structure (appurtenant structure) means a structure with a floor area 400 square feet or less that is located on the same parcel of property as the principal structure and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure. Accessory structures should constitute a minimal initial investment, may not be used for human habitation, and be designed to have minimal flood damage potential. Examples of accessory structures are detached garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, and hay sheds.
Addition (to an existing structure) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a structure in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition, which is connected by a firewall or is separated by independent perimeter load-bearing walls, is new construction.
Appeal means a request for a review of the floodplain administrator's interpretation of any provision of this ordinance.
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH Zone on the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
Base Flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
Base Flood Elevation (BEE) means the elevation of the one-percent annual chance flood.
Basement means that portion of a structure having its floor sub-grade (below ground level) on all sides.
Boundary River means the part of the Ohio River that forms the boundary between the Kentucky and Indiana.
Boundary River Floodway means the floodway of a boundary river. Building - see "Structure."
Community means a political entity that has the authority to adopt and enforce floodplain ordinances for the area under its jurisdiction.
Community Rating System (CRS) means a program developed by the Federal Insurance Administration to provide incentives for those communities in the Regular Program that have gone beyond the minimum floodplain management requirements to develop extra measures to provide protection from flooding.
Critical facility means a facility for which even a slight chance of flooding might be too great. Critical facilities include, but are not limited to, schools, nursing homes, hospitals, police, fire, and emergency response installations, installations which produce, use or store hazardous materials or hazardous waste.
Development means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate including but not limited to:
337
(1) construction, reconstruction, or placement of a structure or any addition to a structure;
(2) installing a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for a manufactured home or installing a recreational vehicle on a site for more than 180 days;
(3) installing utilities, erection of walls and fences, construction of roads, or similar projects;
(4) construction of flood control structures such as levees, dikes, dams, channel improvements, etc.;
(5) mining, dredging, filling, grading, excavation, or drilling operations;
(6) construction and/or reconstruction of bridges or culverts;
(7) storage of materials; or
(8) any other activity that might change the direction, height, or velocity of flood or surface waters.
"Development” does not include activities such as the maintenance of existing structures and facilities such as painting, re-roofing; resurfacing roads; or gardening, plowing, and similar agricultural practices that do not involve filling, grading, excavation, or the construction of permanent structures.
Elevated structure means a non-basement structure built to have the lowest floor elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, filled stem wall foundations (also called chain walls), pilings, or columns (posts and piers).
Elevation Certificate is a certified statement that verifies a structure's elevation information.
Emergency Program means the first phase under which a community participates in the NFIP. It is intended to provide a first layer amount of insurance at subsidized rates on all insurable structures in that community before the effective date of the initial FIRM.
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the community's first floodplain ordinance.
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FEMA means the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
338
Flood means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow, the unusual and rapid accumulation, or the runoff of surface waters from any source.
Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM) means an official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) or Federal Insurance Administration (FIA) has delineated the areas of flood hazards and regulatory floodway.
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, on which FEMA has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
Flood Insurance Study (FIS) is the official hydraulic and hydrologic report provided by FEMA. The report contains flood profiles, as well as the FIRM, FBFM (where applicable), and the water surface elevation of the base flood.
Flood Prone Area means any land area acknowledged by a community as being susceptible to inundation by water from any source. (See "Flood")
Flood Protection Grade (FPG) is the elevation of the regulatory flood plus two feet at any given location in the SFHA. (see "Freeboard")
Floodplain means the channel proper and the areas adjoining any wetland, lake, or watercourse which have been or hereafter may be covered by the regulatory flood. The floodplain includes both the floodway and the fringe districts.
Floodplain management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management regulations, and open space plans.
Floodplain management regulations means this ordinance and other zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances, and other applications of police power which control development in flood-prone areas. This term describes federal, state, or local regulations in any combination thereof, which provide standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and damage. Floodplain management regulations are also referred to as floodplain regulations, floodplain ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, and floodplain management requirements.
Floodproofing (dry floodproofing) is a method of protecting a structure that ensures that the structure, together with attendant utilities and sanitary facilities, is watertight to the floodproofed design elevation with walls that are substantially impermeable to the passage of water. All structural components of these walls are capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic flood forces, including the effects of buoyancy, and anticipated debris impact forces.
Floodproofing certificate is a form used to certify compliance for non-residential structures as an alternative to elevating structures to or above the FPG. This certification must be by a Registered Professional Engineer or Architect.
339
Floodway is the channel of a river or stream and those portions of the floodplains adjoining the channel which are reasonably required to efficiently carry and discharge the peak flood flow of the regulatory flood of any river or stream.
Freeboard means a factor of safety, usually expressed in feet above the BFE, which is applied for the purposes of floodplain management. It is used to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than those calculated for the base flood.
Fringe is those portions of the floodplain lying outside the floodway.
Hardship (as related to variances of this ordinance) means the exceptional hardship that would result from a failure to grant the requested variance. The Board of Zoning Appeals requires that the variance is exceptional, unusual, and peculiar to the property involved. Mere economic or financial hardship alone is NOT exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps, personal preferences, or the disapproval of one's neighbors likewise cannot, as a rule, qualify as an exceptional hardship. All of these problems can be resolved through other means without granting a variance, even if the alternative is more expensive, or requires the property owner to build elsewhere or put the parcel to a different use than originally intended.
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to the start of construction, next to the proposed walls of a structure.
Historic structures means any structures individually listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the Indiana State Register of Historic Sites and Structures.
Increased Cost of Compliance (ICC) means the cost to repair a substantially damaged structure that exceeds the minimal repair cost and that is required to bring a substantially damaged structure into compliance with the local flood damage prevention ordinance. Acceptable mitigation measures are elevation, relocation, demolition, or any combination thereof. All renewal and new business flood insurance policies with effective dates on or after June 1, 1997, will include ICC coverage.
Letter of Final Determination (LFD) means a letter issued by FEMA during the mapping update process which establishes final elevations and provides the new flood map and flood study to the community. The LFD initiates the six-month adoption period. The community must adopt or amend its floodplain management regulations during this six-month period unless the community has previously incorporated an automatic adoption clause.
Letter of Map Change (LOMC) is a general term used to refer to the several types of revisions and amendments to FEMA maps that can be accomplished by letter. They include Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA), Letter of Map Revision (LOMR), and Letter of Map Revision based on Fill (LOMR-F). The definitions are presented below:
Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA) means an amendment by letter to the currently effective FEMA map that establishes that a property is not located in a SFHA through the submittal of property specific elevation data. A LOMA is only issued by FEMA.
Letter of Map Revision (LOMR) means an official revision to the currently effective FEMA map. It is issued by FEMA and changes flood zones, delineations, and elevations.
340
Letter of Map Revision Based on Fill (LOMR-F) means an official revision by letter to an effective NFIP map. A LOMR-F provides FEMA's determination concerning whether a structure or parcel has been elevated on fill above the BFE and excluded from the SFHA.
Lowest adjacent grade means the lowest elevation, after completion of construction, of the ground, sidewalk, patio, deck support, or basement entryway immediately next to the structure.
Lowest floor means the lowest elevation described among the following:
(1) The top of the lowest level of the structure.
(2) The top of the basement floor.
(3) The top of the garage floor, if the garage is the lowest level of the structure.
(4) The top of the first floor of a structure elevated on pilings or pillars.
(5) The top of the floor level of any enclosure, other than a basement, below an elevated structure where the walls of the enclosure provide any resistance to the flow of flood waters unless:
(a) the walls are designed to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on the walls by allowing for the entry and exit of flood waters by providing a minimum of two openings (in addition to doorways and windows) in a minimum of two exterior walls; if a structure has more than one enclosed area, each shall have openings on exterior walls;
(b) the total net area of all openings shall be at least one (1) square inch for every one square foot of enclosed area; the bottom of all such openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above the exterior grade or the interior grade immediately beneath each opening, whichever is higher; and,
(c) such enclosed space shall be usable solely for the parking of vehicles and building access.
Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle,"
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
Market value means the building value, excluding the land (as agreed to between a willing buyer and seller), as established by what the local real estate market will bear. Market value can be established by independent certified appraisal, replacement cost depreciated by age of building (actual cash value), or adjusted assessed values.
341
Mitigation means sustained actions taken to reduce or eliminate long-term risk to people and property from hazards and their effects. The purpose of mitigation is twofold: to protect people and structures, and to minimize the cost of disaster response and recovery.
National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) is the federal program that makes flood insurance available to owners of property in participating communities nationwide through the cooperative efforts of the Federal Government and the private insurance industry.
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 as corrected in 1929 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain.
New construction means any structure for which the "start of construction" commenced after the effective date of the community's first floodplain ordinance.
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of the community's first floodplain ordinance.
Non-boundary river floodway means the floodway of any river or stream other than a boundary river.
North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD 88) as adopted in 1993 is a vertical control datum used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain.
Obstruction includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation, canalization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill, structure, vegetation, or other material in, along, across or projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the flow of water; or due to its location, its propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of water, or its likelihood of being carried downstream.
One-percent annual chance flood is the flood that has a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. Any flood zone that begins with the letter A is subject to the one-percent annual chance flood. See "Regulatory Flood".
Physical Map Revision (PMR) is an official republication of a community's FEMA map to effect changes to base (1-percent annual chance) flood elevations, floodplain boundary delineations, regulatory floodways, and planimetric features. These changes typically occur as a result of structural works or improvements, annexations resulting in additional flood hazard areas, or correction to base flood elevations or SFHAs.
Public safety and nuisance means anything which is injurious to the safety or health of an entire community, neighborhood or any considerable number of persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal, or basin.
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is (1) built on a single chassis; (2) 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections; (3) designed to be self-
342
propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and (4) designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as quarters for recreational camping, travel, or seasonal use.
Regular program means the phase of the community's participation in the NFIP where more comprehensive floodplain management requirements are imposed and higher amounts of insurance are available based upon risk zones and elevations determined in a FIS.
Regulatory flood means the flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, as calculated by a method and procedure that is acceptable to and approved by the Indiana Department of Natural Resources and the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The regulatory flood elevation at any location is as defined in Section 00-15-152-07 of this ordinance. The "Regulatory Flood" is also known by the term "Base Flood", "One-Percent Annual Chance Flood'', and “100-Year Flood".
Repetitive loss means flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a 10-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equaled or exceeds 25% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
Section 1316 is that section of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968, as amended, which states that no new flood insurance coverage shall be provided for any property that the Administrator finds has been declared by a duly constituted state or local zoning authority or other authorized public body to be in violation of state or local laws, regulations, or ordinances that intended to discourage or otherwise restrict land development or occupancy in flood-prone areas.
Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA) means those lands within the jurisdiction of the Town subject to inundation by the regulatory flood. The SFHAs of the Town of Cumberland are generally identified as such on the Hancock County, Indiana and Incorporated Areas Flood Insurance Rate Map dated December 4, 2007 as well as any future updates, amendments, or revisions, prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency with the most recent date. (These areas are shown on a FIRM as Zone A, AE, A1- A30, AH, AR, A99, or AO).
Start of construction includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, foundations, or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
Structure means a structure that is principally above ground and is enclosed by walls and a roof. The term includes a gas or liquid storage tank, a manufactured home, or a prefabricated building. The term also includes recreational vehicles to be installed on a site for more than 180 days.
343
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to it's before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures that have incurred 'repetitive loss Of "substantial damage" regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not include improvements of structures to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code requirements or any alteration of a "historic structure", provided that the alteration will not preclude the structures continued designation as a "historic structure".
Suspension means the removal of a participating community from the NFIP because the community has not enacted and/or enforced the proper floodplain management regulations required for participation in the NFIP.
Variance is a grant of relief from the requirements of this ordinance, which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this ordinance where specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship.
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with this ordinance. A structure or other development without the elevation, other certification, or other evidence of compliance required in this ordinance is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
Watercourse means a lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel or other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodic-ally. Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may occur.
X zone means the area where the flood hazard is less than that in the SFHA. Shaded X zones shown on recent FIRMs (B zones on older FIRMs) designate areas subject to inundation by the flood with a 0.2 percent chance of being equaled or exceeded (the 500-year flood). Unshaded X zones (C zones on older FIRMs) designate areas where the annual exceedance probability of flooding is less than 0.2 percent.
Zone means a geographical area shown on a FIRM that reflects the severity or type of flooding in the area.
Zone A (see definition for A zone)
Zone B, C, and X means areas identified in the community as areas of moderate or minimal hazard from the principal source of flood in the area. However, buildings in these zones could be flooded by severe, concentrated rainfall coupled with inadequate local drainage systems. Flood insurance is available in participating communities but is not required by regulation in these zones. (Zone X is used on new and revised maps in place of Zones B and C.)
344
§ 00-15-152-06. LANDS TO WHICH THIS ORDINANCE APPLIES
This ordinance shall apply to all SFHAs and known flood prone areas within the jurisdiction of the Town of Cumberland.
§ 00-15-152-07. BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING REGULATORY FLOOD DATA.
This ordinance's protection standard is the regulatory flood. The best available regulatory flood data is listed below.
(A) The regulatory flood elevation, floodway, and fringe limits for the studied SFHAs within
the jurisdiction of the Town of Cumberland shall be as delineated on the one-percent annual chance flood profiles in the Flood Insurance Study of Hancock County, Indiana and Incorporated Areas and the corresponding Flood Insurance Rate Map dated December 4, 2007 as well as any future updates, amendments, or revisions, prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency with the most recent date.
(B) The regulatory flood elevation, floodway, and fringe limits for each of the SFHAs within
the jurisdiction of the Town of Cumberland, delineated as an "A Zone" on the Hancock County, Indiana and Incorporated Areas Flood Insurance Rate Map dated December 4, 2007 as well as any future updates, amendments, or revisions, prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency with the most recent date, shall be according to the best data available as provided by the Indiana Department of Natural Resources; provided the upstream drainage area from the subject site is greater than one square mile. Whenever a party disagrees with the best available data, the party needs to replace existing data with better data that meets current engineering standards. To be considered, this data must be submitted to the Indiana Department of Natural Resources for review, subsequently approved.
(C) In the absence of a published FEMA map, or absence of identification on a FEMA map,
the regulatory flood elevation, floodway, and fringe limits of any watercourse in the community's known flood prone areas shall be according to the best data available as provided by the Indiana Department of Natural Resources; provided the upstream drainage area from the subject site is greater than one square mile.
(D) Upon issuance of a Letter of Final Determination (LED), any more restrictive data in the
new (riot yet effective) mapping/study shall be utilized for permitting and construction (development) purposes, replacing all previously effective less restrictive flood hazard data provided by FEMA.
§ 00-15-152-08. ESTABLISHMENT OF FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT
PERMIT.
A Floodplain Development Permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this ordinance prior to the commencement of any development activities in areas of special flood hazard.
345
§ 00-15-152-09. COMPLIANCE.
No structure shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or structurally altered within the SFHA without full compliance with the terms of this ordinance and other applicable regulations. No land or stream within the SFHA shall hereafter be altered without full compliance with the terms of this ordinance and other applicable regulations.
§ 00-15-152-10. ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
This ordinance is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this ordinance and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
§ 00-15-152-11. DISCREPANCY BETWEEN MAPPED FLOODPLAIN AND
ACTUAL GROUND ELEVATIONS.
(A) In cases where there is a discrepancy between the mapped floodplain (SFHA) on the
FIRM and the actual ground elevations, the elevation provided on the profiles shall govern.
(B) If the elevation of the site in question is below the base flood elevation, that site shall
be included in the SFHA and regulated accordingly.
(C) If the elevation (natural grade) of the site in question is above the base flood
elevation and not located within the floodway, that site shall be considered outside the SFHA and the floodplain regulations will not be applied. The property owner shall be advised to apply for a LOMA.
§ 00-15-152-12. INTERPRETATION.
In the interpretation and application of this ordinance all provisions shall be:
(A) Considered as minimum requirements.
(B) Liberally construed in favor of the governing body.
(C) Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.
§ 00-15-152-13. WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
The degree of flood protection required by this ordinance is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on available information derived from engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Therefore, this ordinance does not create any liability on the part of the Town of Cumberland, the Indiana Department of Natural Resources, or the State of Indiana, for any flood damage that results from reliance on this ordinance or any administrative decision made lawfully thereunder.
346
§ 00-15-152-14. PENALITIES FOR VIOLATION.
Failure to obtain a Floodplain Development Permit in the SFHA or failure to comply with the requirements of a Floodplain Development Permit or conditions of a variance shall be deemed to be a violation of this ordinance. All violations shall be considered a common nuisance and be treated as such in accordance with the provisions of the Zoning Code for the Town of Cumberland.
(A) A separate offense shall be deemed to occur for each day the violation continues to exist.
(B) The Floodplain Administrator shall inform the owner that any such violation is considered a willful act to increase flood damages and therefore may cause coverage by a Standard Flood Insurance Policy to be suspended.
(C) Nothing herein shall prevent the Town of Cumberland from taking such other lawful action to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs connected therewith shall accrue to the person or persons responsible. 00-15-152-15. Designation of Administrator. The Town Council of the Town of Cumberland hereby appoints the Planning Administrator to administer and implement the provisions of this ordinance and is herein referred to as the Floodplain Administrator.
§ 00-15-152-16. PERMIT PROCEDURES.
Application for a Floodplain Development Permit shall be made to the Floodplain Administrator on forms furnished by him or her prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to, the following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, earthen fill, storage of materials or equipment, drainage facilities, and the location of the foregoing. Specifically the following information is required:
(A) Application Stage.
(1) A description of the proposed development.
(2) Location of the proposed development sufficient to accurately locate property and structure(s) in relation to existing roads and streams.
(3) A legal description of the property site.
(4) A site development plan showing existing and proposed development locations and existing and proposed land grades.
(5) Elevation of the top of the planned lowest floor (including basement) of all proposed buildings. Elevation should be in NAVD 88 or NGVD.
(6) Elevation (in NAVD 88 or NGVD) to which any non-residential structure will be floodproofed.
(7) Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. A hydrologic and hydraulic engineering study is
347
required and any watercourse changes submitted to DNR for approval and then to FEMA as a Letter of Map Revision. (See Section 00-15-152-17(6) for additional information.)
(B) Construction Stage.
(1) Upon establishment/placement of the lowest floor, before framing continues,
to include any approved floodproofing, it shall be the duty of the applicant to submit to the Floodplain Administrator a certification of the NAVD 88 or NGVD elevation of the lowest floor or floodproofed elevation, as built. Said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by the same. When floodproofing is utilized for a particular structure said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. Any work undertaken prior to submission of the floodproofing certification shall be at the applicant's risk. (The Floodplain Administrator shall review the lowest floor and floodproofing elevation survey data submitted.) The applicant shall correct deficiencies detected by such review before any further work is allowed to proceed. Failure to submit the survey or failure to make said corrections required hereby shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project. Any work undertaken prior to submission of the elevation certification shall be at the applicant's risk. The Floodplain Administrator shall review the lowest floor or floodproofed elevation survey data submitted. The applicant shall correct any deficiencies detected by such review. Failure to submit the elevation certification or failure to make correction required shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project.
(C) Finished Construction.
(1) Upon completion of construction, a FEMA elevation certificate, Form 81-31,
which depicts all finished construction, is required to be submitted to the Floodplain Administrator. If the project includes a floodproofing measure, a FEMA floodproofing certificate, Form 81-65, is required to be submitted by the applicant to the Floodplain Administrator.
§ 00-15-152-17. DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
The Floodplain Administrator and/or designated staff is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this ordinance. The administrator is further authorized to render interpretations of this ordinance, which are consistent with its spirit and purpose.
Duties and Responsibilities of the Flood plain Administrator shall include, but are not limited to:
(A) Review all floodplain development permits to assure that the permit requirements of this ordinance have been satisfied.
(B) Inspect and inventory damaged structures in the SFHA and complete substantial damage determinations.
348
(C) Ensure that construction authorization has been granted by the Indiana Department of Natural Resources for all development projects subject to Section 00-15-152-22 and 00-15-152-24(1) of this ordinance, and maintain a record of such authorization (either copy of actual permit/authorization or floodplain analysis/regulatory assessment).
(D) Ensure that all necessary federal or state permits have been received prior to issuance of the local floodplain development permit. Copies of such permits/authorizations are to be maintained on file with the floodplain development permit.
(E) Maintain and track permit records involving additions and improvements to residences located in the floodway.
(F) Notify adjacent communities and the State Floodplain Coordinator prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit copies of such notifications to FEMA.
(G) Maintain for public inspection and furnish upon request local permit documents, damaged structure inventories, substantial damage determinations, regulatory flood data, SFHA maps, Letters of Map Change (LOMC), copies of DNR permits, letters of authorization, and floodplain analysis and regulatory assessments (letters of recommendation), federal permit documents, and "as-built" elevation and floodproofing data for all buildings constructed subject to this ordinance.
(H) Utilize and enforce all Letters of Map Change (LOMC) or Physical Map Revisions (PMR) issued by FEMA for the currently effective SFHA maps of the community.
(I) Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished. (10)Review certified plans and specifications for compliance.
(J) Verify and record the actual elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures, in accordance with Section 00-15-152-16.
(K) Verify and record the actual elevation to which any new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed in accordance with Section 00-15-152-16.
(L) Stop Work Orders
(1) Upon notice from the floodplain administrator, work on any building, structure or premises that is being done contrary to the provisions of this ordinance shall immediately cease
(2) Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to his agent, or to the person doing the work, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed.
(M) Revocation of Permits
(1) The floodplain administrator may revoke a permit or approval, issued under the provisions of the ordinance, in cases where there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to the material fact in the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based.
349
(2) The floodplain administrator may revoke a permit upon determination by the floodplain administrator that the construction, erection, alteration, repair, moving, demolition, installation, or replacement of the structure for which the permit was issued is in violation of, or not in conformity with, the provisions of this ordinance.
§ 00-15-152-18. GENERAL STANDARDS.
In all SFHAs and known flood prone areas the following provisions are required:
(A) New construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure.
(B) Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces.
(C) New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage below the FPG.
(D) New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
(E) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment, utility meters, and other service facilities shall be located at/above the FPG or designed so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components below the FPG. Water and sewer pipes, electrical and telephone lines, submersible pumps, and other waterproofed service facilities may be located below the FPG.
(F) New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system.
(G) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system.
(H) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
(I) Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a structure that is in compliance with the provisions of this ordinance shall meet the requirements of "new construction" as contained in this ordinance
§ 00-15-152-19. SPECIFIC STANDARDS.
In all SFHAs, the following provisions are required:
(A) In addition to the requirements of 00-15-152-18, all structures to be located in the SFHA shall he protected from flood damage below the FPG. This building protection requirement applies to the following situations:
350
(1) Construction or placement of any structure having a floor area greater than 400 square feet.
(2) Addition or improvement made to any existing structure where the cost of the addition or improvement equals or exceeds 50% of the value of the existing structure (excluding the value of the land).
(3) Reconstruction or repairs made to a damaged structure where the costs of restoring the structure to it's before damaged condition equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure (excluding the value of the land) before damage occurred.
(4) Installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a site for more than 180 days.
(5) Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new manufactured home on an existing site. This ordinance does not apply to returning the existing manufactured home to the same site it lawfully occupied before it was removed to avoid flood damage.
(6) Reconstruction or repairs made to a repetitive loss structure.
(7) Addition or improvement made to any existing structure with a previous addition or improvement constructed since the community's first floodplain ordinance.
(B) Residential Structures. New construction or substantial improvement of any residential structure (or manufactured home) shall have the lowest floor; including basement, at or above the FPG (two feet above the base flood elevation). Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with the standards of 00-15-152-19(4).
(C) Non-Residential Structures. New construction or substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial, or non-residential structure (or manufactured home) shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the FPG (two feet above the base flood elevation) or be floodproofed to or above the FPG. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with the standards of 00-15-152-19(4) Structures located in all "A Zones° may be floodproofed in lieu of being elevated if done in accordance with the following:
(1) A Registered Professional Engineer or Architect shall certify that the structure has been designed so that below the FPG, the structure and attendant utility facilities are watertight and capable of resisting the effects of the regulatory flood. The structure design shall take into account flood velocities, duration, rate of rise, hydrostatic pressures, and impacts from debris or ice. Such certification shall be provided to the official as set forth in 00-15-152-17(12).
(2) Floodproofing measures shall be operable without human intervention and without an outside source of electricity.
(D) Elevated Structures. New construction or substantial improvements of elevated structures shall have the lowest floor at or above the FPG.
351
Elevated structures with fully enclosed areas formed by foundation and other exterior walls below the flood protection grade shall be designed to preclude finished living space and designed to allow for the entry and exit of floodwaters to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls. Designs must meet the following minimum criteria:
(1) Provide a minimum of two openings located in a minimum of two exterior walls (having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every one square foot of enclosed area).
(2) The bottom of all openings shall be no more than one foot above the exterior grade or the interior grade immediately beneath each opening, whichever is higher.
(3) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in both directions.
(4) Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow for parking for vehicles (garage door) or limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises (standard exterior door) or entry to the living area (stairway or elevator).
(5) The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms.
(6) The interior grade of such enclosed area shall be at an elevation at or higher than the exterior grade.
(E) Structures Constructed on Fill. A residential or nonresidential structure may be constructed on a permanent land fill in accordance with the following:
(1) The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than 1 foot deep before compacting to 95% of the maximum density obtainable with either the Standard or Modified Proctor Test method, which shall be retained in permit file.
(2) The fill shall extend 10 feet beyond the foundation of the structure before sloping below the BFE.
(3) The fill shall be protected against erosion and scour during flooding by vegetative cover, riprap, or bulkheading, If vegetative cover is used, the slopes shall be no steeper than 3 horizontal to 1 vertical.
(4) The fill shall not adversely affect the flow of surface drainage from or onto neighboring properties.
(5) The top of the lowest floor including basements shall be at or above the FPG.
(F) Standards for Manufactured Homes and Recreational Vehicles. Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles to be installed or substantially improved on a site for more than 180 days must meet one of the following requirements:
352
(1) These requirements apply to all manufactured homes to be placed on a site outside a manufactured home park or subdivision; in a new manufactured home park or subdivision; in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred 'substantial damage" as a result of a flood:
(a) The manufactured home shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor shall be at or above the FPG and securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
(b) Fully enclosed areas formed by foundation and other exterior walls below the FPG shall be designed to preclude finished living space and designed to allow for the entry and exit of floodwaters to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls as required for elevated structures in 00-15-152-19(4).
(c) Flexible skirting and rigid skirting not attached to the frame or foundation of a manufactured home are not required to have openings.
(2) These requirements apply to all manufactured homes to be placed on a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision that has not been substantially damaged by a flood-
(a) The manufactured home shall be elevated so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elevations that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
(b) Fully enclosed areas formed by foundation and other exterior walls below the FPG shall be designed to preclude finished living space and designed to allow for the entry and exit of floodwaters to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls as required for elevated structures in 00-15-152-19(4).
(c) Flexible skirting and rigid skirting not attached to the frame or foundation of a manufactured home are not required to have openings.
(3) Recreational vehicles placed on a site shall either:
(a) be on site for less than 180 days: or,
(b) be fully licensed and ready for highway use (defined as being on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions): or
353
(c) meet the requirements for "manufactured homes" as stated earlier in this section.
(G) Accessory Structures. Relief to the elevation or dry floodproofing standards may be granted for accessory structures. Such structures must meet the following standards:
(1) Shall not be used for human habitation.
(2) Shall be constructed of flood resistant materials.
(3) Shall be constructed and placed on the lot to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters.
(4) Shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation.
(5) Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment shall be elevated or floodproofed to or above the FPG.
(6) Shall be designed to allow for the entry and exit of floodwaters to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls as required for elevated structures in 00-15-152-19(D).
(H) Above Ground Gas or Liquid Storage Tanks. All above ground gas or liquid storage tanks shall be anchored to prevent flotation or lateral movement.
§ 00-15-152-20. STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISION PROPOSALS.
(A) All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
(B) All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.
(C) All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
(D) Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals and other proposed development (including manufactured home parks and subdivisions), which is greater than the lesser of fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres.
(E) All subdivision proposals shall minimize development in the SFHA and/or limit density of development permitted in the SFHA.
(F) All subdivision proposals shall ensure safe access into/out of SFHA for pedestrians and vehicles (especially emergency responders).
§ 00-15-152-21. CRITICAL FACILITY.
Construction of new critical facilities shall be, to the extent possible, located outside the limits of the SFHA. Construction of new critical facilities shall be permissible within the SFHA if no feasible alternative site is available. Critical facilities constructed within the SFHA shall have
354
the lowest floor elevated to or above the FPG at the site. Floodproofing and sealing measures must be taken to ensure that toxic substances will not be displaced by or released into floodwaters. Access routes elevated to or above the FPG shall be provided to all critical facilities to the extent possible.
§ 00-15-152-22. STANDARDS FOR IDENTIFIED FLOODWAYS.
Located within SFHAs, established in 00-15-152-07, are areas designated as floodways. The floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters, which carry debris, potential projectiles, and has erosion potential. If the site is in an identified floodway, the Floodplain Administrator shall require the applicant to forward the application, along with all pertinent plans and specifications, to the Indiana Department of Natural Resources and apply for a permit for construction in a floodway. Under the provisions of IC 14-28-1 a permit for construction in a floodway from the Indiana Department of Natural Resources is required prior to the issuance of a local building permit for any excavation, deposit, construction, or obstruction activity located in the floodway, This includes land preparation activities such as filling, grading, clearing and paving etc. undertaken before the actual start of construction of the structure. However, it does exclude non-substantial additions/improvements to existing (lawful) residences in a non-boundary river floodway. (IC 14-28-1-26 allows construction of a non-substantial addition/ improvement to a residence in a non-boundary river floodway without obtaining a permit for construction in the floodway from the Indiana Department of Natural Resources. Please note that if fill is needed to elevate an addition above the existing grade, prior approval for the fill is required from the Indiana Department of Natural Resources.)
No action shall be taken by the Floodplain Administrator until a permit or letter of authorization (when applicable) has been issued by the Indiana Department of Natural Resources granting approval for construction in the floodway. Once a permit for construction in a floodway or letter of authorization has been issued by the Indiana Department of Natural Resources, the Floodplain Administrator may issue the local Floodplain Development Permit, provided the provisions contained in 00-15-152-18 through 00-15-152-25 of this ordinance have been met. The Floodplain Development Permit cannot be less restrictive than the permit for construction in a floodway issued by the Indiana Department of Natural Resources. However, a community's more restrictive regulations (if any) shall take precedence.
No development shall be allowed, which acting alone or in combination with existing or future development, that will adversely affect the efficiency of, or unduly restrict the capacity of the floodway. This adverse affect is defined as an increase in the elevation of the regulatory flood of at least fifteen-hundredths (0.15) of a foot as determined by comparing the regulatory flood elevation under the project condition to that under the natural or pre-floodway condition as proven with hydraulic analyses.
For all projects involving channel modifications or fill (including levees) the Floodplain Administrator shall submit the data and request that the Federal Emergency Management Agency revise the regulatory flood data per mapping standard regulations found at 44 CFR § 65.12.
§ 00-15-152-23. STANDARDS FOR IDENTIFIED FRINGE.
If the site is located in an identified fringe, then the Floodplain Administrator may issue the local Floodplain Development Permit provided the provisions contained in 00-15-152-18
355
through 00-15-152-25 of this ordinance have been met. The key provision is that the top of the lowest floor of any new or substantially improved structure shall be at or above the FPG.
§ 00-15-152-24. STANDARDS FOR SFHAs WITHOUT ESTABLISHED BASE
FLOOD ELEVATION AND FOR FLOODWAYS/FRINGES.
(A) Drainage area upstream of the site is greater than one square mile:
If the site is in an identified floodplain where the limits of the floodway and fringe have not yet been determined, and the drainage area upstream of the site is greater than one square mile, the Floodplain Administrator shall require the applicant to forward the application, along with all pertinent plans and specifications, to the Indiana Department of Natural Resources for review and comment.
No action shall be taken by the Floodplain Administrator until either a permit for construction in a floodway permit (including letters of authorization) or a floodplain analysis/regulatory assessment citing the one-percent annual chance flood elevation and the recommended Flood Protection Grade has been received from the Indiana Department of Natural Resources.
Once the Floodplain Administrator has received the proper permit for construction in a floodway permit (including letters of authorization) or floodplain analysis/regulatory assessment approving the proposed development, a Floodplain Development Permit may be issued provided the conditions of the Floodplain Development Permit are not less restrictive than the conditions received from the Indiana Department of Natural Resources and the provisions contained in 00-15-152-18 through 00-15-152-25 of this ordinance have been met.
(B) Drainage area upstream of the site is less than one square mile:
If the site is in an identified floodplain where the limits of the floodway and fringe have not yet been determined and the drainage area upstream of the site is less than one square mile, the Floodplain Administrator shall require the applicant to provide an engineering analysis showing the limits of the floodplain and one-percent annual chance flood elevation for the site
Upon receipt, the Floodplain Administrator may issue the local Floodplain Development Permit, provided the provisions contained in 00-15-152-18 through 00-15-152-25 of this ordinance have been met.
(C) The total cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the regulatory flood more than 0.14 of one foot and will not increase flood damages or potential flood damages.
§ 00-15-152-25. STANDARDS FOR FLOOD PRONE AREAS.
All development in known flood prone areas not identified on FEMA maps, or where no FEMA published map is available, shall meet applicable standards as required per 00-15-152-18 through 00-15-152-25.
§ 00-15-152-26. DESIGNATION OF VARIANCE AND APPEALS BOARD.
The Board of Zoning Appeals shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from requirements of this ordinance.
356
§ 00-15-152-27. DUTIES OF VARIANCE AND APPEALS BOARD.
The board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or determination is made by the Floodplain Administrator in the enforcement or administration of this ordinance. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the board may appeal such decision to the Hancock County Circuit Court.
§ 0015-152-28. VARIANCE PROCEDURES.
In passing upon such applications, the board shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards specified in other sections of this ordinance, and;
(A) The danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage.
(B) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner.
(C) The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community.
(D) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable.
(E) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage.
(F) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development,
(G) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area.
(H) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles.
(I) The expected height, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment of transport of the floodwaters at the site.
(J)The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and bridges.
§ 00-15-152-29. CONDITIONS FOR VARIANCES.
(A) Variances shall only be issued when there is:
(1) A showing of good and sufficient cause.
(2) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship.
357
(3) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing laws or ordinances.
(B) No variance for a residential use within a floodway subject to 00-15-152-22 or 00-15-152-24(A) of this ordinance may be granted.
(C) Any variance granted in a floodway subject to 00-15-152-22 or 00-15-152-24(A) of this ordinance will require a permit from the Indiana Department of Natural Resources.
(D) Variances to the Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction of 00-15-152-19, may be granted only when a new structure is to be located on a lot of one-half acre or less in size, contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the flood protection grade.
(E) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
(F) Variances may be granted for the reconstruction or restoration of any structure individually listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the Indiana State Register of Historic. Sites and Structures.
(G) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the Flood Protection Grade and the elevation to which the lowest floor is to be built and stating that the cost of the flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation (See Section 00-15-152-30).
(H) The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain the records of appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency or the Indiana Department of Natural Resources upon request (See 00-15-152-30).
§ 00-15-152-30. VARIANCE NOTIFICATION.
Any applicant to whom a variance is granted that allows the lowest floor of a structure to be built below the flood protection grade shall be given written notice over the signature of a community official that:
(A) The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the flood protection grade will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage; and;
(B) Such construction below the flood protection grade increases risks to life and property. A copy of the notice shall be recorded by the Floodplain Administrator in the Office of the County Recorder and shall be recorded in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land.
The Floodplain Administrator will maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance.
358
§ 00-15-152-31. HISTORIC STRUCTURE.
Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of "historic structures" upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an "historic structure" and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
§ 00-15-152-32. SPECIAL CONDITIONS.
Upon the consideration of the factors listed in 00-15-152-26 through 00-15-152-32, and the purposes of this ordinance, the Board of Zoning Appeals may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this ordinance.
§ 00-15-152-33. SEVERABILITY.
If any section, clause, sentence, or phrase of the Ordinance is held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, then said holding shall in no way effect the validity of the remaining portions of this Ordinance.
(Ord. 2014-02, passed _____________)
359
CHAPTER 154: PUBLIC HEALTH, SAFETY AND GENERAL WELFARE
RELATIVE TO CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY
Section
00-15-154-01 Public Property; Walkways
00-15-154-02 Removing Structures
00-15-154-03 Safety Fences and Railings
00-15-154-04 Trash and Debris Containment and Disposal
00-15-154-05 On- Site Equipment and Material Storage
00-15-154-06 Open Burning
00-15-154-07 Theft, Vandalism and Destruction of Private Property
00-15-154-08 Specific Health and Safety Hazards
00-15-154-09 Construction Activity Affecting Town Infrastructure
00-15-154-10 Erosion, Sediment and Pollution Control Requirements
00-15-154-99 Penalties
§00-15-154-01 PUBLIC PROPERTY; WALKWAYS
Any person, partnership or corporation carrying out construction activity in the Town shall comply with the following requirements:
(A) The use of public property shall meet all the requirements of the Town
(B) Building equipment and materials shall not be placed or stored on public property as to obstruct free and convenient access to and function of any fire hydrant, utility devise, drainage and/or utility easement, manhole, street, alley, gutter or right-of-way.
(C) A protective frame be provided for any fire hydrant or utility device which might be damaged by construction activity.
(D) Bridges or covers shall be provided for sidewalks and manholes which might be damaged by construction activity.
(E) Walkways.
(1) A walkway shall be constructed and maintained on the sidewalk, street and alley around the site of construction activity involving the erection, construction, major alteration or razing of any structure, except signs, grandstands, tents, or air-supported structures, which:
(a) Has an initial or ultimate height in excess of fifteen (15); and
(b) Has all or any part of an excavation relative to the construction activity which is in excess of eight (8) feet in depth; and
360
(c) is located within twenty (20) feet of the structure or excavation.
(2) The Building Commissioner has the discretion to waive the requirement of placing the walkway on a showing that omission of the walkway will not significantly increase the possibility of injury to persons or damage to property as a result of the construction activity on the site. The walkway may be placed further from the site on a sidewalk or within a street or alley if the Town gives appropriate authorization.
(3) The walkway shall be equipped with suitable lighting devices and illumination shall be provided in the walkway at all times.
(4) The walkway, at all items, shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be kept free from rubbish, litter and advertising display and shall be provided with suitable solid, inclined approaches.
(5) The walkway shall not be less than four (4) feet wide and shall have a durable wearing surface capable of supporting a live load of two hundred (200) pounds per square foot.
(6) The walkway shall be provided with a fence along the construction side, a railing along the street side and a full roof above, so as to afford maximum protection to pedestrians.
(a) The protective fence shall be no less than eight (8) feet high above the grade and be constructed from ¾ inch boards or plywood laid tightly together and securely fastened to four (4) inch uprights, set no more than four (4) feet apart, with 2 x 6 inch bracing and girts. The posts shall be set and braced securely to prevent buckling and overturning.
(b) Opening in the fence shall be protected by doors which normally are kept closed.
(c) The protective railing shall be substantially built and, when of wood, shall be constructed of new material having a nominal sixe of at least 2 x 4 inches. Railings shall be at least four (4) feet in height and, when adjacent to the excavation, shall be provided with midrail.
(7) The protective roof shall have a clear height of eight (8) feet above the walkway. The roof shall be tightly sheathed. The sheathing shall be tow (2) inch nominal wood planking or the equivalent.
(8) Walkways shall be maintained in place and kept in good condition for the length of time construction activity continues, after which they shall be removed within thirty (30) days.
§ 00-01-154-02 MOVING STRUCTURES
Any person, partnership or corporation carrying out construction activity limited to demolishing, dismantling, dismembering, razing or removing structures in the Town shall, in addition to the requirements of Section 00-15-1543-01, comply with the following requirements.
361
(A) Notice must be given to the Building Commissioner at least fourteen (14) days prior to
demolishing, dismantling, dismembering, razing or removing structures in the Town. The Building Commissioner or an authorized representative may, if reasonably necessary to ensure public safety, require the wrecking contractor to submit plans and a complete schedule for demolition. Where those are required, no work shall be accomplished until the plans and schedule area approved by the Commissioner or Commissioner’s representative.
(B) No open fires or other sources of flame, except necessary cutting torches, are permitted
on the inside of the structure being wrecked or in close proximity to flammable materials located outside the structure. Every reasonable precaution shall be taken to prevent the possibility of fire.
(C) In accordance with Section 00-15-154-04, suitable provisions shall be made for the
disposal of materials which are accumulated during the wrecking of a structure.
(D) The buildings, foundations, curbs, sidewalks, concrete or asphalt drives and all
appurtenances shall be removed to one (1) foot below the ground line or one (1) foot below subgrade elevation, whichever of the two is lower. Removal also shall include the removal and disposal of buried or exposed tanks. Concrete slabs, under which a basement, pit, well or cistern exits, shall be broken and removed.
(E) All rubbish and debris, including any goods, merchandise, commodities, products or
materials of any kind which may have been stored within the structure being wrecked or on the property shall be removed and cleaned away, the ground leveled and the premises put in a clean and sanitary condition, provided that if the property is properly fenced and the erection of a new structure is to begin within ninety (90) days, the ground need not be leveled until all work on the premises is completed.
(F) Material used for fill and grading shall be only material that can be properly compacted
in order to avoid future settlement of filled-in earth or the structure erected over the fill. No pieces of stone, lumber, boards or other material which, due to their size or character, prevent proper compaction or later would cause settlement of the surface shall be used in the fill.
(G) Where a structure is wrecked and an excavation which, at any point, is eight (8) or more
feet below grade level is left unfilled, the fence portion of the walkway required by Section 00-15-154-01 shall remain at the site. The Building Commissioner may approve a fence that does not meet the standards of Section 00-15-154-01 if it is sufficient to persons, especially children, to protect from falling into the excavation.
§ 00-01-154-03 SAFETY FENCES AND RAILING
Requirements for temporary safety fences and railings for all construction activity occurring in the Town, except as otherwise required in Sections 00-15-154-01 and 00-15-154-02.
(A) Temporary Safety Fence.
(1) A temporary safety fence not less than four (4) feet high shall be installed entirely
around any open excavation that is more than three (3) feet below the surrounding grade (i.e. – basements, swimming pools, utility installations or repairs), and that will remain open for longer than twelve (12) consecutive hours.
362
(2) The temporary safety fence around a basement excavation shall remain in place,
and maintained in good condition, at all times until the excavation is back-filled by the construction of the basement structure, including the construction of the first floor framing and decking, and by aggregate and/or soil fill around the entire perimeter of the basement structure. In addition, if the stairway from the first floor to the basement is not completed with the framing and decking of the first floor surface, then a temporary safety fence shall be required around the stairway opening until such time as the stairway is constructed.
(3) The temporary safety fence around a swimming pool excavation shall remain in
place, and maintained in good condition, at all times until the swimming pool construction is completed and the required permanent safety features have been installed in accordance with 675 IAC 10 – Indiana Swimming Pool Code.
(4) The temporary safety fence around an excavation for the purpose of the
installation or repair of any utility, or other similar purposes, shall remain I place, and maintained in good condition, at all times until the excavation has been fully back-filled and restored to level with the surrounding grade.
(5) The Building Commissioner shall determine if the temporary safety fence is
adequate and in compliance with the provisions of this section.
(6) The Building Commissioner shall determine when temporary safety fences are
necessary and required, and when the fences can be removed in compliance with the provisions of this section.
(B) Temporary Safety Railings.
(1) A temporary safety railing not less than three (3) feet high shall be installed along al open floor surface edges that are more than three (3) feet above a floor or grade surface below.
(2) A temporary safety railing not less than three (3) feet high shall be installed along all open edges of a stairway where the step or landing surfaces of the of the stairway are more than three (3) feet above the floor or grade below.
(3) The temporary safety railing shall remain in place, and maintained in good condition, until the required permanent railing is installed in accordance with 675 IAC 13 Indiana Building Code and/or 675 IAC 14 Indiana Residential Code.
(4) The Building Commissioner shall determine if the temporary safety railing is adequate and in compliance with the provisions of this section.
(5) The Building Commissioner shall determine when temporary safety railings are necessary and required, and when the railings can be removed in compliance with the provisions of this section.
(C) The Building Commissioner shall have the authority to enforce the provisions of this section.
363
§ 00-01-154-04 TRASH AND DEBRIS CONTAINMENT AND DISPOSAL
Any person, partnership or corporation obtaining a building permit for construction activity in the Town (the “permit holder”) shall be required to provide for on-site containment of all construction related trash and debris, and shall be fully responsible for the proper disposal of such trash and debris upon completion of the constructions activity.
(A) All construction related trash and debris shall, at all times during the construction
activity, be kept in a metal storage and disposal unit (dumpster) or other fully enclosed containment facility approved by the Building Commissioner.
(B) All reasonable measures shall be taken to prevent construction related trash and debris
from being blown or scattered onto adjoining properties. In the event that construction related trash and debris is blown or scattered onto adjoining properties, the permit holder shall be fully responsible for cleaning up and properly disposing of such trash and debris.
(C) Upon completion of the construction activity, all construction related trash and debris
shall be fully and completely removed from the site and disposed of in an approved and legal manner.
(D) It shall be unlawful for construction related trash and debris to be dumped or disposed
of on vacant building lots in the Town, or in containment facilities located on other active construction sites.
(E) It shall be unlawful for construction related trash and debris to be buried on the site of
the construction activity, or on any vacant building lot in the Town.
§ 00-15-154-05 ON-SITE EQUIPMENT AND MATERIALS STORAGE
Any person, partnership or corporation obtaining a building permit for construction activity in the Town (the “permit holder”) shall be required to make provisions for the storage of construction related equipment and materials entirely within the property where the construction activity is occurring.
(A) Construction related equipment and materials shall not be stored on adjoining
properties to the property where the construction activity is occurring without the prior written consent of the owner of the adjoining property. Such written consent shall be required to be filed with the Building Commissioner prior to the equipment and materials being stored on the adjoining property.
(B) Construction related equipment and materials shall, at no time, be stored on any vacant
building lot in the Town, except for equipment and materials necessary for the installation of the utility infrastructure for an approved subdivision or development.
(C) It shall be unlawful, at all times, for construction related equipment and materials to be
stored on any street alley, right-of-way, sidewalk, utility device, manhole, or other public area in the Town.
364
(D) Construction related equipment and materials shall, at all times, be stored in a neat and
orderly manner.
§ 00-15-154-06 OPEN BURNING
No person, partnership or corporation shall cause, suffer or allow any open burning of any kind on any construction site in the Town of Cumberland.
§ 00-15-154-07 THEFT, VANDALISM AND DESTRUCTION OF PRIVATE
PROPERTY
Any person, partnership or corporation obtaining a building permit for construction activity in the Town (the “permit holder’) shall comply with the following requirements regarding theft, vandalism and destruction of private property on, or related to, the construction site.
(A) The permit holder shall report all acts of theft, vandalism and destruction of private
property occurring on the construction site to the Cumberland Police Department and the Department of Building and Planning Services.
(B) Any person that witnesses an act of theft, vandalism or destruction of private property
on, or relating to, a construction site in the Town shall report such act to the Cumberland Police Department and the Department of Building and Planning Services.
(C) It shall be unlawful for a permit holder, or anyone employed or contracted by the permit
holder, while engaged in construction activity on the construction site, to use any utility connected to a property adjoining the construction site without the prior written consent of the owner of the adjoining property. Such written consent shall be required to be filed with the Building Commissioner prior to the use of the utility by the permit holder.
(D) The owner of a property adjoining a construction site shall report any unauthorized use
of a utility by a permit holder, or anyone employed or contracted by the permit holder, while engaged in construction activity on the construction site, to the Cumberland Police Department and the Department of Building and Planning Services.
§ 00-01-154-08 SPECIFIC HEALTH AND SAFETY HAZARDS
Construction activity on either a structure or building equipment where the activity, if done improperly, is a potential health or safety hazard shall require that a permit be obtained from the Building Commissioner.
(A) Construction activity relative to a structure which, if done improperly would be a
potential health or safety hazard includes:
(1) The construction or alteration of a chimney or venting system;
(2) The stripping and reapplication of roofing material;
(3) A change in exterior bulk or façade;
(4) The creation or cutting away of any load-bearing wall, partition, or portion thereof;
365
(5) The addition of concentrated roof loading;
(6) The creation, removal or change of any required means of egress;
(7) The rearrangement of parts of a structure affecting the exitway requirements;
(8) A change of the use group, occupancy or structure type.
(B) Construction activity relative to building equipment which, if done improperly, would be a potential health or safety hazard includes:
(1) The installation, significant alteration or relocation of any water distribution system, soil, waste, vent or similar piping within a structure;
(2) The relocation of any plumbing fixtures;
(3) The installation, significant alteration or relocation of an electrical power
distribution system;
(4) The installation of a heating system, space heating equipment, cooling system or
space cooling equipment;
(5) The installation of a water heater:
(6) The replacement of a water heater with one that is not identical as to temperature or
pressure protection, venting arrangement, and type of fuel or energy input;
(7) The connection, provision or use of temporary electrical power for on-site
construction activity;
(8) The construction or placement of an above ground swimming pool that is more than
thirty (30) inches deep and/or more than fifteen (15) feet wide at its widest point.
§ 00-15-154-09 CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY AFFECTING TOWN
INFRASTRUCTURE
Construction activity on a structure, accessory structure, building equipment or other installations incidental to the use of the property (i.e. – fences, swimming pools, decks, etc.) which, if done or placed improperly, would have an adverse or detrimental effect on Town infrastructure shall require that a permit be obtained from the Building Commissioner.
(A) Construction activity allowed under the provisions of this section includes:
(1) The construction or replacement of a concrete or asphalt driveway;
(2) The construction of any driveway that abuts a Town street or road, or that crosses a
publicly used sidewalk;
366
(3) The construction or replacement of a sidewalk that will be for public use (along a
Town street or road);
(4) The construction or placement of any non-permanent accessory structure, building
equipment or other installation within, or over, a drainage and/or utility easement;
(5) The construction or placement of any fence within, or over, an open surface drainage
swale or channel.
(B) Construction activity prohibited under the provisions of this section includes:
(1) The construction or placement of a permanent structure, accessory structure,
building equipment or other installation within, or over, any drainage and/or utility easement;
(2) The construction or placement of a permanent or non-permanent structure,
accessory structure, building equipment or other installation within any street, road or other right-of-way;
(3) The alteration of any open surface drainage swale or channel.
§ 00-15-154-10 EROSION, SEDIMENT AND POLLUTION CONTROL
REQUIREMENTS
Any person, partnership or corporation involved in the grading, removal of protective ground cover of vegetation, excavation, land filling, landscape, or other similar construction activity on any property in the Town shall comply with the requirements of this section.
(A) Provide written notification to the Department of Building and Planning Services at least
two (2) working days prior to commencing any land disturbing activity.
(B) Provide temporary sediment basins that shall detain sediment-laden water flowing from
the site. Such water shall not be discharged in a manner that causes erosion in the receiving channels.
(C) All waste and unused building materials, including garbage, debris, cleaning wastes,
wastewater, toxic materials and hazardous materials, shall be properly disposed of and not allowed to go offsite or into storm sewers or drainage channels.
(D) Provide graveled roads, access drives, driveways and parking areas of sufficient width
and length to prevent sediment from being tracked onto public or private streets and roadways. Any sediment reaching a public or private street or roadway shall be removed by street cleaning (not flushing) by those responsible before the end of each workday.
(E) All storm drainage inlets shall be protected with straw bales, filter fabric or an equivalent
barrier meeting accepted design criteria, standards and specifications.
(F) All sediment shall be controlled and contained on-site.
367
(G) For vacant land held for development, grass or other vegetative ground cover shall be
provided and regular mowing or herbicide spray treatment must control noxious weeds.
(H) Single building lots that remain inactive for thirty (30) days or more shall be provided
with temporary ground cover vegetation. This requirement may be waived if the landowner has sold the lot and construction activity is scheduled to commence within thirty days after the lot is sold.
(I) Maintain all erosion, sediment and pollution control measures necessary to meet the
requirements of this section during the entire period of land disturbance and/or land development on the site.
(J) In addition to complying with the requirements of this section, all requirements of the
Hancock County Soil Conservation Division of the Indiana Department of Natural Resources shall be complied with.
(K) Repair any sedimentation or erosion damage on adjoining surfaces, storm sewers or
drainage channels resulting from land disturbing or land developing activities.
(L) In addition to complying with the requirements of this section, all requirements of the
Indiana Department of Environmental Management and the Cumberland Stormwater Utility Board, relative to Stormwater Phase II, shall be complied with.
§ 00-15-154-99 PENALTIES
Any person partnership or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter, or shall fail to perform any duty lawfully required, or shall fail, neglect or refuse to obey any lawful order given by the Building Commissioner, or other designated Town Staff, in connection with the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the penalties for violation prescribed herein. For each such violation, failure or refusal, such person, partnership or corporation shall be fined a sum of not less than Ninety-Five Dollars ($95.00). Each day such unlawful activity occurs or continues shall constitute a distinct and separate offense.
(Adopted by Cumberland Town Council on May 1, 2002 – Ordinance No. 2002-10)
368
CHAPTER 155: FEES
Section
00-15-155-01 Permit Fees for Residential Structures and Accessory Structures
00-15-155-02 Permit Fees for Commercial, Industrial, Institutional, and Multiple Family Structures and Accessory Structures
00-15-155-03 Permit Fees for Signs and Non-Categorized Construction
00-15-155-04 Inspection Fees
00-15-155-05 Subdivision Plat Application Fees
00-15-155-06 Planned Unit Development (PUD) Plan Application Fees
00-15-155-07 Board of Zoning Appeals Petition Fees
00-15-155-08 Geographic Information System (GIS) Information Access Fees
§ 00-15-155-01 PERMIT FEES FOR RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES AND
ACCESSORY STRUCTURES
(A) Structural Permit.
(1) Base Fee: $35.00, plus inspection fees.
(2) $0.05 additional charge for each square foot of floor area in excess of 1,200 square
feet.
(B) Electrical Permit – Base Fee: $35.00, plus inspection fees.
(C) Plumbing Permit – Base Fee: $35.00, plus inspection fees.
(D) Heat, Venting and Air Conditioning (HVAC) Permit – No Base Fee if an Electrical Permit or Plumbing Permit has been obtained, plus inspection fees.
(E) Accessory Structures – Base Fee: $35.00, plus inspection fees.
(F) Renewal of Expired Permit – one half (1/2) the fee of the original permit.
§ 00-15-155-02 PERMIT FEES FOR COMMERCIAL, INDUSTRIAL,
INSTITUTIONAL, AND MULTIPLE FAMILY STRUCTURES AND ACCESSORY STRUCTURES
The following fees shall be paid for the permits required for the construction, repair, replacement or addition to commercial, industrial, institutional and multiple family structures and accessory structures.
(A) Structural Permit.
(1) Base Fee: $75.00, plus inspection fees.
369
(2) $0.05 additional charge for each square foot of floor area in excess of 3,000 square feet.
(B) Electrical Permit.
(1) Base Fee: $75.00, plus inspection fees.
(2) Additional inspections will be required for each additional service entrance to the same structure, and/or for each additional service (circuit breaker) panel in the same structure.
(C) Plumbing Permit.
(1) Base Fee: $75.00, plus inspection fees.
(2) Additional inspections will be required based on the number of trapped fixtures in excess of twenty (20).
(D) HVAC / Mechanical Permit.
(1) Base Fee: $75.0, plus inspection fees.
(2) Additional inspections will be required for each additional furnace or heating system, and air conditioning or cooling system in the same structure.
(E) Accessory Structures – Base Fee: $75.00, plus inspection fees.
(F) Renewal of Expired Permit – one half (1/2) the fee of the original permit.
§ 00-15-155-03 PERMIT FEES FOR SIGNS AND NON-CATEGORIZED CONSTRUCTION
(A) Sign Permit (installation or placement).
(1) Non-illuminated: $35.00, plus inspection fees.
(2) Illuminated: $70.00, plus inspection fees.
(B) Non-Categorized Construction Permit.
(1) Non-Categorized (as required by law): $35.00, plus inspection fees.
Note: Non-Categorized Construction shall include, but not be limited to, the construction, installation or placement of fences (any type); swimming pools; concrete or asphalt driveways, sidewalks and stoops; patios, decks and related walkways, preplacement doors and windows (excluding storm doors and windows): siding, soffit and related trims; roofing materials (on existing structures); and any other construction activity not specifically described I this chapter.
370
§ 00-15-155-04 INSPECTION FEES
(A) Each Inspection [Except Re-Inspections as provided in (B) and (C) below]: $25.00.
(B) Signs; Annual Re-Inspection.
(1) Non-Illuminated: $15.00 each inspection.
(2) Illuminated: $20.00 each inspection.
(C) Each Re-Inspection required as a result of a Violation Citation (Red Tag), Any Type: $40.00.
§ 00-15-155-05 SUBDIVISION PLAT APPLICATION FEES
(A) Preliminary Plat Application: $300.00, plus all legal notice advertising costs, and all Town Consulting Engineer review costs.
(B) Secondary (final) Plat Application: $500.00, plus all Town Consulting Engineer review costs.
§ 00-15-155-06 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD) PLAN
APPLICATION FEES
(A) Preliminary Plan Application: $500.00 plus all legal notice advertising costs, and all Town Consulting Engineer review costs.
(B) Secondary (Final) Plan Application: $300.00, plus all Town Consulting Engineer review costs.
§ 00-15-155-07 PLAN COMMISSION AND BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS
PETITION FEES
(A) Zoning Map Change [except for Planned Unit Development (PUD) Zoning]: $350.00
(B) Zoning Text Change [except for Planned Unit Development (PUD) Zoning]: $750.00
(C) Development Plan Approval: $350.00
(D) Conditional or Special Use: $300.00
(E) Variance of Land Use: $200.00
(F) Variance from Development Standards: $200.00
(G) Subdivision RE-Plat: $200.00
(H) Special Exception [Residential]: $200.00
371
(I) Special Exception [Commercial/Industrial]: $300.00
(J) Plat Amendment: $200.00
(K) Appeals: $50.00
§ 00-15-155-08 GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM (GIS)
INFORMATION ACCESS FEES
(A) General Town Information Map (8 ½” X 11” Color or Black & White): $1.00 Each
Sheet General Town information may include, but not be limited to, parcel, subdivision plat, zoning, land use, Town infrastructure, street & road, parks, property address and public safety information. [Note: Information on items such as private utilities, aerial photography, property ownership, etc. that is provided to the Town by the various private utility companies and Hancock County or Marion County for internal use only, and may not be accessed through the Town’s GIS by without the written consent of those entities.]
(B) Special Project Information Map (8 ½” X 11” Color or Black & White): $1.00 each
sheet, plus $35.00 per hour for the staff time necessary to research, collect and generate the specific property or area information and create the map layout for the special project.
(Adopted by Cumberland Town Council on May 1, 2002 – Ordinance No. 2002-11)
372
CHAPTER 156: PERMIT APPLICATION, INSPECTION AND COMPLETION REQUIREMENTS
Section
00-15-156-01 Permit Application Requirements
00-15-156-02 Plan Sheets and Scale Requirements
00-15-156-03 Examination of Detailed Plans and Specifications
00-15-156-04 Payment of Permit Fees
00-15-156-05 Expiration of Permit
00-15-156-06 Defacing of Permit
00-15-156-07 Structural Inspection Requirements
00-15-156-08 Electrical Inspection Requirements
00-15-156-09 Plumbing Inspection Requirements
00-15-156-10 Heat, Ventilation and Air Conditioning Inspection Requirements
00-15-156-11 Notice of Availability for Inspection
00-15-156-12 Construction Activity to Remain Available for Inspection
00-15-156-13 Filing of Certificate of Completion and Compliance
00-15-156-14 Certificate of Occupancy
00-15-156-15 Penalty
§ 00-15-156-01 PERMIT APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS
(A) Application for a permit shall be made to the Building Commissioner. The
application shall be in writing and contain the information required by a form prescribed by the Commissioner and approved by the Town Council, and shall be supported with:
(1) Three (3) copies of detailed plans and specifications drawn to an acceptable
scale which indicate in a precise manner the nature and the location of all work to be accomplished pursuant to the permit. In lieu thereof, it shall be within the discretion of the Building Commissioner to accept three (3) copies of a written statement indicating the nature and location of the work to be done pursuant to the permit, where the written statement describes the work as precisely as a copy of detailed plans and specifications drawn to scale.
(2) Three (3) copies of a plot plan drawn to an acceptable scale which reflect the
location of the structure(s) in relation to existing property lines and which show streets, curbs and sidewalks and proposed changes or additions to streets, curbs and sidewalks. The plot plan shall not be required in the instance where all of the construction activity is to occur inside an existing structure or where the construction activity consists only of demolition, removal or razing of a structure.
(3) Three (3) copies of a soil composition and compaction report, if the
construction activity is one which includes the construction of a permanent foundation. The soil report shall not be required if the lot where the construction activity is to be
373
located is part of an approved subdivision for which a soil report was previously submitted and approved.
(4) A Design Release issued by the State Building Commissioner if required by
Indiana law or any rule of the Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission.
(5) A connection permit obtained from the Cumberland Sewer Utility, if required
by any ordinance.
(6) In the instance where a permit is requested for the purpose of allowing the
demolition or removal of a structure, the application shall be supported with a written statement from each utility that its service to the premises has been disconnected, and with either a written statement from the record titleholder of the premises authorizing the demolition or removal, or a court order or administrative order requiring the demolition or removal of the structure.
(B) In the instance where a permit is requested for allowing the demolition or removal of
a structure which is in excess of seventy-five (75) feet in height, the application shall be supported by a certificate of insurance reflecting that the obtainer of the permit has a public liability and property damage insurance policy naming the licensee and the Town as the assured and providing also for the payment of any liability imposed by law on the licensee or the Town in the minimum amounts of One Million Dollars ($1,000,000.00) for any occurrence relative to where there is injury to or death of one or more persons, and Five Hundred Thousand Dollars ($500,000.0) for any occurrence relative to which there is property damage.
(C) A permit shall be issued if:
(1) The application and supporting information required by this section have
been property prepared and submitted; and
(2) The application and supporting information filed in accordance with this
section reflect compliance with all applicable state codes and local ordinances; and
(3) The proposed construction activity will not violate any zoning ordinance of
the Town, will not encroach on any easement or adjoining property, and will not violate any restrictive covenant applicable to the property; and
(4) The permit fee has been paid in compliance with Chapter 155.
(D) By making payment for the permit, the applicant shall be deemed to represent and
certify that the information contained in that permit is complete and accurate, unless the applicant shall, within ten (10) days, provide in writing to the Building Commissioner any additions or corrections to that information.
(E) The issuance or granting of a permit or design release shall not be construed to be a
permit for, or an approval of, any violation of any provision of applicable state codes or local ordinances. No permit presuming to give authority to violate or cancel any applicable provision of state codes or local ordinances shall be valid, except insofar as the work or use which is authorized as lawful.
374
(F) The permit issued based upon the plans and specifications shall not prevent the
Building Commissioner from requiring the correction of errors in plans and specifications or from preventing construction activity being carried on thereunder when in violation of any applicable provision of state codes or local ordinances.
§ 00-15-156-02 PLAN SHEETS AND SCALE REQUIREMENTS
(A) All plans shall be drawn to scale suitable to illustrate the work using accepted
professional practices. The drawing scale must be noted on each sheet.
(B) All plans with more than one (1) sheet shall be numbered.
(C) Except with respect to residential structures, an index shall be furnished on the first
sheet setting forth the character of each sheet in the set of plans.
(D) The address appearing on the permit shall be placed in letter at least ¼ inch high on
the face of each sheet.
§ 00-15-156-03 EXAMINATION OF DETAILED PLANS AND
SPECIFICATIONS
(A) The purpose of any examination of detailed plans and specifications and plot plans shall
be to determine consistency with applicable state codes and local ordinances.
(B) Design characteristics not affecting consistency with applicable state codes and local
ordinances shall not be considered in any examination of detailed plans and specifications and plot plans.
(C) Issuance of a permit relative to plans which do not comply with applicable state codes
and local ordinances shall not relieve the person, partnership or corporation who applied for, or obtained, the permit of the responsibility of complying with all applicable state codes and local ordinances.
(D) The Building Commissioner shall stamp all acceptable plans and specifications and plot
plans “Approved,” then return one (1) copy of the detailed plans and specifications and one (1) copy of the plot plan to the applicant.
(E) The Building Commissioner shall retain one (1) copy of the approved plans and
specifications and one (1) copy of the plot plan for a period not less than ninety (90) days from the date of completion of the work covered thereby.
(F) The Building Commissioner shall file one (1) copy of the approved plans and
specifications and one (1) copy of the plot plan with the Hancock County Assessor’s Office.
§ 00-15-156-04 PAYMENT OF PERMIT FEES
Fees required for permits issued by the Building Commissioner shall be collected by the Clerk-Treasurer of the Town before the issuance of any permit. A permit shall not be considered valid until such fees have been paid in full.
375
§ 00-15-156-05 EXPIRATION OF PERMIT
(A) If the construction activity for which a permit has been issued has not commenced
within sixty (60) days from the date of its issuance, the permit shall expire by operation of law and no longer shall be of any force or effect.
(1) The Building Commissioner may, for good cause shown in writing before expiration of the sixty (60) days, extend the validity of any permit for an additional period which is reasonable under the circumstances, but in no event shall the continuance exceed sixty (60) days.
(2) The extension shall be confirmed in writing.
(B) If the construction activity has been commenced but only partially completed and
thereafter substantially no construction activity occurs on the construction over a period of sixty (60) days, the permit shall expire by operation of law an no longer shall be of any force or effect.
(C) The Building Commissioner may, for good cause shown in writing before expiration
of the sixty (60) days, extend the validity of any permit for an additional period which is reasonable under the circumstance to allow re-initiation of construction activity. In no event shall the extension exceed sixty (60) days.
(D) If a permit expires by operation of law under this section, before work can be
commenced, a new permit first shall be obtained and the fee therefor shall be one half (1/2) the amount required for the original permit for the work, provided that no change shall have been made in the original plans and specifications for the work, and the failure to commence construction activity or the suspension of construction activity shall not have exceeded one (1) year.
§ 00-15-156-06 DEFACING OF PERMIT
It shall be unlawful for any person intentionally to remove, deface obscure, mutilate, mark or sign a posted permit without authorization from the Building Commissioner, or the Commissioner’s authorized representative, until fifteen (15) day after both the construction activity is completed and the Building Commissioner is notified of the completion.
§ 00-15-156-07 STRUCTURAL INSPECTION REQUIREMENTS
(A) The Building Commissioner, or an authorized assistant, shall inspect each structure
being constructed for which a permit is required.
(1) If the work fully complies with the provisions of all applicable state codes and
local ordinances governing the construction, the Commissioner, or authorized assistant, shall approve it.
(2) If the work does not comply with the applicable state codes and local
ordinances governing the construction, the Commissioner, or authorized assistant, shall require the construction to be altered so as to comply.
376
(B) The construction of, remodeling of, or addition to a structure shall require, as
applicable, the following inspections:
(1) A footing inspection, to be made after polies or piers are set, trenches are
excavated, forms are erected and any required reinforcing steel is in place, but before placing of the concrete;
(2) A basement inspection, to be made after basement areas are excavated, forms
are erected and any required reinforcing steel is in place, but before placing of the concrete;
(3) A framing and masonry inspection, to be made after the roof, masonry, all
framing, firestopping and bracings are in place and all electrical wiring, pipes, chimneys and vents are complete, but before interior covering of walls;
(4) A final inspection, to be made after construction activity is complete and the
structure is ready for occupancy;
(5) A finish grading inspection, to be made after all finish grading around the
structure and on the entire lot is completed, and all sodding and seeding has been installed.
(C) The Building Commissioner, when satisfied that structure construction is, or will be,
ready for inspection, shall examine the work and approve or reject it, or parts thereof, as soon as possible from the time of the construction activity.
(D) If the structure construction has been rejected the Building Commissioner shall re-
inspect the structure upon notice from the permit holder that the structure is in compliance and shall assess an additional charge for the re-inspections as required by Town ordinance.
(E) No person, partnership or corporation shall use or occupy any structure for which a
permit has been, or is required to be, obtained pursuant to applicable state codes and local ordinances until after a Certificate of Occupancy has been issued.
§ 00-15-156-08 ELECTRICAL INSPECTION REQUIREMENTS
(A) The Building Commissioner, or an authorized assistant, shall inspect each structure
where the construction activity involves electrical work or wiring.
(1) If the work fully complies with the provisions of all applicable state codes and
local ordinances governing it, the Commissioner, or authorized assistant, shall approve it.
(2) If the electrical work or wiring does not comply with applicable state codes
and local ordinances governing it, the Commissioner, or authorized assistant, shall require the electrical work or wiring to be altered so as to comply.
(B) All new building construction requiring electrical service shall be required to have
the following electrical inspections:
377
(1) A temporary service inspection, to be made after the temporary service
equipment has been installed, but before electrical service is connected by the electric power utility provider.
(2) A rough-in inspection, to be made after all electrical wiring, conduit and
boxes are installed, but before any electrical devices, appliances or equipment are installed and before covering the interior ceilings and walls;
(3) A final inspection, to be made after all electrical work is completed, and
before the use or occupancy of the structure.
(4) A permanent service inspection, to be made after the permanent service
equipment has been installed, but before electrical service is connected by the electric power utility provider.
(C) When notified that any electrical work or wiring is, or will be, ready for inspection,
the Building Commissioner, or an authorized assistant, shall examine it and approve or reject the work, or parts thereof, as soon as possible from the time of notification.
(D) If the electrical work has been rejected, the Building Commissioner, or authorized assistant, shall re-inspect the work upon notice from the permit holder that the electrical work is in compliance and shall assess an additional charge for re-inspection, as required by Town ordinance.
(E) No person, partnership or corporation shall use any electrical power in or on a structure where construction activity for which a permit has been, or is required to be, obtained pursuant to applicable state codes and local ordinances until after an inspection has been made and approval given.
§ 00-15-156-09 PLUMBING INSPECTION REQUIREMENTS
(A) The Building Commissioner, or an authorized assistant, shall inspect each structure
where the construction activity involves plumbing work or sanitary drainage, water pipe fitting, and any sanitary appliances connected therewith.
(1) If the work fully complies with the provisions of all applicable state codes and
local ordinances governing it, the Commissioner, or authorized assistant, shall approve it.
(2) If the work or sanitary drainage, water pipe fitting and any sanitary
appliances connected therewith does not comply with applicable state codes and local ordinances governing it the Commissioner, or authorized assistant, shall require the work to be altered so as to comply.
(B) All new building construction requiring plumbing service shall be required to have
the following plumbing inspections:
(1) An under-slab inspection shall be required when plumbing pipes and fittings
are installed in an area that will be covered by concrete. The inspection shall be made before any concrete is poured over the plumbing work.
378
(2) A rough-in inspection, to be made after all plumbing pipes and fittings are
installed, but before any plumbing fixtures or appliances are installed and before covering the interior ceilings and walls.
(3) A final inspection, to be made after all plumbing work is completed, and
before the use or occupancy of the structure.
(C) When notified that any plumbing work or sanitary drainage, water pipe fitting and
any sanitary appliances connected therewith is, or will be, ready for inspection, the Building Commissioner, or authorized assistant, shall examine it and approve or reject the work, or parts thereof, as soon as possible from the time of notification.
(D) If the plumbing work has been rejected, the Commissioner, or authorized assistant,
shall re-inspect the work upon notice from the permit holder that the plumbing work is in compliance and shall assess an additional charge for re-inspection, as required by Town ordinance.
(E) No person, partnership or corporation shall use any plumbing in or on a structure
where construction activity for which a permit has been, or is required to be, obtained pursuant to applicable state codes and local ordinances until after an inspection has been made and approval given.
§ 00-15-156-10 HEAT, VENTILATION AND AIR CONDITIONING
INSPECTION REQUIREMENTS
(A) The Building Commissioner, or an authorized assistant, shall inspect each structure
where the construction activity involves heating, ventilating or air conditioning work.
(1) IF the work fully complies with the provisions of all applicable state codes and
local ordinances governing it, the Commissioner, or authorized assistant, shall approve it.
(2) If the heating, ventilating or air condition work does not comply, the
Commissioner, or authorized assistant, shall require it to be altered so as to comply.
(B) All new building construction requiring heating, ventilating or air conditioning
service shall be required to have the following inspections:
(1) A rough-in inspection, to be made after all natural gas pipes and fittings,
plumbing pipes and fittings, electrical wiring and conduits, and duct work is installed, but before any heating, ventilating or air conditioning appliances are installed, and before covering the interior ceilings and walls in the areas where the above are installed.
(2) A final inspection, to be made after all heating, ventilating and air
conditioning work has been completed, and before the use or occupancy of the structure.
(C) When notified that any heating, ventilating and air conditioning work is, or will be,
ready for inspection, the Building Commissioner, or authorized assistant, shall examine it and approve or reject the work, or parts thereof, as soon as possible from the time of notification.
379
(D) If the heating, ventilating and air conditioning work has been rejected, the
Commissioner, or authorized assistant, shall re-inspect the work upon notice from the permit holder that the work is in compliance and shall assess an additional charge for re-inspection, as required by Town ordinance.
(E) No person, partnership or corporation shall use any heating, ventilating and air
conditioning in or on a structure where the construction activity for which a permit has been, or is required to be, obtained pursuant to applicable state codes and local ordinances until after an inspection has been made and approval given.
§ 00-15-156-11 NOTICE OF AVAILABILITY FOR INSPECTION
Whenever a stage of construction activity is reached for which an inspection is required, the permit holder, or the permit holder’s agent, shall be under a duty to give appropriate notice to the Building Commissioner that the construction activity is available for inspection. Notice of availability shall be given either by telephone communication over a specified telephone line in the office of the Department of Building and Planning Services, by hand-delivered written notice or by a letter delivered by the United States Postal Service.
§ 00-15-156-12 CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY TO REMAIN AVAILABLE FOR INSPECTION
(A) Whenever a stage of construction activity designated in this chapter is reached, no
person shall take any action or accomplish any additional construction activity which would substantially impede the opportunity of the Building Commissioner, or an authorized assistant, to inspect that stage of construction activity for a period of at least forty-eight (48) hours after notice of availability for inspection has been received during business hours in the Department of Building and Planning Services office or until after an inspection is made, whichever first occurs.
(B) The forty-eight (48) hour period shall begin to run upon actual receipt of the notice
during business hours but shall not run during any day when an inspection attempt by the Building Commissioner, or authorized assistant, is unsuccessful because the work is not accessible or on Saturdays, Sundays or legal holidays.
(C) A person, partnership or corporation may pour a footing two (2) hours after
notification is received in the office of the Department of Building and Planning Services. If a footing is so poured, the remainder of the excavation must remain open for a period of at least forty-eight (48) hours from the time when notice is received, and the person, partnership or corporation must assist the inspector in making the excavation available for proper inspection.
§ 00-15-156-13 FILING OF CERTIFICATE OF COMPLETION AND
COMPLIANCE
Within ten (10) days after completion of the construction activity for which a permit has been issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, and applicable state codes and local ordinances, and before the use or occupancy of the structure, the person who applied for the permit for the construction activity shall execute and file a Certificate of Completion and
380
Compliance with the Building Commissioner in the form specified by the Commissioner and approved by the Town Council.
§ 00-15-156-14 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY
Upon receipt of the Certificate of Completion and Compliance, satisfactory completion of all final inspections and receipt of certification from the Superintendent of the Sewage Utility that all sewer connections have been completed in compliance with Chapter 51 of the Town Code and that grading of the property upon which the construction activity was completed does not cause surface water to flow into the sanitary sewer, the Building Commissioner, or authorized assistant, shall issue a Certificate of Occupancy.
§ 00-15-156-15 PENALTY
Any person, partnership or corporation violating any provision of this chapter, failing to perform any duty lawfully given within the time prescribed by the Building Commissioner, or authorized assistant, or failing, neglecting or refusing to obey any lawful order given by the Commissioner shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than Ninety-Five Dollars ($95.00) nor more than Twenty-Five Hundred Dollars ($2,500.00). Each day a violation occurs or continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(Adopted by Cumberland Town Council on May 1, 2002 – Ordinance No. 2002-12)
381
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
Table
I. ANNEXATIONS
II. CONTRACTS
III. ZONING MAP CHANGES
382
TABLE I: ANNEXATIONS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
1971-6 10-27-1971 Annexing of certain area to the town’s Ward #3, which begins at the southeast corner of Section 35, Township 16 North, Range 5 East
1980-07 6-13-1980 Annexation of Masonic lodge property at Rt. 40 and 700 W
86-5 6-4-1986 Annexing property contiguous to the town, Marion and Hancock Counties, Indiana, in as much as at least one-eighth of the aggregate external boundaries of the real estate coincides with the boundaries of the municipal Town of Cumberland, Marion and Hancock Counties, Indiana
- 6-10-1986 Annexing certain property starting at the southwest corner of Section 26 and going north for two miles along the west section line of Sections 26 and 23, which is common to the Hancock- Marion County line, to the northwest corner of Section 23
1988-3 7-6-1988 Annexing certain property commencing at a point on the north line and 1,340 feet west of the northeast corner of Section 2, Township 15 North, Range 5 East
1988-4 9-15-1988 Annexing certain property at a brass monument marking the southeast corner of the one-fourth section
- 6-4-1986 Annexing certain property beginning at a five-eighth inch rebar marking the southwest corner of the one-fourth section
1988-5 9-15-1988 Annexing certain property commencing at the southwest corner of the west half of the southeast quarter of the section
- -- Annexing certain property commencing at the northeast corner of the section
2 3-1-1989 Annexing certain property contiguous to the Town of Cumberland, Marion and Hancock Counties, Indiana
383
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
1992-1 2-19-1992 Annexing contiguous territory to the town more particularly described as the northwest quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 26, Township 16 North, Range 5 East, containing 40 acres, and the southwest quarter of Section 26, township 16 North, Range 5 East, containing 40 acres
1997-04 8-2-1997 Kent D. and Cynthia Abercombie at 255 Buck Creek Road Lot 1 in Newbys Minor Subdivision
1997-07 -- Establishing the Council District for Ord. 1997-04
1999-08 8-20-1998 Annexation of Cornelius; Bangel, Kleine; Atherton; Hale; Circle & Doris Wiese property at 300; 314; 385; 465 and 495 Buck Creek Road
2000-07 2-7-2001 Annexation of Smithy-Howe Development – “The Crossing”
2000-08 2-7-2001 Annexation of CTS Development/Valley Brooke Village, Section 7
2001-10 8-15-2001 Annexation of Cowan Tucker/Cumberland Falls
2001-14 10-3-2001 Annexation of Nancy Haley/171 Buck Creek Road
2004-01 4-8-2004 Annexation of 1518 North Buck Creek Road
2004-11 2-16-2005 Annexing property located along the north side of US 40, south of Glen Oaks Village
384
TABLE II: CONTRACTS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
- -- Granting a franchise to Indianapolis Cablevision Company, Ltd., to construct and operate a cable television system
1995-2 1-4-1995 Granting a franchise to Comcast Cablevision of Indianapolis, L.P., to construct, operate, and maintain a cable television system in the town
2000-5 10-4-2000 Authorizing a joint agreement, between the Town of Cumberland and the Hancock County Regional Water and Sewer District, for the town to provide sanitary sewer service to certain territory within the jurisdiction of the District
385
TABLE III: ZONING MAP CHANGES
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
1988-10 9-7-1988 Rezoning certain property commencing at the northeast corner of the one-fourth section to R-2 residential district, and rezoning certain property commencing at the northeast corner of the one- fourth section to B-2 Business District
1988-14 11-2-1988 Rezoning certain property commencing at a brass monument marking the southeast corner of the one-fourth section to R-1 Residential District
1986-16 12-28-1988 Rezoning certain property commencing at the southeast corner of the west half of the southeast quarter of the section to R-3 Residential District
1989-3 4-5-989 Rezoning certain property commencing at the northeast corner of the section to R-2 Residential District
1991-2 3-6-1991 Rezoning certain property commencing at the northwest corner of the quarter section to B-1 Business District
1992-4 2-4-1992 Rezoning certain property commencing in the northwest quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 26, Township 16 North, Range 5 East, containing 40 acres, and commencing in the southwest quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 26, Township 16 North, Range 5 East, containing 40 acres, to the R-1 zoning district classification
1993-8 5-26-1993 Zoning certain property being a part of the southwest quarter of Section 35, Township 16 North, Range 5 East, in Buck Creek Township containing 17.368 acres as R-3 District
1998-09 10-7-1998 Zoning certain property being a part of the southwest quarter of section 35, Township 16 North, Range 5 in Buck Creek Township containing 43.014 acres as R-1 Residential District
386
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
2001-03 2-7-2001 Rezoning certain property being a part of the northwest quarter of section 26, Township 16 North, Range 5 in Buck Creek Township containing 15.513 acres as R-4 Residential District
2001-04 2-7-2001 Rezoning certain property being a part of the southwest quarter of section 35, Township 16 North, Range 5 East in Buck Creek Township containing 16.71 acres as R-3 Residential District
2001-15 10-3-201 Rezoning certain property being a part of the northeast quarter of section 35, Township 16 North, Range 5 in Buck Creek Township containing28.322 acres as PUD-R Planned Unit Development District – Residential District
2001-16 10-3-2001 Rezoning certain property being a part of the northwest quarter of section 2, Township 15 North, Range 5 East in Hancock County, Indiana, containing one acre as R-4 Residential District
2004-02 4-8-2004 Rezoning certain property being a part of the west half of section 26, Township 16 North, Range 5 East I Hancock County containing 80.8 acres as PUD-R Planned Unit Development – Residential District
2005-01 2-16-2005 Rezoning certain property located at 7560 and 7606 West US 40 in Sugar Creek Township, containing 15.5 acres as B-1 Commercial District
2005-02 2-16-2005 Rezoning certain property located at approximately 495 North Buck Creek Road in Buck Creek Township, containing 43.652 acres as PUD-R Planning Unit Development – Residential District
2005-08 12-14-2005 Adding a new zoning district, National Road Overlay District
2009-06-2 7-15-2009 Changing the zoning for approximately 69.007 acres of real estate known as the former Cumberland Trails, to be rezoned A-1/R-6
2013-14 _________ Annexing certain territory referred to as “US 40 East” into the Town
2014-09 _________ Authorizing the provision of fire protection and emergency response services by Sugar Creek Township in portions of the Town, without the necessity of a contract
2014-12 _________ Authorizing the provision of fire protection and emergency response services by Buck Creek Township in portions of the Town, without the necessity of a contract
2014-14 _________ Annexing certain territory referred to as “US 40 East – Phase 2”
Into the Town
387
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Indiana Code
References to 1995 Code
References to Ordinances
388
REFERENCES TO INDIANA CODE
I.C. Cites Code Section
1-1-1-5 00-01-10-04
1-1-1-7 00-01-10-12
1-1-1-8 00-01-10-06
1-1-4-5 00-01-10-05
1-1-5-1 00-01-10-11
1-1-6-1 00-01-10-08
3-10-6 00-03-37-03
5-4-1 00-03-31-02, 00-03-37-03
5-14-1.5 00-03-30-22
5-14-1.5-1 et seq. 00-03-30-21
5-22 00-03-32-30
6-3.5-1.1-21.1 00-03-35-07
6-3.5-6-17.3 00-03-35-07
6-3.5-7-13.1 00-03-35-08
6-3.5-7-17.3 00-03-35-07
7.1-3-20-2 00-09-98-06
7.1-3-20-7 00-09-98-06
9-4-1-7 00-07-70-36
9-13-2 00-07-70-01, 00-07-71-01
9-18-12 00-09-90-02
9-22-1-1 00-09-90-02
9-22-1-1 through
9-22-1-32 00-09-90-02, 00-09-90-03
13-1-3 00-05-50-005
13-7 00-05-50-005
14-32 00-05-51-007
14-34 0005-51-045, 00-05-51-060
33-6-3 00-03-36-01
33-36-2-3 00-09-99-07
35-7 00-03-32-17
35-47-2-3(b) 00-03-35-23
36-1-3-8(a)(10) 00-01-10-99
36-1-8-5 00-03-35-07
36-1-8-5.1 00-03-35-07
36-5-2-2 00-01-10-15
36-5-2-9.2 00-03-30-20
36-5-2-9.6 00-03-30-20
36-5-2-9.8 00-03-30-20
36-5-4-11 00-03-30-06
36-5-7 00-01-10-05
36-7-4 00-03-34-15, 00-03-34-30
36-7-14 et seq. 00-03-34-34, 00-03-34-47
36-7-14-12.2 00-03-34-45
36-9-9 00-05-52-001, 00-05-52-006
36-10-5-2 00-03-34-01
389
REFERENCES TO 1995 CODE
1995 Code 2004 Code
00-01-11-01 00-03-30-35
00-03-30-01 00-03-30-01
00-03-30-02 00-03-30-02
00-03-30-03 00-03-30-03
00-03-30-05 00-03-30-05
00-03-30-06 00-03-30-06
00-03-30-20 00-03-30-20
00-03-30-21 00-03-30-21
00-03-30-22 00-03-30-22
00-03-30-23 00-03-30-23
00-03-31-01 00-03-34-01
00-03-31-02 00-03-34-02
00-03-31-35 00-03-34-15
00-03-31-37 00-03-34-16
00-03-31-42 00-03-34-17
00-03-31-61 00-03-34-31
00-03-33-02 00-03-33-02
00-03-33-03 00-03-33-03
00-03-33-04 00-03-33-04
00-03-33-05 00-03-33-05
00-03-33-07 00-03-33-06
00-03-33-08 00-03-33-07
00-03-33-09 00-03-32-18
00-03-33-25 00-03-31-03
00-03-34-01 00-03-35-01
00-03-34-02 00-03-35-23
00-03-34-03 00-03-35-04
00-03-34-04 00-03-35-05
00-03-34-05 00-03-35-06
00-03-34-06 00-03-35-21
00-03-34-07 00-03-35-22
00-03-34-08 00-03-35-03
00-03-34-09 00-03-35-24
00-05-51-001 00-05-50-001
00-05-51-002 00-05-50-002
00-05-51-003 00-05-50-003
00-05-51-004 00-05-50-004
00-05-51-005 00-05-50-005
00-05-51-006 00-05-50-006
00-05-51-008 00-05-50-009
00-05-51-009 00-05-50-007
00-05-51-010 00-05-50-008
00-05-51-011 00-05-50-010
00-05-51-012 00-05-50-011
00-05-51-013 00-05-51-012
00-05-51-014 00-05-50-013
390
1995 Code 2004 Code
00-05-51-025 00-05-50-025
00-05-51-026 00-05-50-026
00-05-51-050 00-05-50-040
00-05-51-051 00-05-50-041
00-05-51-053 00-05-50-043
00-05-51-054 00-05-50-044
00-05-51-055 00-05-50-045
00-05-51-056 00-05-50-046
00-05-51-057 00-05-50-047
00-05-51-058 00-05-50-048
00-05-51-059 00-05-50-049
00-05-51-060 00-05-50-050
00-05-51-00 00-05-50-065
00-05-51-071 00-05-50-066
00-05-51-085 00-05-50-080
00-05-51-086 00-05-50-081
00-05-51-087 00-05-50-082
00-05-51-088 00-05-50-083
00-05-51-089 00-05-50-084
00-05-51-090 00-05-50-085
00-05-51-100 00-05-50-100
00-05-51-101 00-05-50-109
00-05-51-102 00-05-50-101
00-05-51-121 00-05-50-120
00-05-51-122 00-05-50-121
00-05-51-123 00-05-50-122
00-05-51-124 00-05-50-123
00-05-51-125 00-05-50-124
00-05-51-126 00-05-50-125
00-05-51-127 00-05-50-126
00-05-51-128 00-05-50-127
00-05-51-129 00-05-50-128
00-05-51-999 00-05-50-999
00-07-70-02 00-07-70-20
00-07-70-04 00-07-70-35
00-07-70-25 00-07-70-60
00-07-70-26 00-07-70-61
00-07-71-17 00-07-71-17
00-07-71-22 00-07-71-22
00-07-71-23 00-03-35-25
Ch. 72, Sch. II 00-07-71-99
Ch. 73, Sch. I 00-07-71-99
00-09-90-02 00-09-90-16
00-09-90-03 00-09-90-17
00-09-92-01 00-09-92-01
00-09-92-02 00-09-92-02
00-09-92-03 00-09-92-03
00-09-92-05 00-09-92-05
00-09-92-06 00-09-02-06
391
1995 Code 2004 Code
00-09-92-07 00-09-92-07
00-09-92-08 00-09-92-08
00-09-92-10 00-09-92-09
00-09-92-99 00-09-92-99
00-09-93-01 00-09-93-01
00-09-93-02 00-09-93-02
00-09-93-03 00-09-93-03
00-09-93-04 00-09-93-04
00-09-93-15 00-09-93-15
00-09-93-16 00-09-93-16
00-09-93-99 00-09-93-99
00-09-94-01 00-09-94-01
00-09-94-02 00-09-94-02
00-09-94-03 00-09-94-03
00-09-95-01 00-09-95-01
00-09-95-02 00-09-95-02
00-09-95-03 00-09-95-03
00-09-95-04 00-09-95-04
00-09-95-05 00-09-95-05
00-09-95-06 00-09-95-06
00-09-95-07 00-09-95-07
00-09-95-08 00-09-95-20
00-09-95-09 00-09-95-08
00-09-95-10 00-09-95-09
00-09-95-11 00-09-95-21
00-09-95-12 00-09-95-22
00-09-95-13 00-09-05-23
00-09-95-14 00-09-95-24
00-09-95-15 00-09-95-25
00-09-95-16 00-09-95-26
00-09-95-25 00-09-95-40
00-09-95-26 00-09-95-41
00-09-95-27 00-09-95-42
00-09-95-28 00-09-95-43
00-09-95-29 00-09-95-44
00-09-95-30 00-09-95-45
00-09-95-31 00-09-95-46
00-09-95-32 00-09-95-47
00-09-95-33 00-09-95-48
00-09-95-45 00-09-95-60
00-09-95-46 00-09-95-61
00-09-95-47 00-09-95-62
00-09-95-55 00-09-95-75
00-09-95-56 00-09-95-76
00-09-95-57 00-09-95-77
00-09-95-58 00-09-95-78
00-09-95-59 00-09-95-79
00-09-95-99 00-09-95-99
00-11-113-01 00-11-111-01
392
1995 Code 2004 Code
00-11-113-02 00-11-111-02
00-11-113-10 00-11-111-15
00-11-113-11 00-11-111-16
00-11-113-12 00-11-111-17
00-13-130-02 00-13-130-01
00-13-130-04 00-13-130-02
00-13-130-07 00-13-130-03
00-13-130-09 00-13-130-04
393
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
- -- TSO Table II
- -- TSO Table I
1971-6 10-27-1971 TSO Table I
1980-07 6-13-1980 TSO Table I
- 6-4-1986 TSO Table I
86-5 6-4-1986 TSO Table I
- 6-10-1986 TSO Table I
1986-7 7-2-1986 00-07-70-61
1986-13 12-29-1986 00-03-31-03
1987-1 1-7-1987 00-03-34-15 through 00-03-34-17,
00-03-34-31
1988-3 7-6-1988 TSO Table I
1988-8 8-25-1988 00-05-50-002 through
00-05-50-012, 00-05-50-025,
00-05-50-026, 00-05-50-040,
00-05-50-041, 00-05-50-043
through 00-05-50-050,
00-05-50-065, 00-05-50-066,
00-05-50-080 through
00-05-50-085, 00-05-50-999
1988-9 8-25-1988 00-05-50-001, 00-05-50-002,
00-05-50-100, 00-05-50-101,
00-05-50-108
1988-10 9-7-1988 TSO Table III
1988-4 9-15-1988 TSO Table I
1988-5 9-15-1988 TSO Table I
1988-14 11-2-1988 TSO Table III
88-15-A 12-7-1988 00-03-35-04
1986-16 12-28-1988 TSO Table III
2 3-1-1989 TSO Table I
1989-3 4-5-1989 TSO Table III
1990-1 1-6-1990 00-03-31-03
1990-13 8-1-1990 00-05-50-002, 00-05-50-104
1990-18 11-7-1990 00-07-71-99
1991-2 3-6-1991 TSO Table III
1991-6 9-4-1991 00-09-92-05 through 00-09-92-09,
00-09-92-99
1991-8 10-2-1991 00-05-50-003, 00-05-50-025,
00-05-50-045, 00-05-50-080,
00-05-50-999
1992-4 2-4-1991 TSO Table III
1992-1 2-19-1992 TSO Table I
1992-5 6-3-1992 00-05-50-002, 00-05-50-104
1992-7 6-3-1992 00-03-35-05
1992-9 6-3-1992 00-09-90-16, 00-09-90-17
10-1992 7-1-1992 00-03-3-06
1992-13 8-5-1992 00-03-34-01, 00-03-34-02
394
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
1993-3 2-3-1993 00-05-50-002, 00-05-50-104
1993-5 3-3-1993 00-03-35-21
1993-7 3-3-1993 00-05-50-013, 00-05-50-080
1993-8 5-26-1993 TSO Table III
1993-12 11-3-1993 00-03-35-22
1993-13 11-3-1993 00-03-35-03
1994-4 4-7-1994 00-05-50-120 - 00-05-5-128
1994-5 4-7-1994 00-05-50-999
1994-9 8-3-1994 00-05-50-101
1995-2 1-4-1995 TSO Table II
1995-8 5-3-1995 00-03-32-18
1995-10 9-6-1995 00-03-35-24
96-2 7-3-1996 00-09-92-07
97-1 3-5-1997 00-03-34-02 through 00-03-34-04
97-2 3-18-1997 00-05-50-102
97-6 7-9-1997 00-03-35-01
1997-04 8-2-1997 TSO Table I
1997-07 -- TSO Table I
1998-1 2-4-1998 00-03-35-20
199-4 4-1-1998 00-03-35-02
5 6- -1998 00-03-32-31
1998-5 6-3-1998 00-03-32-30
1998-6 6-3-1998 00-05-50-107
1998-09 10-7-1998 TSO Table III
1999-08 8-20-1998 TSO Table I
2000-2 5-3-2000 00-05-50-103
2000-3 5-3-2000 00-09-94-01, 00-09-94-03
2000-5 10-4-2000 TSO Table II
200-6 11-1-2000 00-07-71-99
2000-07 2-7-2001 TSO Table I
2000-08 2-7-2001 TSO Table I
2001-03 2-7-2001 TSO Table III
2001-04 20702001 TSO Table III
2001-7 4-4-2001 00-01-10-05, 00-01-10-17,
00-03-30-04, 00-03-30-24,
00-03-31-02, 00-03-31-04,
00-03-32-01
2001-9 6-6-2001 00-05-50-002, 00-05-50-104,
00-05-50-105
2001-10 8-15-2001 TSO Table I
2001-13 8-1-2001 00-05-50-104
2001-14 10-3-2001 TSO Table I
2001-15 10-3-2001 TSO Table III
2001-16 10-3-2001 TSO Table III
2002-1 1-2-2002 00-07-70-01, 00-07-70-02,
00-07-70-21 through 00-07-70-23,
00-0-70-36 through 00-07-70-48
00-07-70-99
395
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
2002-02 1-2-2002 00-07-71-01 through 00-07-71-07,
00-07-71-16, 00-07-71-18 through
00-07-71-21, 00-07-71-99
2002-3 1-2-2002 00-09-91-01 through 00-09-91-18,
00-09-91-99
2002-4 1-2-2002 00-09-97-01 through 00-09-97-04,
00-09-97-99
2002-5 2-6-2002 00-03-36-20 through 00-03-36-26,
00-03-36-40, 00-03-36-41
2002-05 2-6-2002 00-03-36-02
2002-7 4-4-2002 00-03-32-15
2002-07 5-1-2002 00-05-50-104
2002-15 6-5-2002 00-05-50-104, 00-05-50-106
2002-16 9-19-2002 00-05-50-104
2002-21 10-16-2002 00-03-30-07
2003-2 7-16-2003 00-05-50-110
2003-4 9-22-2003 00-03-30-07
2004-01 4-8-2004 TSO Table I
2004-02 4-8-2004 TSO Table III
2004-03 5-5-2004 00-03-35-07
2004-05 6-2-2004 00-03-30-07
2004-11 2-16-2005 TSO Table I
2004-12 1-5-2005 00-05-51-001 through
00-05-51-008, 00-05-51-015 through 00-05-51-021,
00-05-51-030 through
00-05-51-036,
00-05-51-045 through
00-05-51-048, 00-05-51-060 through 00-05-51-064,
00-05-51-070 through
00-05-51-078, 00-05-51-090,
00-05-51-091, 00-05-51-100 through 00-05-51-105,
00-05-51-999
2005-01 2-16-2005 TSO Table III
2005-02 2-16-2005 TSO Table III
2005-04 7-6-2005 Ch. 72, Sched. I
2005-06 8-3-2005 00-03-32-16
2005-07 9-7-2005 00-05-50-008, 00-05-50-009,
00-05-50-014
2005-08 12-14-2005 TSO Table III
2006-03 7-19-2006 00-03-32-18
2007-03 6-20-2007 00-03-32-16
2007-05 9-5-2007 00-03-32-01
2007-05 11-7-2007 00-03-32-32
2007-07 11-21-2007 00-09-98-01 through
00-09-98-11, 00-09-98-99
396
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
2007-11 8-20-2008 00-05-51-090, 00-05-51-091
2008-02 2-20-2008 00-03-32-19
2008-05 4-16-2008 00-03-34-40, 000-03-34-47
2009-01 2-17-2009 00-03-34-01 through 00-03-34-04
2009-03 4-15-2009 00-05-52-001 through
00-05-52-006
2009-06-1 6-17-2009 00-09-96-01 – 00-09-96-03
2009-06-2 7-15-2009 T.S.O. Table III
2009-11 1-20-2010 00-03-32-33
2009-12 12-15-2009 00-09-94-04
2009-13 12-15-2009 00-11-110-07, 00-11-110-99
2010-1 2-3-2010 00-03-32-01
2010-2 3-3-2010 00-03-37-01 through 00-03-37-14
2010-3 3-17-2010 00-07-71-08, 00-07-71-99
2010-04 4-21-201- 00-03-32-50 through 00-03-32-67
2010-05 4-21-2010 00-07-74-01 through 00-07-74-07
2010-12 7-7-2010 00-09-99-01 through 00-09-99-08
2010-13 8-4-2010 00-09-94-05
2010-15 8-4-2010 00-07-71-99
2010-16 9-1-2010 00-03-35-08
397
INDEX
398
INDEX
ABANDONED VEHICLES
Definition, 00-09-90-01
Police Department; power, 00-09-90-03
Statutory authority, 00-09-90-02
Town Marshal; power, 00-09-90-04
ALARMS
Automatic alarm notification devices prohibited, 00-09-97-04
Excessive false alarms prohibited, 00-09-97-02
General provisions, 00-09-97-01
Penalty, 00-09-97-99
Prolonged externally sounding alarms prohibited, 00-09-97-03
AMUSEMENT DEVICES
Definition, 00-11-111-02
Gambling devices prohibited, 00-11-111-01
Licenses
Affixing to machine, 00-11-111-17
Issuance, 00-11-111-16
Required, 00-11-111-15
Penalty, 00-11-111-99
ANIMALS
General provisions, 00-09-01-01
Identification required, 00-09-01-02
Penalty, 00-09-01-99
Regulated Activities
Animals creating a nuisance, 00-09-01-05
Animals in crime, 00-09-01-11
Animals in vehicles, 00-09-01-12
Awarding live animals as prizes, 00-09-01-09
Confinement of cats and dogs, 00-09-01-03
Curbing animals required, 00-09-01-15
Disposal of animals, 00-09-01-03
Dogs and cats in heat, 00-09-01-04
Enticing animals, 00-09-01-18
Enticing animals to fight, 00-09-01-10
Humane treatment required, 00-09-01-06
Keeping farm animals, 00-09-01-14
Vaccination required, 00-09-01-07
Vehicular collisions with animals, 00-09-01-17
Vicious animals, 00-09-01-16
Wild animals, 00-09-01-13
BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS
Appointment and number of members, 00-03-34-31
Established, 00-03-34-30
CLERK-TREASURER, 00-03-31-01
399
EMPLOYEE HANDBOOK, 00-03-32-01
FIRE PREVENTION
Adoption by reference of Indianapolis fire regulations, 00-09-92-01
Burning for the purpose of training fire personnel, 00-09-92-08
Enforcement, 00-09-92-04
Liability, 00-09-92-09
Limited burning for special purposes, 00-09-92-07
Open burning prohibited, 00-09-92-05
Penalty, 00-09-92-99
Provision of fire protection, 00-09-92-02
Regulations, 00-09-92-03
Residential burning, 00-09-92-06
GENERAL OFFENSES
Congregating, 00-13-130-01
Discharging firearms, 00-13-130-02
Littering, 00-13-130-03
Penalty, 00-13-130-99
GENERAL PROVISIONS ON CODE AND PENALTY
Application to future ordinances, 00-01-10-03
Construction of code, 00-01-10-04
Distribution of the code, 00-01-10-17
Errors and omissions, 00-01-10-09
General penalty, 00-01-10-99
Interpretation, 00-01-10-02
Limitation periods, 00-01-10-12
Ordinances unaffected, 00-01-10-13
Ordinances which amend or supplement code, 00-01-10-14
Preservation of penalties, offenses, rights, and liabilities, 00-01-10-16
Reasonable time, 00-01-10-10
Reference to offices; name designations, 00-01-10-08
Reference to other sections, 00-01-10-07
Repeal or modification of code section, 00-01-10-11
Rules of interpretation; definitions, 00-01-10-05
Section histories; statutory references, 00-01-10-15
Severability, 00-01-10-06
Title of code, 00-01-10-01
H1N1 POLICY
Assumptions, 00-03-32-060
Communicable disease response, 00-03-32-051
Communication and education, 00-03-32-053
Definitions, 00-03-32-052
Employees caring for family members with H1N1, 00-03-32-055
Employees with H1N1, 00-03-32-054
Equipment, 00-03-32-063
Essential town employees and services, 00-03-32-057
General guidelines, 00-03-32-059
H1N1 Policy, 00-03-32-050
400
Leave; mutual aid, 00-03-32-064
Protocols, 00-03-32-066
Public safety; police department, 00-03-32-058
Reports; incidents, 00-03-32-062
Responding to calls, 00-03-32-065
Responsibilities, 00-03-32-061
Severe outbreaks, 00-03-32-056
Staffing for the Cumberland Police Department, 00-03-32-063
MOTOR VEHICLE STORAGE
Application and enforcement of storage provisions, 00-09-90-15
Compliance required; removal of vehicles, 00-09-90-17
Storing motor vehicles on private property, 00-09-90-16
NO PARKING ZONES, Parking Schedule I
NO SMOKING
Application to town property, 00-09-98-02
Declaration of establishment as non-smoking, 00-09-98-07
Definitions, 00-09-98-01
Enforcement, 00-09-98-09
No-retaliation, 00-09-98-10
Other applicable laws, 00-09-98-11
Penalty, 00-09-98-99
Places where smoking is not regulated, 00-09-98-06
Posting of signs, 00-09-98-08
Reasonable distance, 00-09-98-05
Smoking prohibited in places of employment, 00-09-98-04
Smoking prohibited in public places and parks, 00-09-98-03
NUISANCES
Abatement; Enforcement
Abatement procedures, 00-09-93-15
Enforcement by police, 00-09-93-16
Health hazards, prohibited, 00-09-93-02
Offensive premises, 00-09-93-03
Penalty, 00-09-93-99
Structures or things detrimental to health and safety, 00-09-93-01
Unsafe motor vehicles, 00-09-93-04
ONE-WAY STREETS, Traffic Schedule III
ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS BUREAU
Administration; Clerk-Treasurer appointment, 00-03-36-02
Creation, 00-03-36-01
Procedure
Acceptance of admission; late charge, 00-03-36-23
Acceptance of written appearance, waivers of trial, and the like, 00-03-36-20
Authority to issue complaints, 00-03-36-21
Challenges; legal proceedings, 00-03-36-26
Issuance of complaint; duty to appear or deliver, 00-03-36-22
401
Issuance of receipt, 00-03-36-24
Legal proceedings; court costs, 00-03-36-25
Violations
Other legal action; authority, 00-03-36-40
Schedule, 00-03-36-41
PARKING
Car doors, 00-07-71-07
Definitions; consistency with statutory law, 00-07-71-01
Limited parking, 00-07-71-04
Obstructing traffic, 00-07-71-06
Parking method, 00-07-71-02
Parking prohibited 00-07-71-03
Penalty, 00-07-71-99
Prohibited stopping, standing, and parking, 00-07-71-05
Specific Regulations
Exceptions to use, 00-07-71-22
Loading and unloading, 00-07-71-18
Metered parking, 00-07-71-16
Oversized vehicle parking, 00-07-71-21
Placement of meters, 00-07-71-17
Public carrier stops, 00-07-71-20
Unauthorized parking in loading and unloading zones, 00-07-71-19
Truck and/or trailer parking, 00-07-71-08
PARKS ADVISORY COUNCIL
Creation, 00-03-34-01
Membership, 00-03-34-02
Powers and duties, 00-03-34-04
Regular and special meetings, 00-03-34-03
PARKS AND RECREATION
Control of vehicles, 00-09-94-02
Fees, 13-03-32-18
General rules, 00-09-94-01
Penalty, 00-09-94-99
Prohibited persons, 00-09-94-04
Tennis facilities, 00-09-94-03
Trail rules, 00-09-94-05
PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
Appeal procedures, 00-11-110-05
Definitions, 00-11-110-01
Other prohibited activity, 00-11-110-07
Penalty, 00-11-110-99
Permit application and fee, 00-11-110-03
Permit required for peddlers, 00-11-110-02
Prohibited solicitation, 00-11-110-06
Revocation of permits, 00-11-110-04
402
PLAN COMMISSION
Appointment of members, 00-03-34-16
Budget, 00-03-34-17
Established, 00-03-34-15
POLICE DEPARTMENT
Appointments, 00-03-33-03
Conduct of personnel, 00-03-33-05
Copy fees, 00-03-32-19
Court appearances, 00-03-33-07
Custody of property, 00-03-33-06
Department established; 00-03-33-01
Duties, 00-03-33-02
Serving process, 00-03-33-04
POLICE DEPARTMENT FUNDS
Firearms Training Fund, 00-03-35-23
Fund for fees received for police inspection of motor vehicle identification numbers,
00-03-35-21
Parking Fund, 00-03-35-25
Police Canine Expense Fund, 00-03-35-20
Police Cops-Fast Grant Fund, 00-03-35-24
Police Scholarship Fund, 00-03-35-22
PURCHASING
Credit card rules, 00-03-32-33
Purchasing agency, 00-03-32-30
Purchasing rules, 00-03-32-31
Travel policies, 00-03-32-32
REDEVELOPMENT COMMISSION
Compensation, 00-03-34-44
Established, 00-03-34-40
No pecuniary interests, 00-03-34-47
Oath and bond, 00-03-34-43
Organization of Commission, 00-03-34-41
Organizational meeting and election of officers, 00-03-34-46
Purpose, duties, and powers, 00-03-34-45
Term of office and removal, 00-03-34-42
SANITARY SEWER SERVICES
Accessibility, 00-05-50-011
Administration and Enforcement; Appeals
Appeals, 00-05-50-026
Notice of violation, 00-05-50-025
Approval of plans and specifications, 00-05-50-008
Authority of town, 00-05-50-001
Available to public, 00-05-50-014
Building Sewers; Connections
Access, 00-05-50-050
Compliance with regulations; resistance to gas and water, 00-05-50-046
Connections of roof down spouts, exterior foundation drains, and the like,
403
00-05-50-045
Distance from water supply wells, 00-05-50-049
Elevations; life, 00-05-50-044
Excavation; restoration, 00-05-50-048
Inspection, 00-05-50-047
Old sewers used with new building, 00-05-50-041
Separate sewers required for each building, 00-05-50-040
Size; slope; diameter, 00-05-50-043
Specification requirements, 00-05-50-042
Causing or contributing to pollution of streams or waters prohibited, 00-05-50-005
Compliance of residential sewer laterals, 00-05-50-007
Definitions, 00-05-50-002
Denial of permits, 00-05-50-009
Disconnection from system; permit and fee required, 0-05-50-013
Disposition of septic tanks, 00-05-50-004
Industrial Sites
Control manhole, 00-05-50-082
Discharge permits required; application; fee, 00-05-50-080
Responsibility of owners; town indemnified, 00-05-50-081
Safety rules, 00-05-50-085
Special agreements and arrangements, 00-05-50-085
Standards for measurements, tests, and analyses, 00-05-50-083
Penalty, 00-05-50-999
Permit required to uncover, connect, alter, use or disturb sewer or appurtenances,
00-05-50-006
Permits, 00-05-50-012
Rates and Charges
Charge for service required; user classes established, 00-05-50-100
Delinquency charge, 00-05-50-109
Dishonored payment charge, 00-05-50-110
Non-residential users of water from sources other than Indianapolis Water
Company, 00-05-50-103
Rate Determination, 00-05-50-102
Rates and charges to be collected; billing procedure, 00-05-50-101
Schedule of rates and charges, 00-05-50-104
Sewer interceptor costs, 00-05-50-105
Sewer service application review fee, 00-05-50-106
Surcharges, 00-05-50-108
Waiver of applicable fees, 00-05-50-107
Suitable toilet and sewage facilities, 00-05-50-003
Supplemental Provisions to Prevent Illegal Discharges
Condition of noncompliance, 00-05-50-121
Determination of reasonable measures, 00-05-50-125
Discharge of storm or unpolluted water to sanitary sewer, 00-05-50-127
Enforcement authority, 00-05-50-123
Legal remedies; lien; costs of collection, 00-05-50-128
Permit required to disturb connection, 00-05-50-126
Proof of compliance; grant of inspection, 00-05-50-120
Subchapter deemed supplemental, 00-05-50-124
User liable for expenses upon violation, 00-05-50-122
Town’s responsibility for maintenance; exception, 00-05-50-010
404
SIGNS, WAYFINDING (See WAYFINDING DESTINATION SIGN POLICY)
SPECIAL PURPOSE FUNDS
Economic Development Fund, 00-03-35-08
Fund for collection and remission of state sales tax, 00-03-35-06
Funds for sewage works, 00-03-35-04
General Promotional Fund, 00-03-35-01
Park Donation Fund, 00-03-35-03
Parks recreational equipment fund, 00-03-35-05
Rainy Day Fund, 00-03-35-07
Wastewater
Discharge regulations; prohibited substances, 00-05-50-065
Town’s authority to reject waste; procedure, 00-05-50-066
Youth activities Program Fund, 00-03-35-02
SPEED LIMITS, Traffic Schedule II
STOP STREETS, Traffic Schedule I
STORM WATER MANAGEMENT
Abbreviations, 00-05-51-006
Applicability and exemptions, 00-05-51-002
Authority and title, 00-05-51-001
Background, 00-05-51-003
Definitions, 00-05-51-007
Enforcement
Appeals, 00-05-51-105
Compliance with this chapter, 00-05-51-100
Corrective action, 00-05-51-104
Failure to comply or complete, 00-05-51-102
Stop work order, 00-05-51-101
Suspension of access to the storm drain system, 00-05-51-103
Findings, 00-05-51-004
Penalty, 00-05-51-999
Permit Requirements and Procedures
Certification of as-built plans, 00-05-51-078
Changes to plans, 00-05-51-074
Conceptual drainage plan review, 00-05-51-070
Fee structure, 00-05-51-075
Information requirements, 00-05-51-072
Permit procedures, 00-05-51-071
Required assurances, 00-05-51-076
Review of individual lots within a permitted project, 00-05-51-073
Terms and conditions of permits, 00-05-51-077
Prohibited Discharge and Connections
Applicability and exemptions, 00-05-1-015
Exempted discharges and connections, 00-05-51-017
Inspections and monitoring, 00-05-51-021
Private property maintenance duties, 00-051-51-019
Prohibited discharges and connections, 00-51-51-016
405
Spill reporting, 00-05-51-020
Storage of hazardous or toxic material, 00-05-51-018
Purpose, 00-05-51-005
Responsibility for administration, 00-05-51-008
Stormwater Pollution Prevention for Construction Sites
Applicability and exemptions, 00-05-51-045
Calculations and design standards and specifications, 00-05-51-047
Inspection, maintenance, record keeping, and reporting, 00-05-51-048
Policy on stormwater pollution prevention, 00-05-51-046
Stormwater Quantity Management
Applicability and exemptions, 00-051-51-030
Calculations and design standards and specifications, 00-05-51-021
Drainage easement requirements, 00-05-51-033
Inspection, maintenance, record keeping, and reporting, 00-05-51-036
Placement of utilities, 00-05-51-034
Policy on stormwater quantify management, 00-05-51-031
Structures near regulated drains, 00-05-51-035
Stormwater Quality Management for Post-Construction
Applicability and exemptions, 00-05-51-060
Calculations and design standards and specifications, 00-05-51-062
Easement requirements, 00-05-51-063
Inspection, maintenance, record keeping, and reporting, 00-05-51-064
Policy on stormwater quality management, 00-05-51-061
Stormwater Water Utility Fee
Storm Water Fee Funds, 00-05-51-091
Storm water utility fee, 00-05-51-090
STREET LIGHTS
Authority of town, 00-05-52-001
Definitions, 00-05-52-002
Maintenance of street lights, 00-05-52-005
No payment for nonconforming street lights, 00-05-52-004
Payment for electric service to street lights, 00-05-52-003
Right to petition, 00-05-52-006
STREETS; SIDEWALKS; BRIDGES
Acceptance of streets and bridges, 00-09-95-02
Alternate bonding procedure, 00-09-95-05
Appeal from administrative action, 00-09-95-04
Applicability of provisions, 00-09-95-01
Construction, inspection, acceptance, and bond release, 00-09-95-03
Cuts or Excavations for Installation of Utilities
Duty to replace pavement; liability, 00-09-95-61
Permit required; fee, 00-09-95-62
Plans and specifications, 00-09-95-60
Defects, 00-09-95-09
Minimum Standards
Bridges, 00-09-95-44
Drainage, 00-09-95-47
Driveways, 00-09-95-45
General requirements, 00-09-95-41
406
Minimum standards for street construction, 00-09-95-43
Minimum standards for street design, 00-09-95-42
Plans, 00-09-95-48
Street name signs, 00-09-95-46
Variance required, 00-09-95-40
Overhanging Canopies; Signs
Bond, 00-09-95-76
Construction, 00-09-95-77
Height, 00-09-95-78
Inspection, 00-09-95-79
Permit, 00-09-95-75
Penalty, 00-09-95-99
Permit required to construct or lay pavement, 00-09-95-07
Prohibited Conduct
Advertisements; notices, 00-09-95-25
Barricades, 00-09-95-22
Burning leaves and rubbish, 00-09-95-26
Encroachments, 00-09-95-24
Injury to new pavement, 00-09-95-20
Obstruction, 00-09-95-21
Private use, 00-09-95-23
Repairs, 00-09-95-08
Street lights (See STREET LIGHTS)
Supervision of maintenance and repair work, 00-09-95-06
TOWN ATTORNEY, 00-03-31-04
TOWN COUNCIL
Appointments, 00-03-30-05
Authority to revoke licenses, 00-03-30-06
Bond, 00-03-30-03
Duties; compensation; oath, 00-03-30-02
Meetings
All meetings open to public; exception, 00-03-30-21
Date, time, and place of regular meetings, 00-03-30-20
Emergency meetings, 00-03-30-23
Rules of procedure, 00-03-30-24
Special meetings, 00-03-30-22
President and Vice President, 00-03-30-04
Terms, 00-03-30-01
TOWN COUNCIL DISTRICTS, 00-03-30-07
TOWN COURT
Appeals, 00-3-37-13
Clerk of Court, 00-03-37-14
Compensation, 00-03-37-09
Election and term of Judge; bond, 00-03-37-03
Eligibility for election of Judge 00-03-37-02
Establishment, 00-03-37-01
Jurisdiction, 00-03-37-05
407
Location, 00-03-37-07
Not a Court of Record, 00-03-37-12
Powers and duties of Judge, 00-03-37-04
Prosecutor, 00-03-37-10
Service of process, 00-03-37-11
Special Judge, 00-03-37-08
Town Court seal, 00-03-37-06
TOWN FEES
Criminal history reports, 00-03-32-17
Park facilities fees, 00-03-32-18
Police Department copy fees, 00-03-32-19
Public records; general copy fees, 00-03-32-15
Vehicle accident reports, 00-03-32-16
TOWN MANAGER, 00-03-31-02
TOWN MARSHAL, 00-03-31-03
TOWN SEAL, 00-03-30-35
TRAFFIC RULES
Control Devices; Compliance
Control devices; erection and establishment, 00-07-70-20
Flashing signals, 00-07-70-22
Signal legend, 00-07-70-21
Turn markers, 00-07-70-23
Definitions; consistency with statutory law, 00-07-70-01
Directions by police officer or firefighter, 00-0-70-02
Loads; Loading
Load limits, 00-07-70-61
Loading regulated, 00-07-70-60
Operational Requirements
Damage to streets, 00-07-70-47
Driving on sidewalks, 00-07-70-37
Muffler required, 00-07-70-46
One-way streets, 00-07-70-41
Parades and processions, 00-07-70-48
Railroad crossings, 00-07-70-44
Restricted turns, 00-07-70-43
Speeding, 00-07-70-36
Stop streets, 00-07-70-35
Stopping before entering public way, 00-07-70-40
Stopping required, 00-07-70-38
U-turns, 00-07-70-42
Use of horns, 00-07-70-45
Yielding required, 00-07-70-39
Penalty, 00-07-70-99
408
WATER CONSERVATION
Application, 00-09-99-01
Definitions, 00-09-99-02
Declaration of need; notice, 00-09-99-04
Enforcement, 00-09-99-07
Mandatory water conservation; exemptions, 00-09-99-05
Violations, 00-09-99-06
Violations subject to admission and payment, 00-09-99-08
Voluntary conservation, 00-09-99-03
WAYFINDING DESTINATION SIGN POLICY
Appeals, 00-07-74-07
Districts, 00-07-74-04
Making a request, 00-07-74-06
Policy for destinations to be listed on town wayfinding signs, 00-07-74-01
Private businesses, 00-07-74-05
Public services, 00-07-74-03
Publicly owned and operated, 00-07-74-02
WEEDS AND VEGETATION
Collection of cost of abatement and lien, 00-09-96-03
Cutting or removal, 00-09-96-02
Unlawful growth, 00-09-96-01

ARTICLE 1 	 TITLE, PURPOSE AND EFFECT	5
00-15-153-01.1	Title	5
00-15-153-01.2	Authority	5
00-15-153-01.3	Purposes	5
00-15-153-01.4	Scope	5
00-15-153-01.5	Provisions Declared To Be Minimum Requirements	6
00-15-153-01.6	Severability	6
00-15-153-01.7	Exclusion	7
00-15-153-01.8	Saving Provision	7
00-15-153-01.9	Repeal of Prior Ordinance	7
00-15-153-01.10	Effective Date	7
ARTICLE 2	 DEFINITIONS	8
00-15-153-02.1	Definitions Generally	8
00-15-153-02.2	Rules for Generic Use Definitions	9
00-15-153-02.3	Definitions	9
ARTICLE 3	  LEGISLATIVE AND ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY	39
00-15-153-03.1	Summary of Authority	39
00-15-153-03.2	Town Council	39
00-15-153-03.3	Plan Commission	39
00-15-153-03.4	Board of Zoning Appeals	40
00-15-153-03.5	Zoning Administrator	41
00-15-153-03.6	Written Commitments	42
ARTICLE 4	 APPLICATIONS AND HEARINGS	44
00-15-153-04.1	Applications	44
00-15-153-04.2	Successive Applications	45
00-15-153-04.3	Notice	46
00-15-153-04.4	Review and Hearings	46
ARTICLE 5.	IMPROVEMENT LOCATION PERMITS, CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY AND INTERPRETATIONS	48
00-15-153-05.1	Improvement Location Permits	48
00-15-153-05.2	Certificates of Occupancy	49
00-15-153-05.3	Application for Certificates of Occupancy	49
00-15-153-05.4	Issuance of Certificate of Occupancy	50
00-15-153-05.5	Submission Requirements for Improvement Location Permits and Certificates of Occupancy	50
00-15-153-05.6	Administrative Interpretations	51
ARTICLE 6	DEVELOPMENT PLANS	54
00-15-153-06.1	Development Plans	54
00-15-153-06.2	Authority	54
00-15-153-06.3	Scope of Application	54
00-15-153-06.4	Parties Entitled to Approval of a Development Plan	54
00-15-153-06.5	Procedure for Review and Decision	55
00-15-153-06.6	Criteria for Review	57
00-15-153-06.7	Performance Guarantee	59
00-15-153-06.8	Waiver of Development Requirements	59
00-15-153-06.9	Amendments to Approved Plans	59
     00-15-153-06.10  Submission Requirements for Development Plan Review…………………………...62
ARTICLE 7	ZONING AMENDMENTS	61
00-15-153-07.1	Amendments to the Zoning Ordinance and Map	61
00-15-153-07.2	Authority	61
00-15-153-07.3	Parties Entitled to Initiate Amendments	61
00-15-153-07.4	Standards for Amendments	61
00-15-153-07.5	Procedure for Review and Decision	61
00-15-153-07.6	Written Commitments	63
00-15-153-07.7	Submission Requirements for Zoning Amendments	63
ARTICLE 8	VARIANCES	64
00-15-153-08.1	Variances	64
00-15-153-08.2	Parties Entitled to Seek Variance	64
00-15-153-08.3	Procedure for Review and Decision	64
00-15-153-08.4	Standards for Variances	65
00-15-153-08.5	Conditions on Variances	66
00-15-153-08.6	Effect of Grant of Variance	66
00-15-153-08.7	Submission Requirements for Variances	66
ARTICLE 9	APPEALS	68
00-15-153-09.1	Appeals	68
00-15-153-09.2	Authority	68
00-15-153-09.3	Parties Entitled to Appeal	68
00-15-153-09.4	Procedure for Review and Decision	68
00-15-153-09.5	Conditions and Limitations on Rights Granted by Appeal	69
ARTICLE 10	SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS	69
00-15-153-10.1	 Purpose	70
00-15-153-10.2 	Authority	70
00-15-153-10.3 	Parties Entitled to Seek Special Exceptions	70
00-15-153-10.4 	Procedure for Review and Decision	70
00-15-153-10.5 	Standards for Special Exceptions	71
00-15-153-10.6 	Supplementary Conditions and Safeguards	72
00-15-153-10.7 	No Presumption of Approval	72
00-15-153-10.8 	Limitations on Special Exceptions	72
00-15-153-10.9 	Effect of Approval	73
ARTICLE 11	PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS	74
00-15-153-11.1	Purpose.	74
00-15-153-11.2 	Authority to Vary Regulations.	74
00-15-153-11.3	Ownership.	74
00-15-153-11.4 	Minimum Project Area.	75
00-15-153-11.5 	Permitted Uses.	75
00-15-153-11.6 	Project Density.	pg. 75
00-15-153-11.7 	Development Standards	76
00-15-153-11.8 	Water and Sewer Availability.	77
00-15-153-11.9 	Public Streets	77
00-15-153-11.10 	Utilities	77
00-15-153-11.11 	Procedure for Approval	78
00-15-153-11.12	 Extensions and Abandonment	83
00-15-153-11.13	 Recording	83
00-15-153-11.14	 Limitation of Rezoning.	84
00-15-153-11.15	 Financial Assurance Requirements.	84
00-15-153-11.16	 Procedures for Platting Planned Unit Development.	84
00-15-153-11.17 	Minimum Submission Requirements for Planned Unit Developments 
	District	84
ARTICLE 12	DISTRICTS AND BOUNDARIES	89
00-15-153-12.1	Establishment of Districts.	89
00-15-153-12.2	Interpretation of District Sequence	89
00-15-153-12.3	Annexed Land	90
00-15-153-12.4	Official Zoning Map	90
00-15-153-12.5	Interpretation of District Boundaries	92
00-15-153-12.6	Special Districts and Regulations	92
00-15-153-12.7	Residential Districts and Regulations	95
00-15-153-12.8	Business Districts and Regulations	99
00-15-153-12.9	Industrial Districts and Regulations	103
ARTICLE 13	SPECIFIC USE REQUIREMENTS	108
00-15-153-13.1	Lots	108
00-15-153-13.2 	Permitted Obstruction in Required Yards	109
00-15-153-13.3	Accessory Uses and Structures	110
00-15-153-13.4	Swimming Pools and Hot Tubs	110
00-15-153-13.5	Fences and Walls	111
00-15-153-13.6 	Home Occupations	114
00-15-153-13.7	Bed and Breakfast Establishments	115
00-15-153-13.8	Residential Facility for the Mentally Ill	116
00-15-153-13.9	Manufactured Homes Standards	116
00-15-153-13.10	Satellite Dish Antenna	117
00-15-153-13.11	Amateur Radio Antenna	118
00-15-153-13.12	Wireless Communication Service Facilities	119
00-15-153-13.13  … House, Apartment, Garage and Yard Sales    … …………………………………...125
ARTICLE 14	OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING	123
00-15-153-14.1 	Off-Street Parking and Loading Required	123
00-15-153-14.2 	General Requirements	123
00-15-153-14.3	 Location of Off-Street Parking Facilities	124
00-15-153-14.4	 Specifications for Off-Street Parking Areas	125
00-15-153-14.5 	Computation of Required Spaces	126
00-15-153-14.6 	Stacking Requirements for Drive-Through Facilities	127
00-15-153-14.7 	Off-Street Parking Requirements	127
00-15-153-14.8 	Mobility-Impaired Accessible Parking	129
00-15-153-14.9 	Specific Requirements related to the Storage of Recreational Vehicles	130
00-15-153-14.10 	Off-Street Loading General Requirements	130
00-15-153-14.11 	Off-Street Loading Specific Requirements	132
ARTICLE 15	LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS	133
00-15-153-15.1	 Purpose.	133
00-15-153-15.2	Enforcement of Landscaping Requirements.	133
00-15-153-15.3 	Landscape Plan	133
00-15-153-15.4	 Selection, Installation and Maintenance of Plant Materials	134
00-15-153-15.5	Design Standards and Guidelines	134
00-15-153-15.6	Minimum Landscaping of Yards	140
00-15-153-15.7	Foundation Plantings	141
00-15-153-15.8	Parkway Landscaping	141
00-15-153-15.9	Parking Lot Landscaping	142
00-15-153-15.10	Landscape Buffers	144
00-15-153-15.11	Screening of Refuse Disposal Dumpsters and Loading Berths	147
00-15-153-15.12	 Changes to Approved Landscape Plans	148
ARTICLE 16	TEMPORARY USE REQUIREMENTS	149
00-15-153-16.1 	Temporary Use Permits	149
00-15-153-16.2 	General Regulations for Temporary Uses	149
00-15-153-16.3 	Temporary Uses Permitted	150
00-15-153-16.4 	Appeals	153
ARTICLE 17	PERFORMANCE STANDARDS	154
00-15-153-17.1	Application of Performance Standards	154
00-15-153-17.2	Compliance with Performance Standards	154
00-15-153-17.3	Enforcement	154
00-15-153-17.4	Toxic Matter	154
00-15-153-17.5	Fire and Explosion Hazards	154
00-15-153-17.6	Glare or Heat	155
00-15-153-17.7	Odor	155
00-15-153-17.8	Noise	155
00-15-153-17.9	Vibration	155
00-15-153-17.10	      Dust and Air Pollution……………………………………………………………   156
00-15-153-17.11	Nuisance	156
00-15-153-17.12	Electromagnetic Interference.	156
00-15-153-17.13	Water Pollution	156
00-15-153-17.14	Outdoor Storage	156
00-15-153-17.15	Outdoor Lighting	156
ARTICLE 18	SIGNS	161
00-15-153-18.1	Purpose	161
00-15-153-18.2	Signs Prohibited	161
00-15-153-18.3	Sign Permits	162
00-15-153-18.4 	Exemptions	164
00-15-153-18.5 	General Sign Standards	167
00-15-153-18.6	Temporary Signs	170
00-15-153-18.7	Regulation by District Classification	172
00-15-153-18.8	Localized Alternative Sign Regulations	174
00-15-153-18.9	Off-Premise Advertising Signs	175
00-15-153-18.10	Enforcement	176
ARTICLE 19	NONCONFORMING LOTS, USES, AND STRUCTURES	178
00-15-153-19.1 	Purpose	178
00-15-153-19.2 	General Standards	178
00-15-153-19.3 	Nonconforming Lots	179
00-15-153-19.4	Nonconforming Uses.	179
00-15-153-19.5	Nonconforming Structures.	180
00-15-153-19.6	Nonconforming Signs.	181
ARTICLE 20	ENFORCEMENT	183
00-15-153-20.1 	Authority	183
00-15-153-20.2 	Complaints Regarding Violations	183
00-15-153-20.3 	Persons Liable	183
00-15-153-20.4 	Right of Entry	183
00-15-153-20.5 	Procedures upon Discovery of Violations	183
00-15-153-20.6 	Civil Zoning Violations	186
00-15-153-20.7 	Revocation of Development Review Approvals	186
00-15-153-20.8 	Common Nuisance	188
00-15-153-20.9 	Appeals of Zoning Administrator Decisions	188
00-15-153-20.10	 Private Remedies Reserved	188

 
ARTICLE 1 		TITLE, PURPOSE AND EFFECT

00-15-153-01.1		Title
00-15-153-01.2  	Authority
00-15-153-01.3  	Purposes
00-15-153-01.4  	Scope
00-15-153-01.5  	Provisions Declared to be Minimum Requirements
00-15-153-01.6  	Severability
00-15-153-01.7  	Exclusion
00-15-153-01.8  	Saving Provision
00-15-153-01.9  	Repeal of Prior Ordinance
00-15-153-01.10	Effective Date
_____________________________________________

00-15-153-01.1	Title
This Ordinance shall be known and cited as the “Town of Cumberland - Zoning Code.” 

00-15-153-01.2	Authority 
This Ordinance is adopted pursuant to the authority contained in Indiana Code 36-7-4 et seq.    Whenever any provision of this Ordinance refers to or cites a section of the Indiana 
Code and that section is later amended or superseded, this Ordinance shall be deemed to refer to the amended section or the section that most closely corresponds to the superseded section.

00-15-153-01.3	Purposes
The purpose of this Ordinance is to regulate the use and development of land within the Town of Cumberland, Indiana.  The Ordinance is designed to accomplish the following:
1.	to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare;
2.	to guide the future growth and development of the Town of Cumberland in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan and Thoroughfare Plan;
3.	to secure adequate light, air, convenience of access, and safety from fire, flood, and other danger;
4.	to lessen or avoid congestion in public ways;
5.	to restrict development in areas prone to flooding;
6.	to protect the historic and architectural heritage of the community;
7.	to protect and conserve the value of land, building, and other improvements upon the land, and to minimize the conflicts among the uses of land and building;
8.	to guide public and private policy and action in order to assure adequate and efficient transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, drainage, and other public requirements and facilities;
9.	to avoid scattered and uncontrolled subdivision of land that would result in an excessive expenditure of public funds for the supply of community services; and
10.	to otherwise accomplish the purposes of Indiana Code 36-7-4 et seq.

00-15-153-01.4	Scope
This Ordinance shall apply to all real property located within the corporate boundaries of the Town of Cumberland, Indiana and other property in Hancock County for which the Town of Cumberland, Indiana has zoning jurisdiction. Except as expressly provided otherwise in this Ordinance, the following rules shall apply.

1.	All buildings erected hereafter, all uses of land or buildings established hereafter, all structural alteration or relocation of existing buildings occurring hereafter, and all enlargements of or additions to existing uses occurring hereafter shall be subject to the regulations of this Ordinance as applicable. 

2.	Where an improvement location permit has been issued prior to the effective date of this Ordinance and provided that construction is begun within one year of such effective date and diligently pursued to completion, said building or structure may be completed and occupied in accordance with the improvement location permit. Said building or structure shall be thereafter subject to the provisions of Article 19, (Nonconforming Lots, Uses and Structures).

3.	Existing uses, buildings, and structures that do not comply with the regulations of this Ordinance shall be subject to the regulations of Article 19, (Nonconforming Lots, Uses and Structures). 

00-15-153-01.5	Provisions Declared To Be Minimum Requirements
The provisions of this Ordinance are declared by the Town Council of the Town of Cumberland, Indiana to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, and general welfare.

1.	Where this Ordinance imposes conditions upon the use of land or buildings or upon the bulk of buildings or structures that are either more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any other provision of this Ordinance or of any other law, ordinance, resolution, rule, or regulation of any kind, the regulations which are more restrictive (or which impose higher standards or requirements) shall govern.

2.	This Ordinance is not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant or any other private agreement, provided that where the regulations of this Ordinance are more restrictive (or impose higher standards or requirements) than such easements, covenants or other private agreements, the requirements of this Ordinance shall govern.

3.	No building, structure or use which, at the time of the adoption of this Ordinance, was unlawfully existing shall become or be made lawful solely by reason of the adoption of this Ordinance. To the extent that, and in any manner that, said unlawful building, structure or use is in conflict with the requirements of this Ordinance, said building, structure or use remains unlawful hereunder.

00-15-153-01.6	Severability
It is the declared intention of the Town Council of the Town of Cumberland, Indiana, that the sections, subsections, paragraphs, clauses, words, or provisions of this Ordinance are severable.  

1.	If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any section, subsection, paragraph, clause, word, or provision of this Ordinance to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect any other section, subsection, paragraph, clause, word, or provision of this Ordinance not specifically included in said judgment.

2.	If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge invalid the application of any section, subsection, paragraph, clause, word, or provision of this Ordinance to a particular property, building or other structure, such judgment shall not affect the application of said section, subsection, paragraph, clause, word, or provision to any other property, building or structure not specifically included in said judgment.

00-15-153-01.7	Exclusion 
Nothing in this Ordinance or in any rules, regulations, or orders issued pursuant to this Ordinance shall be deemed to restrict or regulate or to authorize any unit of government, legislative body, commission, or board now or hereafter established, to restrict or regulate the exercise of the power of eminent domain by the State of Indiana or by any agency of the State of Indiana, or the use of property owned or occupied by the State of Indiana or any agency of the State of Indiana. 

00-15-153-01.8	Saving Provision 
Except as expressly provided otherwise in this Ordinance, the adoption of this Ordinance shall not:

1.	abate any action pending under, or by virtue of, any prior zoning ordinance;
2.	discontinue, abate, modify, or alter any penalty accruing or about to accrue under, or by virtue of , any prior zoning ordinance;
3.	affect the liability of any person, firm, or corporation under, or by virtue of, any prior zoning ordinance;
4.	waive any right of the Town of Cumberland under any chapter, section, or provision of any prior zoning ordinance; or
5.	vacate or annul any rights obtained by any person, firm, or corporation by lawful action of the Town of Cumberland under, or by virtue of, any prior zoning ordinance.

00-15-153-01.9	Repeal of Prior Ordinance 
After the effective date of this Ordinance, all provisions of the Zoning Ordinance and Subdivision Plan of Cumberland, Indiana adopted October 2, 1991 as amended, are hereby expressly repealed.  

00-15-153-01.10	Effective Date
This Ordinance was adopted and became effective on the ________ day of ________ 2002.

 
ARTICLE 2	 DEFINITIONS

00-15-153-02.1		Definitions Generally 
00-15-153-02.2  	Rules for Generic Use Definitions
00-15-153-02.3  	Definitions

00-15-153-02.1	Definitions Generally
The terms and words defined in this Article shall have the meanings herein ascribed to them.  

1	Undefined Terms  
Any words not defined in this Article shall be construed as defined in normal dictionary usage.

2	Tense and Form 
Words used or defined in one tense or form shall include other tenses and derivative forms. 

3	Number  
Words in the singular number shall include the plural number, and words in the plural number shall include the singular number.

4	Gender
The masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter.  The feminine gender shall include the masculine and neuter.  The neuter gender shall include the masculine and feminine.

5	Time 
The time within which any act required by this Ordinance is to be performed shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last day, unless the last day is a Saturday or Sunday or a holiday declared by the United States Congress or the Indiana General Assembly, in which event it shall also be excluded.  The word "day" shall mean a calendar day, unless otherwise indicated.

6	Person
The word "person" includes individuals, firms, partnerships, joint ventures, trusts, trustees, estates, corporations, associations, and any other similar entities.

7	Captions, Illustrations, and Tables 
In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of this ordinance and any caption, illustration, or table, the text shall control and no caption, illustration, or table shall be construed to limit the scope or intent of the text of this ordinance. 

 
00-15-153-02.2	Rules for Generic Use Definitions
1	Purpose of Generic Use Definitions  
Certain terms in this Article are defined to be inclusive of many uses in order to eliminate overly detailed listings of uses in the zoning districts established by this Ordinance.  These terms shall be referred to in this Ordinance as “generic” definitions.

2	Components of Generic Use Definitions 
A Generic definition has three (3) components:  (1) a brief listing of examples of uses intended to be included within the scope of the definition; (2) an identification (where appropriate) of certain uses that are not meant to be included by the term; and (3) a statement that for the purposes of each zoning district, any other uses specifically listed within the particular zoning district shall not be construed as falling within the generic definition.

3	Uses Not Listed or Not Within Scope of Generic Use Definitions 
A use that is not specifically listed in a zoning district or does not fall within a generic definition as defined in this Article, or as interpreted by the Zoning Administrator pursuant to Section 3.8, is prohibited.

00-15-153-02.3	Definitions 
For the purposes of this Ordinance, the following terms shall have the following meanings:

Abutting	 To have a common property line or district line.

Accessory Use Or 
Structure	A structure or use that (1) is incidental to and serves a principal building or a principal use; (2) is subordinate in height, area, extent, and purpose to the principal structure or principal use served; (3) contributes to the comfort, convenience, or necessity of the occupants, business, or industry of the principal structure or principal use served; and (4) is located on the same lot as the principal structure or principal use served, except as otherwise expressly authorized by the provision of this Ordinance.  Accessory parking facilities may be authorized to be located elsewhere.  An accessory structure is a detached structure.  Where authorized by this Ordinance, wireless communication service facilities may be considered an accessory use.

Adjacent 	Lying near or in the immediate vicinity.

Adjoining 	Touching or contiguous, as distinguished from lying near.

Advertising Device 	See Sign Advertising.

Agricultural Building 
Or Structure	Any building or structure existing or erected on land used principally for agricultural purposes, with the exception of dwelling units.
 

Agriculture	The use of land for agricultural purposes, including farming, dairy farming, pasturage, horticulture, floriculture, viticulture, and animal and poultry husbandry, and the necessary accessory uses for packing, treating or storing the produce; provided, however, that the operation of any such accessory use shall be secondary to that of the normal agricultural activities. Included are truck farming, poultry farming, bee-keeping, raising of fruit and berries, and the selling of agricultural products, but shall not include mechanized industrial animal farms. The land area (farm) necessary to constitute an agricultural use is five acres. Agriculture shall not include the commercial feed lots or other similar uses.

Alley 	A public or private way, at the rear or side of property, permanently reserved as a means of secondary vehicular access to abutting property. Frontage on said alley shall not be construed as satisfying the requirements of this Ordinance related to frontage on a dedicated street.

Alteration 	Any change in size, shape, character, occupancy, or use of a building or structure, including any act or process which changes one or more exterior architectural features of an historical improvement.

Animal Clinic	A use or structure intended or used primarily for the testing and treatment of animals on an emergency or outpatient basis. Animal clinic shall not include the boarding or training of animals and shall not provide outdoor runs or kennels.  “Animal Clinic” shall not include any use that is otherwise listed specifically in a zoning district as a permitted or special use.

Animal Hospital	A use or structure intended or used primarily for the testing and treatment of the disorders of animals, including the indoor boarding of animals for such purpose, but not the training or grooming of animals.  “Animal Hospital” shall not include any use that is otherwise listed specifically in a zoning district as a permitted or special use.

Antenna	An apparatus, free standing or attached to the exterior of a building, together with any supporting structure, for sending or receiving electromagnetic waves.  

Apartment Building 	A multiple family dwelling originally constructed to accommodate three or more apartments, designed with more than one dwelling unit connecting to a common corridor or entranceway, in contrast to single  or two family dwellings converted for multiple family use.
 

Arbor 	A lattice structure designed specifically for the purpose of supporting leafy vines, typically in an arc or corridor form. No structure shall be considered as an arbor for the purposes of this Ordinance unless the plant material typically associated with an arbor is in place.

Assisted Living	A facility, for adults in need of some protective oversight or assistance due to functional limitation, that provides a living arrangement integrating shelter, food and other supportive services to maintain a functional residential status.  “Assisted Living” shall not include any use that is otherwise listed specifically in a zoning district as a permitted or special use.

Auto Body Repair	A building, property, or activity the principal use of which is automotive body repair or auto detailing other than those types of repairs permitted at automobile filling stations and auto service repair establishments.  “Auto Body Repair” shall not include any use that is otherwise listed specifically in a zoning district as a permitted or special use.

Auto Service Repair	A building, property, or activity the principal use of which is the repair or replacement of parts, oils, coolants, lubricants, tires, and other similar services.  “Auto service repair” shall include, but is not limited to, muffler shops, oil change shops, car care centers, tire centers and other uses similar in nature and impact.  “Auto Service Repair” shall not include an auto body repair establishment, car washes, or any use that is otherwise listed specifically in a zoning district as a permitted or special use.

Auto Filling Station	A building, property, or structure the principal use of which dispenses or offers for retail sale of automotive fuels or oils and incidental convenience goods; having pumps and storage tanks thereon, and where battery, tire and other similar services, are rendered, but only if rendered wholly within lot lines.  “Auto Filling Station” shall not include an auto body repair establishment, car washes, or any use that is otherwise listed specifically in a zoning district as a permitted or special use.

Awning	A roof like cover, temporary in nature, which projects from the wall of a building and, in some cases, overhangs the public way.

Basement 	A story having part but not more than one half of its height below grade. A basement is counted as a story for the purpose of height regulation if subdivided and used for dwelling purposes other than by a janitor employed on the premises.
 

Block 	That property abutting on one side of a street between two nearest intersecting streets, railroad rights of way, or natural barriers; provided, however, that where a street curves so that any two chords thereof form an angle of one hundred twenty degrees or less measured on the lot side, such curve shall be construed as an intersecting street.

Boundary Line	A line on the Zoning Map designating the edge of a use district. Such a boundary line may be a boundary line for two use districts depending on the particular use districts located on each side of said line.

Buildable Area	The space remaining on a zoning lot after the minimum setback requirements of the Ordinance have been complied with.

Building	A structure having a roof, supported by columns or walls for shelter, support, enclosure or protection of persons, animals, chattels or movable property of any kind, and which is permanently affixed to the land.  For structures separated by division walls from the ground up and without openings, each portion of said building shall be deemed as a separate building unit.

Building, Accessory 	See Accessory Building or Use.

Building, Detached 	A building surrounded by an open space on the same lot.

Building Height 	See Height of Building

Building, Nonconforming 	See Nonconforming Building.

Building Permit 	A permit issued by the Town for the construction, erection, or alteration of a structure or building.

Building, Principal	A building in which the principal use of the zoning lot on which it is located is conducted.

Building Setback Line 	The line parallel to the street identifying the minimum distance between a street right of way or property line and the nearest building foundation of any structure on the lot.

Building, Unit Group 	One or more buildings located or grouped upon a lot and held under one ownership, such as universities, hospitals, institutions, churches and temples, industrial plants, shopping centers, townhouses, apartment buildings, and similar uses.

Bulk 	The term used to indicate the size and setbacks of buildings or structures and the location of same with respect to one another, and includes the following:
(1)	Size and height of buildings.
(2)	Location of exterior walls at all levels in relation to lot lines, streets, or other buildings.
(3)	Gross floor area of buildings in relation to lot area (floor area ratio).
(4)	All open spaces allocated to buildings.
(5)	Amount of lot area provided per dwelling unit.

Business Services 
Establishments	A building, property, or activity of which the principal use or purpose is the provision of business support oriented services directly to business and office establishments.  This term shall include, but will not be limited to, temporary employment services, computer, copier, and business machine repair and service shops, bulk mail services and similar establishments.  “Business Services Establishments” shall not include any use or other type of establishment that is otherwise listed specifically in a zoning district as a permitted or special use.

Capacity In Person 	The maximum number of persons that can avail themselves of the services (or goods) of an estab¬lish¬ment, at any one time, with reasonable comfort and safety.

Car Wash	A building, or portion thereof, where facilities that involve machine or hand-operated mechanical devices or equipment for washing, cleaning and detailing automobiles are provided. “Car Wash” shall not include any use that is otherwise listed specifically in a zoning district as a permitted or special use.

Carport	A roofed automobile shelter with the front clear, open, and unobstructed, and at least two other sides having seventy five percent of the vertical area remaining open and clear.

Cellar	A story having more than one half of its height below the curb level or below the highest level of the adjoining ground. A cellar shall not be counted as a story for the purpose of height measurement.

Child Care Center	Any place other than a family home in which persons receive child care services during any part of a day not exceeding thirteen (13) hours in any twenty-four (24) hour period and which is licensed pursuant to the Town and State requirements. 

College/University	A privately-owned or publicly-owned institution providing full-time or part-time education beyond the high school level, including any lodging rooms or housing for students or faculty.
 

Commercial Indoor 
Recreation	Public or private recreation facilities, tennis courts, ball courts, racquet courts or other courts, swimming pools, bowling alleys, skating rinks, or similar uses that are enclosed in buildings and are operated on a commercial or membership basis, and primarily for the use of persons who do not reside on the same lot as the recreational use.  “Commercial Indoor Recreation” shall include but not be limited to, health and fitness clubs or any accessory use, such as snack bars, pro shops, and locker rooms that are designed and intended primarily for the use of patrons of the principal recreational use. “Commercial Indoor Recreation” shall not include gun-firing ranges, cultural facilities, dance halls, community and recreation centers, or any use that is otherwise listed specifically in a zoning district as a permitted or special use.

Commercial Outdoor 
Recreation	Public or private swimming pools, tennis courts, ball fields, and ball courts that are not enclosed in buildings and are operated on a commercial or membership basis, and primarily for the use of persons who do not reside on the same lot as the recreational use.  “Commercial Outdoor Recreation” shall include any accessory uses, such as snack bars, pro shops, and clubhouses that are designed and intended primarily for the use of patrons of the principal recreational use.  “Commercial Outdoor Recreation” shall not include skateboarding courses, water slides, mechanical rides, go-cart or motorcycle courses, raceways, drag strips, overnight camping, or gun-firing ranges, or any use that is otherwise listed specifically in a zoning district as a permitted or special use.

Commercial Parking 
Lot	An area, either privately or publicly owned, that is reserved or used for parking or storage of automobiles, is generally available to the public, and involves payment of a charge for such parking or storage.

Commercial Shopping 
Center	A concentration of related commercial establishments with one or more major anchor tenants, shared parking, and unified architectural and site design. A shopping center normally has single or coordinated ownership-operations-management control and may include out parcels as well as architecturally connected units. “Commercial Shopping Center” shall not include any use that is otherwise listed specifically in a zoning district as a permitted or special use.
 

Commercial Storage 
Facility	A commercial land use consisting of the rental of fully enclosed interior building space for the storage of personal property (mini-warehouse).  An industrial warehouse shall not be considered as a commercial storage facility. “Commercial Storage Facility” shall not include any use that is otherwise listed specifically in a zoning district as a permitted or special use.

Common Open Space 	Land unoccupied by structures, buildings, streets, rights of way, and automobile parking lots and designed and intended for the use or enjoyment of residents of a planned unit development. Common open space may contain structures for recreational use. No area within thirty feet of any building or structure, except a structure used for recreational use shall be included as common open space.

Comprehensive Plan	Extensively developed and evolving plan, or any elements thereof, indicating the proposed future development of the Town as prepared through the Plan Commission.

Community Center	A place, structure, area or other facility used for providing programs, information and services generally open to the public and designed to accommodate and serve significant segments of the community.

Conforming Building Or 
Structure 	Any building or structure which complies with all the regulations of this comprehensive amendment, or of any amendment hereto, governing bulk for the zoning district in which such building or structure is located; or is designed or intended for a conforming use.

Convenience Mart
Fueling Station	A building, property or structure where the direct retail sale of food items such as cereals, grains, produce, baked goods, dairy products, canned and frozen prepared food products, beverages, cleaning supplies, pet food and supplies, household goods, books and magazines, and other sundry items as well as automotive fuels, oils and auto accessories are available to be purchased by the consumer. “Convenience Mart Fueling Station” may also include, as a secondary principal use, a carry-out restaurant. “Convenience Mart Fueling Station” shall not include auto body repair establishments, auto filling stations, auto service repair, car washes, or any use of other type that is otherwise listed specifically in a zoning district as a permitted or special use.
 

Convenience Retail	A building or portion thereof, generally of small size and character, where the direct retail sale of food items such as meats, cereals, grains, produce, baked goods, dairy products, canned and frozen prepared food products, beverages, cleaning supplies, pet food and supplies, pharmaceuticals, over-the-counter medicines, personal products, household goods,, books and magazines, plants, and other sundry items are available to be purchased by the consumer.  “Convenience Retail” shall include, but not be limited to, a grocery store, a food and drug store, meat or fish market, fruit and vegetable market, retail bakery, convenience store and other uses similar in nature and impact. “Convenience Retail” shall not include a supermarket, grocery-mart, or wholesale club store or any use of other type that is otherwise listed specifically in a zoning district as a permitted or special use.

Court 	An open unoccupied space other than a yard on the same lot with a building, which is totally or partially enclosed by a building or buildings and is completely open to the sky.

Curb Level	The level of the established curb in front of the building measured at the center of such front. Where a building faces on more than one street, the "curb level" shall be the average of the levels of the curbs at the center front of each street. Where no curb elevation has been established, the level of the centerline of the street shall be considered the "curb level." 

Density, Gross 	The numerical value obtained by dividing the total dwelling units in a development by the gross area of a tract of land upon which the dwelling units are located. Gross area shall be calculated by including into the total acreage of the development those areas to be utilized as private streets, open space or common areas, and those areas dedicated as streets, driveways and parking areas, as well as dedicated lands counted towards parkland donations or for drainage retention and/or detention purposes.

Density, Net 	The numerical value obtained by dividing the total dwelling units in a development by the net area of a tract of land upon which the dwelling units are located. Net area shall be calculated by reducing from the total acreage of the development those areas dedicated as streets, driveways and parking areas, as well as dedicated lands counted towards parkland donations or for drainage retention and/or detention purposes. Other open space or common areas shall be included in the calculation of net density. 
 

Development Review	Development review shall consist of site plan review, development plan review, zoning certificates, special exception permits, planned unit developments, variances, amendments to the ordinance or map, and appeals from administrative determinations as provided in this Ordinance.

Distribution Facility	A building, area, or portion thereof designed to accommodate large-scale trucking operations, including local, intrastate, or interstate motor carriers, for the transfer, loading and unloading of goods. “Distribution Facility,” may include facilities for the temporary storage of loads prior to shipment.	

District	A portion of the Town within which certain uniform regulations and requirements, or various combinations thereof, apply under the provisions of this Ordinance.

Dormitory	A building or portion thereof that contains living quarters for students, staff, or members of an accredited college, university, boarding school, theological school, hospital, religious order, or comparable organization; provided that said building is owned or managed by said organization and contains not more than one cooking and eating area.

Drive-Through Facility	An accessory facility, structure or portion thereof that is designed, intended or used for transacting business with customers located in motor vehicles.  “Drive-through Facility” shall not include an automobile filling station or any use that is otherwise listed specifically in a zoning district as a permitted or special use. 

Dwelling 	A building or portion thereof, but not including a house trailer or mobile home, designed or used exclusively for residential occupancy, including one family dwelling units, two family dwelling units, and multiple family dwelling units, but not including hotels, boarding or lodging houses.

Dwelling, Apartment	One or more rooms in an apartment building, or combination apartment and commercial building; arranged, intended or designed or occupied as a dwelling unit of a single family, an individual, or a group of individuals.

Dwelling, Attached 
(Group, Row, Or 
Townhouses) 	A dwelling containing two or more dwelling units and joined to other dwellings by a party wall or walls, originally constructed for said purposes.



Dwelling, Converted	Any building which was originally designed and constructed as a one , two , or three family dwelling, but which has been changed or altered by the construction of additional dwelling units to provide for more families than the original building.

Dwelling, Detached	A dwelling which is surrounded on all sides by open space.

Dwelling, 
Efficiency Unit 	A dwelling unit consisting of one principal room exclusive of a bathroom, kitchen, hallway, closet, or dining alcove directly off the principal room.

Dwelling, Ground 
Floor Area 	The first floor area in square feet measured from the outside of the exterior walls but excluding cellars, basements, open porches, breezeways, garages, and other infrequently used spaces.
Dwelling, 
Multiple Family 	A dwelling containing three or more dwelling units, originally constructed for said purpose; and not including converted dwellings.

Dwelling, 
Single Family	A dwelling containing accommodations for, and occupied by, only one family.

Dwelling, 
Two Family 	A building designed exclusively for occupancy by two families living independently of each other and generally having living units separated by a common wall.

Dwelling Unit	One or more rooms in a dwelling, apartment or hotel designed for occupancy by one family for living purposes and having its own permanently installed cooking and sanitary facilities.

Essential Services 	Services provided by public and private utilities necessary for the exercise of the principal use or service of the principal structure. These services include underground, surface, or overhead gas, electrical, steam, water, sanitary sewerage, storm water drainage, and communication systems and accessories thereto, such as poles, towers, wires, drains, vaults, culverts, laterals, sewers, pipes, catch basins, water storage tanks, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, pumps, lift stations, hydrants, etc., but not including buildings that do not need to be in the immediate area of the uses they service.

Excavation	Any act by which organic matter, earth, sand, gravel, rock, or any other similar material is cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced, relocated, or bulldozed and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom.

Existing Grade 	The vertical location of the existing ground surface prior to excavation or filling.

Exterior Architectural 
Feature 	The architectural style, design, general arrangement and components of all of the outer surfaces of an improvement, as distinguished from the interior surfaces enclosed by said exterior surfaces, including but not limited to, the kind of building materials and the type and style of all windows, doors, lights, signs and other fixtures are pertinent to such improvement.

Family 	An individual, or two or more persons related by blood, marriage, or adoption, or a group of not more than three persons, not related by blood, marriage, or adoption, living together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit, but not including sororities, fraternities, or other similar organizations.

Farm 	Land being used for agricultural purposes.

Farm Homestead 	The building located on a farm that is the residence of the farm owner or tenant operator.

Farm Owner 	The person operating a farm or holding Ordinance to the farm land.

Farm, Research, or 
Experimental 	An agricultural use, including buildings and land, for the purpose of obtaining new knowledge in agricultural processes and procedures.

Feed Lot, Commercial 	A structure or area in which twenty five or more units of livestock per acre are confined for a limited period of time prior to being shipped to market. One unit shall be equivalent to one head of cattle, seven hogs, nine sheep, and one hundred forty chickens.

FEMA 	Federal Emergency Management Agency

Fence 	Any construction of wood, metal, wire mesh, masonry, or other material erected for the purpose of assuring privacy, protection, or restraining animals.

Fence, Closed 	A fence, including gates, which conceals from view from adjoining properties, streets, or alleys, activities conducted behind it.

Fence, Open 	A fence, including gates, which has, for each one foot wide segment extending over the entire length and height of the fence, sixty percent of the surface area in open spaces which afford a direct view through the fence.



Fill 	Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock, or any other material is deposited, placed, replaced, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported, or moved by man to a new location and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom.

Financial Institution	A building, property or activity, the principal use or purpose of which is the provision of financial services, including, but not limited to, banks, credit unions, savings and loan institutions, and mortgage companies.  “Financial Institution” shall not include any use or other type of institution that is otherwise listed specifically in a zoning district as a permitted or special use.

Flood 	A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow, the unusual and rapid accumulation, or the runoff of surface waters from any source. 

Floodplain 	The channel proper and the areas adjoining any wetland, lake or watercourse which have been or hereafter may be covered by the regulatory flood.  The floodplain includes both the floodway and the floodway fringe districts. 

Floodway 	The deeper parts of the total floodplain, including the trench or channel and adjoining parts which are reasonably required for the downstream movement of floodwater or flood flows as distinguished from the shallower parts of the floodplain where the speed of flow or current is lessened by the friction of bottom materials and growth. In those flood hazard areas where no floodway has been defined, the entire floodplain or flood hazard area shall be assumed to be floodway.

Floodway Fringe 	Those portions of the floodplain outside the floodway and in which contains slow moving floodwater or the storage of floodwater.

Floor, Lowest	For use with Chapter 17 (Floodplain Regulations) the lowest floor shall be the lowest of the following:
A.	the top of the basement floor; or
B.	the top of the garage floor, if the garage is the lowest level of the building; or
C.	the top of the first floor or of buildings elevated on pilings or constructed on a crawl space with permanent openings; or
D.	the top of the floor level of any enclosure below an elevated building where the walls of the enclosure provide any resistance to the flow of flood waters unless:
1.	the walls are designed to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on the walls by allowing for the entry and exit of flood waters, by providing a minimum of two openings (in addition to doorways and windows) having a total area of one (1) square foot for every two (2) square feet of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.	the bottom of all such openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above grade; and
3.	such enclosed space shall be usable for the parking of vehicles and building access.

Floor Area	The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of the building measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the centerline of walls separating two buildings. The "floor area of a building" shall include the basement floor area when more than one half of the basement height is above the established curb level, off street parking space, elevator shafts and stairwells, and each floor space used for mechanical equipment (except equipment, open or enclosed, located on the roof), penthouses, attic space having headroom of seven feet, ten inches or more, interior balconies, mezzanines, enclosed porches, and floor area devoted to accessory uses.

	The "floor area" of structures devoted to bulk storage of materials including, but not limited to, grain elevators and petroleum storage tanks shall be determined on the basis of the height of such structures in feet; ten (10) feet in height shall be deemed to be equal to one floor (if a structure measures more than five (5) feet over such floor equivalent, it shall be construed to have an additional floor).

Floor Area (For 
Determining Off-Street
Parking and Loading)	The gross floor area taken from the outside walls of the building.

Floor Area, Livable 	Floor area, as measured to the inside of outside walls or the interior side of common partition walls, in a structure specifically designed to be used for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, bathrooms, toilet departments, closets, hallways, storage, or utility. Garages and the floor area of stories below grade shall not be considered as livable floor area, except where basement floor areas are finished to create livable space accessory to the primary livable floor areas.

Frontage 	All the property fronting on one side of a street between the two nearest intersecting streets, measured along the line of the street, or if dead ended, then all of the property abutting on one side between an intersecting street and the dead end of the street.

Garage, Private	An accessory building or an accessory portion of the principal building that is intended for and used for storing the privately owned motor vehicles, boats, and trailers of the family or families residing upon the premises, and in which no business, service or industry connected directly or indirectly with motor vehicles, boats and trailers is carried on, nor any other commercial activity not permitted as a home occupation.

Government Building	A building or structure owned and operated by a municipal, state, federal, or other taxing body institution in which governmental services are provided or conducted.

Grade 	The average level of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to the exterior walls of the building or structure.

Grade, Street 	Same as Curb Level.

Grading 	Excavation or fill or any combination thereof and shall include the conditions resulting from any excavation or fill.

Grocery, Retail	A building or portion thereof where the direct retail sale of food items such as meats, cereals, grains, produce, baked goods, dairy products, canned and frozen prepared food products, beverages, cleaning supplies, pet food and supplies, pharmaceuticals, over-the-counter medicines, personal products, household goods, books and magazines, plants, and other sundry and similar items are available to be purchased by the consumer.  “Grocery Retail” shall include, but not be limited to, grocery stores, supermarkets, meat or fish markets, fruit and vegetable markets, and other uses similar in nature and impact.  “Grocery Retail” shall not include any use of other type of establishment that is otherwise listed specifically in a zoning district as a permitted or special use.

Height of Building 	The vertical distance measured between the average finished grade at the sides around the building to the elevation of the highest point of coping of a flat roof or to the highest point of a mansard roof or to the average height between the eaves and ridge of a gable, gambrel, or hip roof.

Home Childcare 	A home occupation where a family home is used to receive not more than six children for care during any part of the day not exceeding twelve hours in any twenty-four hour period.  The maximum six children includes the family’s natural or adopted children under the age of eighteen and those children who are in the home under full-time care. 

Home Occupation	An accessory use of a dwelling unit that is used for a gainful activity involving the provision, assembly, processing or sale of goods and/or services that is incidental and secondary to the use of a dwelling unit, but excluding the provision of shelter or lodging. 

Hospital	An institution licensed by state law providing health services and medical or surgical care to patients and injured persons.

Hotel	A building in which lodging is offered with or without meals principally to transient guests and that provides a common entrance, lobby, halls and stairways.

Indoor Amusement and
Entertainment	A public or private facility that provides indoor entertainment including, but not limited to, video arcades, virtual reality games, and mechanical rides.

Kennel 	Any premises or portion thereof on which more than a combined total of three dogs, cats or other domestic animals or pets over six months of age are kept for the purpose of sale; or where any number of animals are cared for in return for remuneration.

Lesser Flood Water 
Runoff Channel 	That portion of a drainage system which lies upstream from the main channel and which is generally subject to intermittent flows. They are generally indicated on the U.S.G.S. Hydrological Atlas maps, and serve a tributary area of sixty acres or more. Drainage below the level of a lesser channel is generally by means of a storm sewer.

Limited Access Highway 	A traffic way, including expressways and toll roads for through traffic, in respect to which owners or occupants of abutting property or lands and other persons have no legal right of access to or from the same, except at such points only and in such manner as may be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction over such traffic way.

Loading And Unloading 
Space, Off Street 	An open hard surfaced area of land, other than a street or public way, the principal use of which is for the standing, loading, and unloading of motor trucks, tractors, and trailers. 

Lot 	A legally divided area or portion of land five acres or less in size under single ownership or control that is intended to be occupied by one use, group of uses, one main building, or structure. Within all districts, all lots shall be lots of record when less than five acres in size as required by and in conformance with the Town Subdivision and Plat Ordinance and the State Plat Act.

Lot Area 	The area of a horizontal plane bounded by the front, side, and rear lot lines.

Lot, Corner 	A lot located at the intersection of two streets or a lot bounded on two sides by a curving street and any two chords of which form an angle of one hundred twenty degrees or less measured on the lot side.

Lot Coverage 	The area of a zoning lot occupied by the principal building or buildings and accessory buildings.

Lot Depth 	The mean horizontal distance between front and rear lot lines measured within the lot boundaries.

Lot, Double Frontage 	A lot other than a corner lot having frontage on two or more streets. An alley shall not be considered a street.

Lot Frontage 	The horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured along the front lot line.

Lot, Interior 	A lot other than a corner or reversed corner lot.

Lot Line 	See Property Line.

Lot Line, Front 	The front property line of a zoning lot, abutting or within a street. On a corner lot, the front lot line shall be the lot line having the shortest dimension along the street right-of-way line. 

Lot Line, Interior 	A lot line common with another lot.

Lot Line, Rear 	The rear lot line is the lot line or lot lines most nearly parallel to and most remote from the front lot line.

Lot Line, Side 	Lot lines other than front or rear lot lines.

Lot of Record 	A lot which is a part of a subdivision, the plat of which has been legally recorded, or land which has a parcel index number within the Town at the time this Ordinance is adopted.

Lot, Reversed Corner 	A corner lot at right angles or approximately right angles to the general pattern of the area, the street side lot line of which is substantially a continuation of the front lot line to the rear. The rear of the corner lot is adjacent to the side of another lot, whether across an alley or not.

Lot Width 	The horizontal distance between side lot lines, or between the side lot line and the lot line adjoining a street of a corner lot, measured along the required minimum building setback line created by the front yard requirement of the district in which the lot is located.

Lot, Zoning 	A parcel of land, composed of one or more recorded lots or a parcel of land described by metes and bounds that is of sufficient size to meet the minimum requirements of this Ordinance concerning use, coverage, width, area, yards, or other requirements of this Ordinance and having frontage on an improved public street, and which is designated by its owner or developer as a tract of land to be used, developed, or built upon as a unit, under single ownership or control. A "zoning lot" may or may not coincide with the definition of a "lot of record".

Manufactured Home	A dwelling which is fabricated in one or more modules at a location other than the home site by assembly-line production techniques or by other construction methods unique to an off-site manufacturing process which bears a seal certifying it was built in compliance with the federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Law of 1974 (42 U.S.C. 5401 et seq.) and which was constructed after January 1, 1981, and exceeds nine hundred and fifty (950) square feet of main floor area exclusive of garages, carports, and open porches and exceeds twenty-three (23) feet in width and which is attached to a permanent foundation.

Manufacturing, Heavy	The assembly, fabrication or processing of goods and materials using processes that ordinarily have greater than minimal impacts on the environment, or that ordinarily have significant impacts on the use and enjoyment of adjacent property in terms of noise, smoke, fumes, visual impact, odors, glare, or health and safety hazards, or that otherwise do not constitute “light manufacturing.”  Heavy manufacturing generally includes processing and fabrication of large or bulky products made from extracted or raw materials or products involving flammable or explosive materials and processes that require extensive floor areas or land area for the fabrication and/or incidental storage of the products. “Heavy Manufacturing” shall not include any use that is otherwise listed specifically in a zoning district as a permitted or special use.

Manufacturing, Light	The assembly, fabrication or processing of goods and materials using processes that do not create noise, smoke, fumes, odors, glare or health or safety hazards outside of the building or lot where such assembly, fabrication, or processing takes place, where such processes are housed entirely within a building.  Light manufacturing generally includes processing and fabrication of finished products predominantly from previously prepared materials and includes processes that do not require extensive floor areas or land areas.  “Light Manufacturing” shall not include any use that is otherwise listed specifically in a zoning district as a permitted or special use.

Manufacturing Service 
Establishment	A building, property, or activity of which the principal use or purpose is the provision of industrial support-oriented services directly to manufacturing establishments.  This term shall include, but will not be limited to, tool shops, machine repair and service shops, blade sharpening shops and similar establishments.  “Manufacturing Services Establishments” shall not include any use or other type of establishment that is otherwise listed specifically in a zoning district as a permitted or special use.

Marquee or Canopy 	A roof-like structure of a permanent nature that projects from the wall of a building and, in some cases, overhangs the public way.

Media Broadcast 
Stations	A building, or portion thereof, used for the production and broadcast of media related programming.  This term shall include, but will not be limited to, radio and television broadcasting stations and other uses similar in nature and impact.

 
Media Print 
Establishments	A building or portion thereof used for the production and distribution of newspapers, periodicals, magazines, journals, or other print media forms. “Media Print Establishments” shall not include any use that is otherwise listed specifically in a zoning district as a permitted or special use.

Membership 
Organization	Lands, buildings, or portions of a premises owned or operated by an organization of professional, business, trade, civic, social, fraternal, political, or religious nature operating on a membership basis and engaged in promoting the interest of their members. “Membership Organizations” shall not include any use that is otherwise listed specifically in a zoning district as a permitted or special use.

Mobile Home 	A movable or portable unit, which is eight (8) feet or more in width and is thirty two (32) feet or more in length, and constructed to be towed on its own chassis (comprised of frame and wheels) from the place of construction to the location or subsequent locations, and designed to be used without a permanent foundation and connected to utilities for year round occupancy with or without a permanent foundation. The term shall include: 
(1)	units containing parts that can be folded, collapsed, or telescoped when being towed and that may be expanded to provide additional cubic capacity; 
(2)	units composed of two or more separately towable components designed to be joined into one integral unit capable of being separated again into the components for repeated towing; and
(3)	units designed to be used for residential, commercial, educational, or industrial purposes, excluding, however, recreational vehicles.

Mobile Home Park 	A parcel or tract of land developed with facilities for locating three or more "mobile homes", provided each mobile home contains a kitchen, flush toilet, shower or bath and that such mobile home park shall be for use only by non-transient dwellers remaining continuously for more than one year, whether or not a charge is made. It shall not include a sales lot in which motor vehicles or unoccupied trailers are parked for the purpose of inspection or sale.

Motel	An establishment consisting of a group of attached or detached living or sleeping accommodations for transient guests with bathrooms and closet space, located on a single zoning lot and where access to the sleeping accommodations is directly from the outside.  A "motel" furnishes customary hotel services such as maid service and laundering of linen, telephone and secretarial or desk service, and the use and upkeep of furniture.  “Motel” shall not include any use that is otherwise listed specifically in a zoning district as a permitted or special use.

Motor Home, 
Mini Motor Home Or 
Van Camper 	A self contained motor vehicle, not used commercially, designed, or permanently converted to provide living quarters for recreational, camping or travel use, with direct walk through access to the living quarters from the driver's seat.

Motor Vehicle 	Any passenger vehicle, truck, tractor, tractor trailer, trailer, or semi trailer propelled or drawn by mechanical power.

Motor Vehicle Sales	An establishment, the principal use or purpose of which is the sale of motorized vehicles, including but not limited to the sale of automobiles, trucks, recreation vehicles, snowmobiles, boats, and motorcycles.  “Motor Vehicle Sales” shall include accessory body and service repair areas. “Motor Vehicle Sales” shall not include any use otherwise listed specifically in a zoning district as a permitted or special use.

Municipal Buildings and
Facilities	A building or facility utilized in the operation of local government.  Municipal buildings and facilities shall include, but not be limited to, office space for the operation of administrative functions, police, fire, public works, emergency services, disaster relief, municipal parking lots, garages, and storage facilities, wastewater treatment facilities, municipal wells and enclosures and lift stations.

Nonconforming Building 
Or Structure 	A building or structure or portion thereof lawfully existing at the time of adoption of this Ordinance or amendment thereto, which:

(1) 	was designed, erected, or structurally altered for a use that does not conform to the use regulations of the district in which it is located; and
(2) 	does not comply with the bulk and other requirements of this Ordinance in the zoning district in which the building or structure is located.

Nonconforming Use 	A use which lawfully occupies a building or land at the time of adoption of this Ordinance, or amendment thereto, and which does not conform with the use regulations of the district in which it is located.

 
Office	A use or structure where business or professional activities are conducted and/or business or professional services are made available to the public, including but not limited to, tax preparation, accounting, architecture, legal services, medical clinics and laboratories, dental laboratories, psychological counseling, real estate and securities brokering, and professional consulting services, but not including drive-through service windows, the cutting and styling of hair, recreational facilities or amusements.  “Office” shall not include any use that is otherwise specifically in a zoning district as a permitted or special use.

Open Space	The portion of a lot, excluding the required front, side and rear yards which is not occupied by any principal building or accessory building (unless said buildings are used solely for recreational use.  The area should be unobstructed to the sky and not include paved areas.  Bodies of water as well as any area within officially designated floodplains may have fifty percent (50%) of their total acreage counted as open space.

Outdoor Amusement
and Entertainment	A public or private facility that provides outdoor entertainment including, but limited to, waterslides, water parks, go-cart tracks, miniature golf, batting cages and mechanical rides and games.

Owner 	Any individual, firm, or corporation having a possessory interest Ordinance to exclusive possession in land, buildings, or possessions.

Parcel 	A tract or plot of contiguous land held in one ownership.

Parking Lot	Public or private land intended for the use as a facility for parking motor vehicles. Parking may be with or without fee.

Parking Space, 
Automobile 	Space within a public or a private parking area for the storage of one passenger automobile or commercial vehicle under one and one-half tons capacity.

Party Wall 	A solid common wall which extends from its footing below grade to the underside of floor/roof and divides buildings.

Person 	Any person, firm, or corporation, public or private, the State of Indiana and its agencies or political subdivisions, and the United States of America, its agencies and instrumentality, and any agent, servant, officer, employee of any of the foregoing.

 
Personal Services 
Establishment	A building, property, or activity, the principal use or purpose of which is the provision of personal services directly to the consumer.  The term “Personal Services Establishment” shall include, but not be limited to, barber shops, beauty parlors, laundry and dry cleaning establishments, tailoring shops, massage therapy, shoe repair shops and the like.  “Personal Services Establishment” shall not include any use or other type of establishment that is otherwise listed specifically in a zoning district as a permitted or special use.

Places Of Worship	A church, synagogue, temple, meeting house, mosque, or other place of religious worship, including any accessory use of the structure, such as a school, child care center or dwelling.

Planned Unit 
Development	A development occurring on a parcel under single ownership or unified control which is developed as a unit and is mapped as a zoning district in and of itself. A planned unit development includes two or more principal buildings or uses, and is processed under Chapter 5 of this Ordinance. 

Planned Unit 
Development Plan 	A drawing or map made to a measuring scale upon which is presented a description and definition of the way in which the design requirements of the planned unit development are to be met and intended for recording with the County Recorder Office.

Porch 	A roofed-over structure projecting out from the wall or walls of a main structure and commonly open to the weather in part.

Property Line 	A line at the edge or boundary of a "zoning lot" or a line at the boundary of a lot of record.

Public Open Space 	A publicly owned area including, but not limited to, the following: parks, playgrounds, forest preserves, waterways, parkways, and streets.

Public Utility	Any person, firm, or corporation duly authorized to furnish, under regulation, to the public, cable television, electricity, gas, steam, telephone, telegraph, transportation, water, or sewerage systems.

Public Transportation 
Center	A building or portion thereof used as a terminus for rail or bus passenger service.  This term shall include, but not be limited to, train and bus stations and other uses similar in nature and impact. “Public Transportation Center” shall not include maintenance barns, rail yards, or any use that is otherwise listed specifically in a zoning district as a permitted or special use.

Public Utilities	A building or portion thereof used for providing, monitoring, and housing utilities for public consumption or use.  This term shall include, but not be limited to, operations providing water, sewer, gas, public works facilities, and other uses similar in nature and impact.  “Public Utilities” shall not include any use that is otherwise listed specifically in a zoning district as a permitted or special use.

Public Way 	Any sidewalk, street, alley, highway, or other public thoroughfare.

Railroad Right-of-Way  	A strip of land with tracks and auxiliary facilities for track operation, but not including freight depots or stations, loading platforms, train sheds, warehouses, car or locomotive shops or car yards.

Recreational Vehicle	A vehicle which is built on a single chassis; four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections; designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as temporary living quarters for recreational camping, travel, or seasonal use. 

Research & 
Development Industries	A building, property, or structure in which are located facilities for scientific research, investigation, testing, or experimentation, but not facilities for the manufacture or sale of products, except as incidental to the main purpose of the building, property or structure.  “Research and Development Industries” shall not include any use that is otherwise listed specifically in a zoning district as a permitted or special use.

Residential Facility
For Mentally Ill	A residential facility established under a program authorized by I. C. 12-22-1-1, which provides residential services for not more than eight (8) mentally ill individuals. 

Restaurant	An establishment whose principal business is the sale of edible, prepared food stuffs and/or beverages for consumption on or off the premises.  Restaurants are further defined by class as follows:

(1)	Class A restaurants are those restaurants whose design or principal method of operation includes any two of the following characteristics:
a.	Customers are provided with an individual menu, are served their food or beverages by wait staff, in non-disposable containers, at the same table at which such items are consumed.
b.	Cafeteria-type operations where foods or beverages are generally consumed within the restaurant building.  
c.	Carryout service is not the predominant type of service available.

(2)	Class B restaurants are those restaurants not falling within the classification of Class A and having characteristics of offering food service over a counter or through a drive-through facility, having a limited menu of items already prepared and held for service, or prepared, fried, or grilled quickly, or heated in a microwave oven. 

Retail Goods 
Establishment	A building, property, or activity, the principal use or purpose of which is, the sale of goods, products, or merchandise directly to the consumer.  “Retail Goods Establishment” shall include, but not be limited to, department stores, hardware stores, apparel stores, art galleries, and other uses similar in nature and impact.   “Retail Goods Establishment” shall not include any use or other type of establishment that is otherwise listed specifically in a zoning district as a permitted or special use.

Salvage Yard	An open area where discarded, used, or secondhand materials including motorized vehicles and buses are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled, or handled including, but not limited to, scrap iron, other metals, paper, rags, rubber tires, auto parts, and glass.  All related activities, including accessory activities shall be conducted on the zoning lot.  Salvage Yard includes wrecking yards, but does not include landfills, waste transfer stations, motor vehicle sales, auto service repair, auto filling station establishments and vehicle storage establishments, or uses carried on entirely within enclosed buildings. In addition, “Salvage Yard” shall not include any use that is otherwise listed specifically in a zoning district as a permitted or special use.

Self-Storage Facility	A building or portion thereof used for the storage of personal goods and/or materials.

Shopping Center	A group of commercial establishments planned, constructed and managed as a total entity with customer and employee parking provided on-site, provision for goods delivery separated from customer access, aesthetic considerations and protection from the elements.

Sign 	A name, identification, description, display, or illustration which is affixed to or painted or represented directly or indirectly upon a building, structure, or piece of land and which directs attention to an object, project, place, activity, person, institution, organization, or business.

 
Sign, Advertising 
(Billboard) 	A sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service, or entertainment conducted, sold, or offered elsewhere than upon the premises where such sign is located or to which it is affixed.

Sign, Flashing 	Any illuminated sign on which the artificial light is not maintained stationary and/or constant in intensity and color at all times when such sign is in use. For the purpose of this Ordinance, any revolving, illuminated sign shall be considered a "flashing sign".

Sign, Gross 
Surface Area Of 	The entire area within a single continuous perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of a sign and in no case passing through or between any adjacent elements of the same. However, such perimeter shall not include any structural or framing elements lying outside the limits of such sign with two visible surfaces, the gross surface area shall be the sum of all sides of the sign.

Sign, Identification 	A sign indicating the name and address of a building, or the name of an occupant thereof, and the practice of a permitted occupation therein.

Sign, Monument	Any sign, other than a pole sign placed upon or supported by the ground independently of any other structure.

Sign, Nonconforming	Any sign which was lawfully erected in compliance with applicable regulations of the Town of Cumberland and maintained prior to the effective date of this Ordinance, and which fails to conform to all applicable standards and restrictions of this Ordinance. 

Sign, Pole	A sign erected and maintained on a freestanding mast or pole and not attached to any building, or supported by one or more uprights or braces in or upon the ground, but not including monument signs.

Sign, Political 	A sign that advertises a candidate or issue to be voted upon on a definite election day.

 
Sign, Portable 	Any sign designed to be transported or movable, including but not limited to:

(1) 	Signs with wheels or with wheels removed;
(2) 	Signs with chassis or support constructed without wheels;
(3) 	Signs designed to be transported by trailer, wheels or boat.
(4) 	Signs converted to or constructed as an A- or T-frame sign.
(5) 	Signs painted, mounted or affixed on a motor vehicle or boat for advertising purposes, parked on or off public right-of-way or shore, and visible from the public right-of-way or shore, except signs identifying the related business when the motor vehicle or boat is being used in the normal day-to-day operations of that business.

Sign, Projecting 	A sign which is suspended from or affixed to any building wall or other structure and extends beyond the building wall or parts thereof or structure more than eighteen (18) inches.

Sign, Pylon	A freestanding sign anchored in the ground with its sign face extending upward from the ground surface and which has a height exceeding four (4) feet.

Sign, Public Service 	A sign or device displaying only the time, temperature, stock market quotations or civic messages.

Sign, Roof 	A sign that is mounted or painted on the roof of a building, or that is wholly dependent upon a building for support and that projects above the roof. 

Sign Structure or 
Support 	Any structure that supports or is capable of supporting a sign, including decorative cover.

Sign, Vehicular	Signs on parked vehicles or boats visible from the public right-of-way where the primary purpose of the vehicle or boat is to advertise a product or to direct people to a business or activity located on the same of nearby property.  For the purpose of this ordinance, vehicular signs shall not include business logos, identification or advertising on vehicles primarily used for other business purposes.

Sign, Wall 	A sign affixed, painted, posted, or placed on a building or structure.

Sign, Window 	A sign that is applied or attached to or suspended from the exterior or interior of a window or located within the interior of a structure so that its message can be read from the exterior of the structure.

 
Special Exception 	A specific use of land or buildings, or both, described and permitted in this Ordinance, subject to special provisions and which, because of its unique characteristics, cannot be properly classified as a permitted use.

Specialty Food Store	A building or portion thereof where the direct retail sale of prepared food items, either for immediate consumption on premises or to carry out, are available.  “Specialty Food” items include ice cream and frozen yogurt stores, bakery and bagel shops, coffee and tea shops, confectionery and candy shops, and other stores selling similar items. “Specialty Food Store” shall not include any use that is otherwise listed specifically in a zoning district as a permitted or special use.

Stable, Private 	A structure which is located on a lot on which a dwelling is located, and which is designed, arranged, used, or intended to be used for housing horses for the private use of occupants of the dwelling, but in no event for hire.

Stable, Public 	A building where horses are kept for remuneration, hire, or sale.

Storage, Outdoor 	The outdoor accumulation of vehicles, equipment, or products or materials for permanent or temporary holding.

Story 	That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there be no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it. Any portion of a story exceeding fourteen (14) feet in height shall be considered as an additional story for each fourteen (14) feet or fraction thereof.

Story, Above Grade 	Any story having its finished floor surface entirely above the surrounding grade, except that a basement shall be considered as a story above grade when the distance from the surrounding grade to the finished surface of the floor above the basement is more than five (5) feet for more than fifty percent (50%) of the total perimeter or more than ten (10) feet for more than twenty five percent (25%) of the total perimeter.

Story, Below Grade 	Any story that is not a story above grade, as defined in this Ordinance.

Story, Half 	That portion of a building under a gable, hip, or mansard roof, the wall plates of which, on at least two opposite exterior walls, are not more than four and one half (41/2) feet above the finished floor of such story. In the case of one family dwellings, two family dwellings, and multiple family dwellings, less than three stories in height, a half story in a sloping roof shall not be counted as a story for the purposes of this Ordinance. In the case of multiple family dwellings three (3) or more stories in height, a half story shall be counted as a story.

Street, Private 	Any street other than street, public.

Street, Public 	All property dedicated or intended for public highway, freeway, or roadway purposes or subject to public easements.

Street Frontage 	All of the property fronting on one side of a street between two intersecting streets, or in the cases of a dead end street, all of the property along one side of a street between an intersecting street and the end of such dead end streets.

Street Line 	The division line between private property and a dedicated street right of way, usually uninterrupted from corner to corner in any given block.

Structural Alterations 	Any change in the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams, or girders.

Structure 	Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires permanent location on the ground or attached to something having a permanent location on the ground.  (Among other things, structures include buildings, manufactured homes, mobile homes, walls, and billboards, as well as recreational vehicles installed on a site for more than one hundred eighty (180) days.)

Substantial Damage	Damage that equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.

Substantial Improvement	Any construction, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the start of construction for the improvement.   This term does not include improvements to correct existing violations or state or local health, sanitary, or safety code requirements or any alteration of a designated historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structures continued designation as a historic structure.

Swimming Pool 	Any structure, basin, chamber or tank containing an artificial body of water for swimming and wading, which uses or needs external buttresses or which is dug into the ground and having a depth of two (2) feet or more at any point.

Swimming Pool - Private 	Any swimming pool, located on private residential property, the use of which is intended for the owner and guests.

 
Swimming Pool - Public 	Any swimming pool which has been modified, improved, constructed or installed for the purpose of public swimming and includes pools for community use, pools at apartments having five or more living units, clubs, camps, schools, institutions, park and recreation areas, motels, hotels and other commercial establishments.

Tavern	An establishment serving alcoholic beverages in which the principle business is the sale of such beverages at retail for consumption on the premises and where food and snacks may be made available for consumption on the premises.

Tax Parcel 	Any lot, block, tract or other piece of real property, whether tax exempt or not, which has been assigned a permanent real estate index number, as shown on the record of the local real estate tax collector.

Temporary Sign 	An advertising device of a non-permanent type, used principally for commercial and promotional purposes.

Tenant Operator 	The person, including the family thereof, that is hired to operate a farm, normally not the owner of the farm.

Terrace, Open And Patio 	A level plane or platform which, for the purpose of this Ordinance, is located adjacent to one or more faces of the principal structure and which is constructed not more than eighteen (18) inches in height above the average level of the adjoining ground.

Through Lot 	A lot having its front and rear lot lines on adjacent and substantially parallel streets, otherwise known as a double frontage lot.

Trailer 	A vehicle without motive power used or adaptable for living, sleeping, business, or storage purposes, having no foundation other than wheels, blocks, skids, jacks, horses, or skirting, and has been recently or may be equipped with wheels or other devices for transporting the structure from place to place. A permanent foundation shall not change its character unless the entire structure is erected in accordance with the Town Building Code.

Trade Contractor	A building or portion thereof where building and construction trade services are provided to the public.  “Trade Contractor” shall include, but will not be limited to, contractor offices, including landscaper’s showrooms, construction supplies and storage including plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and building equipment, materials, sales, and other uses similar in nature and impact. “Trade Contractor” shall not include any use that is otherwise listed specifically in a zoning district as a permitted or special use.

Trellis 	A latticed structure designed specifically for the purpose of supporting leafy vines. No structure shall be considered as a trellis for the purposes of this Ordinance unless the plant material typically associated with a trellis is in place.

Unified Control 	The combination of two or more tracts of land wherein each owner has agreed that his tract of land shall be developed as part of a planned development and shall be subject to the control applicable to the planned development.

Uppermost Reach 	An open drainage channel intended to serve two or more lots and generally found on private property. It is the first level of common drainage system, and is generally used to convey periodic rainfall to a storm sewer.

Use	The purpose or activity for which the land, or building thereon, is designed, arranged or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained, and shall include any manner of performance of such activity with respect to the performance standards of this zoning ordinance.

Use, Principal 	The primary use of land or buildings as distinguished from a subordinate or accessory use.

Use, Secondary
Principal	A use, subordinate to the primary use, that is established on a lot or structure subsequent to or at the same time as the primary use but which is not accessory to the primary use.

Use, Temporary	A use that is established for a fixed period of time with the intent to discontinue such use upon the expiration of such time.  

Use, Lawful	The use of any structure or land that conforms with all of the regulations of this Ordinance or any amendment hereto and which conforms with all of the codes, ordinances, and other legal requirements, as existing at the time of the enactment of this Ordinance or any amendment thereto, for the structure or land that is being examined.

Valuation	For the purposes of this Ordinance, valuation of a building shall be the assessed valuation, or where no assessed valuation exists, its appraised valuation as converted to assessed valuation.

Vehicle Sales	An establishment, the principal use or purpose of which is the sale of motorized vehicles, including but not limited to the sale of automobiles, trucks, recreation vehicles, snowmobiles, boats, and motorcycles.  “Motor Vehicle Sales” shall include accessory body and service repair areas. “Motor Vehicle Sales” shall not include any use otherwise listed specifically in a zoning district as a permitted or special use.

Vehicle Towing 
Establishments	A building, property, or activity, the principal use of which is the retrieving or securing of distressed, disabled, abandoned, or illegally parked motorized vehicles. “Vehicle Towing Establishments” shall not include any use that is otherwise listed specifically in a zoning district as a permitted or special use.

Warehouse	A building or portion thereof used for the storage of goods and/or materials.  This term shall include, but not be limited to, industrial storage facilities, and other uses similar in nature and impact.

Wetlands 	Areas defined by the Army Corps of Engineers.

Wholesale Goods 
Establishment	A building, property, or activity, the use or purpose of which is the sale of goods, products, or merchandise, in bulk quantities to retailers or persons who will in turn sell the goods, products or merchandise directly to the consumer.  “Wholesale Goods Establishment” shall not include any use or other type of establishment that is otherwise listed specifically in a zoning district as a permitted or special use.

Wireless  Communication
Service Facility 	An unmanned facility consisting of antennae, equipment, and equipment storage shelter used for the reception, switching, and/or transmission of wireless telecommunications including, but not limited to paging, enhanced specialized mobile radio, personal communication services, cellular telephone, and similar technologies.  A wireless communication service facility may be either freestanding, guy anchored, roof mounted, or building mounted. 

Yard, Required 	An open space on the same zoning lot with a principal building or group of buildings which is unoccupied and unobstructed from its lowest level upward, except as otherwise permitted in this Ordinance, and which extends along a lot line and at right angles thereto to a depth or width specified in the yard regulations for the district in which the zoning lot is located.

Yard, Setback, Front 	A yard extending across the full width of the front of a zoning lot in accordance with the yard provisions of this Ordinance.

Yard, Setback, Rear	A yard extending across the full width of the rear of the lot between the side yards.

Yard, Setback, Side	A yard extending along a side lot line from the front yard to the rear yard.

Zoning Administrator	The Director of Building and Planning Services or his authorized agent.

Zoning Certificate	A written document from the Zoning Administrator approving a use, operation, or activity.

Zoning Map 	The map or maps incorporated into this Ordinance as a part hereof, designating zoning districts. 



 
ARTICLE 3	 	LEGISLATIVE AND ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY

00-15-153-03.1		Summary of Authority
00-15-153-03.2  	Town Council
00-15-153-03.3  	Plan Commission
00-15-153-03.4  	Board of Zoning Appeals
00-15-153-03.5  	Zoning Administrator
00-15-153-03.6  	Written Comments
_________________________________

00-15-153-03.1	Summary of Authority
The following decision making bodies and officials described in this Chapter shall, without limitation upon such authority as each may possess by Law, have the responsibility for implementing and administering this Ordinance.

00-15-153-03.2	Town Council
The Town Council hereby reserves to itself the following powers and duties in connection with the implementation of this Ordinance.

1.	To approve, reject, or amend the comprehensive plan or portions thereof as certified to it by the Plan Commission.
2.	To initiate amendments to the text of this Ordinance and to adopt, reject, or amend proposals to amend or partially repeal the text of this Ordinance, pursuant to the procedures and standards for amendments set forth in Article 7.
3.	To initiate amendments to the Cumberland Subdivision Control Ordinance and to adopt, reject, or amend proposals to amend or partially repeal the text of this Cumberland Subdivision Control Ordinance.
4.	To adopt, reject, or amend proposals to amend the zoning map pursuant to the procedures and standards for amendments set forth in Article 7.
5.	To adopt, reject, or amend a Planned Unit Development Ordinance pursuant to the procedures and standards for amendments set forth in Article 7.
6.	To take such other actions not delegated to other bodies, which may be desirable and necessary to implement the provisions of this Ordinance.

00-15-153-03.3	Plan Commission
The Cumberland Plan Commission, being previously established pursuant to Indiana Code 36-7-4-200 et seq. and Chapter 31, Article 3 of the Cumberland Town Code, is hereby re-established in accordance with Indiana Code 36-7-4-200 et seq., as amended. The Cumberland Plan Commission shall have the following powers and duties in connection with the implementation of this Ordinance.

1.	To initiate amendments to the text of this Ordinance and to the Zoning Map pursuant to the procedures and standards for amendments set forth in Article 7.
2.	To review all proposed amendments to this Ordinance and make recommendations to the Town Council pursuant to the procedures and standards for amendments set forth in Article 7.
3.	To review all Planned Unit Development Petitions and make recommendations to the Town Council for the adoption of said Petitions pursuant to the procedures and standards for Planned Unit Developments set forth in Article 11, and the procedures and standards for amendments, set forth in Article 7.
4.	To render final decision regarding secondary review of all Planned Unit Development Petitions pursuant to the procedures and standards for Planned Unit Development set forth in Article 11.
5.	To initiate amendments to the Cumberland Subdivision Control Ordinance and to adopt, reject, or amend proposals to amend or partially repeal the text of this Cumberland Subdivision Control Ordinance.
6.	To initiate amendments to the Cumberland Thoroughfare Plan and to adopt, reject, or amend proposals to amend or partially repeal the text of this Cumberland Thoroughfare Plan.
7.	To review, approve, approve with modifications, or deny all subdivision applications pursuant to the procedures and standards for subdivision approval set forth in the Subdivision Control Ordinance.
8.	To approve, approve with modifications, or deny all applications for waivers from the subdivision control pursuant to the procedures and standards for plat approval set forth in the Subdivision Control Ordinance.
9.	To approve, approve with modifications, or deny all Site Design Plans pursuant to the procedures and standards for Site Design Plans set forth in Article 6.
10.	To supervise and adopt rules for the administration of the affairs of the Plan Commission.
11.	Record and file all bonds and contracts and assume responsibility for the custody and preservation or all papers and documents of the Plan Commission.
12.	To prepare, publish, and distribute reports, ordinances, and other material related to the Plan Commission activities as authorized by law or this Ordinance.
13.	To invoke any legal, equitable, or special remedy available by law or this Ordinance for the enforcement of the provisions of this Ordinance or actions taken thereunder.
14.	To exercise all powers conferred on it by law, local ordinance or rule in the manner so prescribed.  This Section shall not be construed as a limitation on such powers.

00-15-153-03.4	Board of Zoning Appeals
The Cumberland Board of Zoning Appeals, having been previously established pursuant to Indiana Code 36-7-4-900 et seq. and Chapter 31, Article 3 of the Cumberland Town Code, is hereby re-established in accordance with Indiana Code 36-7-4-900 et seq., as amended. The Cumberland Board of Zoning Appeals shall have the following powers and duties in connection with the implementation of this Ordinance.

1.	To approve, approve with modifications, or deny any application for a variance from the development standards of this Ordinance pursuant to the procedures and standards for variances set forth in Article 8.
2.	To approve, approve with modifications, or deny any application for a use variance pursuant to the procedures and standards for variances set forth in Article 8.
3.	To grant, grant with modifications, or deny any application for a special exception pursuant to the procedures and standards special exceptions set forth in Article 10.
4.	To hear and decide an appeal from any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the Zoning Administrator, hearing officer, or staff in the administration or enforcement of this Ordinance pursuant to procedures and standards for appeals of administrative decisions set forth in Article 20.
5.	To hear and decide an appeal from any order, requirement, decision or determination made by any administrative board, other than the Plan Commission, in the administration or enforcement of this Ordinance pursuant to procedures and standards for appeals of administrative decisions set forth in Article 20.
6.	To exercise all powers conferred on it by law, local ordinance or rule in the manner so prescribed, including to invoke any legal, equitable, or special remedy available by law or this Ordinance for the enforcement of the provisions of this Ordinance or actions taken thereunder. This Section shall not be construed as a limitation on the Board’s powers. 
7.	To adopt rules and procedures for the administration of the Board’s duties provided such rules do not conflict with this Ordinance.

00-15-153-03.5	Zoning Administrator
It is hereby established that the Director of Building and Planning Services shall serve as the Zoning Administrator for the purpose of administering and enforcing this Ordinance.  The Director of Building and Planning Services reserves the right to appoint a designee to serve as the Zoning Administrator as necessity demands.  Any designee shall be considered the Zoning Administrator and retain his full power and authority for the purpose of administering and enforcing this Ordinance.  The Zoning Administrator shall have the following powers and duties in connection with the implementation of this Ordinance.

1.	To interpret provisions of this Ordinance pursuant to the procedures and standards for Interpretation set forth in Article 5.
2.	To ensure compliance with or prevent violation of provisions of this Ordinance pursuant to the procedures and standards for Enforcement set forth in Article 20.
3.	To issue all necessary permits and certificates, and maintain records thereof in the name of the Plan Commission and Board of Zoning Appeals pursuant to the procedures and standards for zoning certificates set forth in Article 5.
4.	To provide assistance to the Plan Commission and Board of Zoning Appeals.
5.	To maintain permanent and current records relative to the administration of this Ordinance, including but not limited to, all maps, amendments, Improvement Location Permits, Certificates of Occupancy, Variances, and Special exceptions, Appeals and disapproved applications, and record of hearings.
6.	To review all development permit applications to determine that the application meets the requirements of this Ordinance and to determine that all necessary permits or prior approvals have been obtained from other government agencies where required.
7.	To conduct all research and collect and analyze all data pertaining to the growth and development of the Town and its environs, as delegated by the Town Council, Plan Commission, Board of Zoning Appeals, or other bodies which may be desirable and necessary to implement the provisions of this Ordinance.
8.	To coordinate and conduct all development activities and programs for the Town and its environs, as delegated by the Town Council, Plan Commission, Board of Zoning Appeals, or other bodies which may be desirable and necessary to implement the provisions of this Ordinance.
9.	To obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data in order to administer this Ordinance.
10.	To notify all jurisdictions and other bodies relative to the alteration of watercourses.
11.	To make interpretations as to the location of special flood hazards.
12.	To take such other actions as delegated by the Town Council, Plan Commission, Board of Zoning Appeals, or other bodies that may be desirable and necessary to implement the provisions of this Ordinance.

 
00-15-153-03.6	Written Commitments
The Cumberland Plan Commission, or Board of Zoning Appeals may, when authorized by this Ordinance or state statute, require or permit the owner(s) of a parcel of property to make written commitments concerning the use or development of that property in connection with a Map Amendment, Plat a Planned Unit Development District, a Development Plan, a Variance, or Special Exception. 

1.	Form
The commitments shall be reduced to writing in recordable form and signed by the owners(s) of the real estate.  The commitments required or made under this Ordinance shall substantially be in the form set forth in Appendix C.  The Zoning Administrator shall approve the form of the commitments prior to their submission.

2.	Application
The commitments shall run with the land, and be binding on the Owner of the subject real estate, subsequent owners of the subject real estate and any person or entity acquiring an interest therein.  An unrecorded commitment is binding on the owner(s) of the subject real estate. An unrecorded commitment is binding on subsequent owners of the subject real estate and any person or entity acquiring an interest therein only if the subsequent owners of the subject real estate and any person or entity acquiring an interest therein has actual notice of the commitment.

3.	Recordation
The petitioner shall be responsible for recording the written commitments within thirty (30) days of the Plan Commission or BZA’s decision.  However, the commitments shall authorize the Zoning Administrator to record the commitments in the event the petitioner does not do so within the above required timeframe.  Written commitments shall be recorded in the Office of the Recorder of Hancock County, Indiana and shall take effect upon approval of the particular development review approval.

4.	Modification and Termination
The commitments may be modified or terminated only with the approval of the owner or owners of the real estate subject to the commitments, and the Cumberland Plan Commission or the Cumberland Board or Zoning Appeals, as the case may be, after a public hearing.  Commitments made or required in connection with a Map Amendment or a Planned Unit Development shall terminate if the zone map applicable to the parcel is changed.

5.	Enforcement
A.	Commitments made or required in connection with this Ordinance may be enforced in accordance with IC 36-7-4-1015.  In addition, any owner or owners of the real estate subject to the COMMITMENTS; and any owner or owners of the real estate who received notice on the original zoning amendment or planned unit development, including subsequent purchasers of the real estate owned by such persons for so long as any such person or persons is an owner of record of the real estate which was originally subject to a notice requirement.

B.	In the event it becomes necessary to enforce a commitment or commitments made or required in connection with this Ordinance in court, and the owner of the real estate is found to be in violation of a commitment or commitments, the owner shall pay all reasonable costs in connection with the enforcement of the commitment or commitments, including attorney fees. 




 
ARTICLE 4	 APPLICATIONS AND HEARINGS

00-15-153-04.1		Applications 
00-15-153-04.2  	Successive Applications
00-15-153-04.3  	Notice
00-15-153-04.4  	Review and Hearings
___________________________________________

00-15-153-04.1	Applications 
All applications or petitions for development review, which shall include site plan review, zoning certificates, special exception permits, planned unit developments, variances, amendments to the zoning ordinance text or zoning map, administrative interpretations, and appeals from administrative determinations, shall be filed in conformance with the regulations set forth below.

1.	Place of Filing 
Applications and petitions shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator, through the Town Clerk-Treasurer’s Office, or with such other Town body or official as the Zoning Administrator may designate.

2.	Form, Number, and Scale
Applications and petitions shall be on forms provided by the Zoning Administrator and shall be filed in such number and manner as the Zoning Administrator may designate. All plans filed as part of any application or petition shall be at a scale sufficient to permit a clear and precise understanding of its contents and of the proposal being made. All plans filed shall be 8-1/2 inches by 11 inches or be folded to a size of 8-1/2 inches by 11 inches.

3.	Minimum Requirements
Applications or petitions submitted pursuant to this Ordinance shall contain such minimum data and information as required by the Zoning Administrator. Applications that are incomplete shall not be processed by the Zoning Administrator and shall be returned to the applicant at the applicant’s expense.

4.	Filing Deadlines
A.	An application or petition requiring a public hearing will not be scheduled for such hearing unless filed in a complete manner, at least thirty (30) days and no more than ninety (90) days prior to the requested public hearing date. An application so filed will be scheduled for the date requested, or the first available date thereafter, on a first-filed-first-scheduled basis. All public hearings to consider applications or petitions filed pursuant to this Ordinance shall be, unless otherwise provided by order of the relevant body, scheduled at the same time as the regular meetings of such body.

B.	An application or petition that does not require a public hearing also shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator in a complete manner. The Zoning Administrator shall process an application or petition so filed on a first-filed-first-processed basis.

C.	Whenever supplemental data in connection with a previously filed application or petition is required by the Town or offered by the applicant, it shall be submitted at least ten (10) days prior to the date on which the application or petition is to be considered or acted upon. The filing of such data shall, in the discretion of the Zoning Administrator, be cause to delay a requested or scheduled hearing or decision date.

5.	Fees 
Every application or petition filed pursuant to this Ordinance shall be subject to an application and filing fee as established, from time to time, by the Town Council. The owner of the property subject to the application or petition and, if different, the applicant or petitioner, shall be jointly and severally liable for the payment of the fee. The failure to pay any such fee when due shall be grounds for refusing to process an application or petition and for denying or revoking any permit or approval sought or issued with respect to the land or development to which the unpaid fee or required deposit relates.

6.	Special Requests
The Zoning Administrator or any official, board or, commission before which an application or petition is pending may require an applicant or petitioner to submit additional data, information, or documentation if necessary or appropriate to achieve a full and proper consideration and disposition of the particular application or petition.
	
00-15-153-04.2	Successive Applications
1.	Second Applications without New Grounds Barred 
When an application or petition filed pursuant to this Ordinance has been denied on its merits, a second application or petition seeking essentially the same relief shall not be permitted.  However, if in the opinion of the Zoning Administrator there is substantial new evidence available, or a mistake of law or fact occurred that significantly affected the prior decision of denial, such second application or petition may be allowed.

2.	New Grounds to Be Stated 
Any such second application shall include a detailed statement of the grounds justifying its consideration.

3.	Summary Denial With or Without Hearing
The Zoning Administrator may summarily deny, without hearing, any such second application or petition on a finding that no grounds warrant a new hearing.  In any case where such application or petition is set for hearing, the applicant shall be required to establish grounds warranting reconsideration of the merits of its application prior to being allowed to offer any evidence on the merits. Unless such grounds are established, the application may be summarily dismissed for such failure.

4.	Exception
Whether or not new grounds are stated, any second application or petition filed more than one year after the denial of a prior application shall be heard on the merits as though no prior application had been filed. The applicant or petitioner shall, however, be required to place in the record all evidence available concerning changes of conditions or new facts that have developed since the denial of the first application or petition. In the absence of such evidence, it shall be presumed that no new facts exist to support the new application or petition that did not exist at the time of the denial of the first application or petition. 	
00-15-153-04.3	Notice
1.	Notice of Public Hearing 
For any review procedure that requires a public hearing, the Town shall arrange for the publication of notice in conformance with Indiana Code 5-3-1 et. seq., and the rules of the particular municipal body, board, or commission.  The applicant or petitioner shall bear the expenses for the advertising costs.

2.	Notice of Public Hearing through Posted Sign
In addition to the notice required by Indiana Code 5-3-1 et. seq., the Zoning Administrator shall cause a sign to be posted on the affected property not less than ten (10) days prior to the hearing.  The sign shall state the date that a hearing will be held, including its time and place and a description of the matter to be heard.

3.	Notice of Interested Parties.
A.	In addition to the other notice provided, the applicant or petitioner shall provide notice to interested parties at least ten (10) days before the date set for the hearing. Such interested parties shall receive written notice by certified mail, at the applicant’s expense. Proof of such notice by Affidavit shall be required. 

B.	In accordance with its rules, the Plan Commission or the Board of Zoning Appeals as the case may be, shall determine who are interested parties. Notwithstanding the forgoing, if the subject matter of the proposal abuts or includes a county line or a county line street, road, or body of water, then all owners of real property to a depth of two (2) ownerships or one-eighth (1/8) of a mile into the adjacent county, whichever is less, are interested parties who must receive notice.
	
00-15-153-04.4	Review and Hearings
1.	Staff Review 
The Zoning Administrator shall refer every application or petition for which this Ordinance requires a public hearing to the appropriate Town official, departments and committees. Each official, department and committee to which an application or petition is referred shall review such application and submit its comments thereon to the Zoning Administrator for transmittal to the specific official or body hearing the application or petition. Such comments shall, whenever possible, be submitted at least ten (10) days prior to the date set for the hearing and shall be made available to any person on request prior to the hearing.

2.	Public Hearing 
The provisions of this Ordinance and the rules promulgated by the body or official conducting the hearing shall govern all other matters pertaining to the conduct of the particular hearing.

 
3.	Examination and Copying of Application and Other Documents
At any time following the giving of notice as required in Section 4-3, and upon reasonable request, any person may examine the application or petition and, subject to the exceptions set forth in the Freedom of Information Act, all other documents on file pertaining to the application. In addition, any person shall be entitled to copies of such application and documents upon reasonable request and payment of a fee as established, from time to time, by the Zoning Administrator to cover the cost of such copies.

 
ARTICLE 5.	IMPROVEMENT LOCATION PERMITS, CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY AND INTERPRETATIONS

00-15-153-05.1		Improvement Location Permits 
00-15-153-05.2  	Certificates of Occupancy
00-15-153-05.3 	Application for Certificates of Occupancy
00-15-153-05.4  	Issuance of Certificates of Occupancy
00-15-153-05.5  	Submission Requirements for Improvement Location Permits and Certificates of Occupancy
00-15-153-05.6		Administrative Interpretations
________________________________________________________________

00-15-153-05.1	Improvement Location Permits
No building or other structure shall be erected, moved, added to, or structurally altered; nor shall any building, structure, or land be established or changed in use without an Improvement Location Permit issued by the Zoning Administrator. An improvement location permit shall be issued only in conformity with the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance, or upon written order from the Board of Zoning Appeals deciding an appeal, special exception, or variance.

1.	Application for Improvement Location Permit
Applications for an Improvement Location Permit shall be filed in accordance with the requirements of Article 4 (Applications & Hearings) of this Ordinance.  

A.	An application for an Improvement Location Permit shall be signed by the owner or agent attesting to the truth and accuracy of all information supplied in the application.

B.	Each application shall clearly state that the permit shall expire and may be revoked if work has not begun within one (1) year, or has not been completed within two (2) years.

C.	At a minimum, an application for an Improvement Location Permit shall contain the information, plans, and data set forth in Section 4-5-5 of this Article.

D.	An application for an Improvement Location Permit for an industrial use shall be accompanied by a “Certificate of Compliance” subscribed by a registered professional engineer or architect, certifying that the intended use will satisfy the requirements of this Article, the development standards within the particular zoning district, and the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance. 

2.	Action by the Zoning Administrator	
Within fifteen (15) days after the receipt of a complete applica¬tion, or within such later time as the applicant may agree, the Zoning Administrator shall either approve or disapprove the application. One set of the plans shall be returned to applicant by the Zoning Administrator and be marked either “approved” or “disapproved”, and the Zoning Administrator’s signature on the copy should attest.  If the application is approved, the Zoning Administrator shall issue a placard to the applicant.  The placard is to be posted in a conspicuous place on the property in question and will attest to the fact that the plans for construction or alteration are in compliance with the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance. If disapproved, the Zoning Administrator shall notify the applicant indicat¬ing the reasons in writing for the disapproval within five (5) days of his decision.

3.	Expiration of the Improvement Location Permit
The work or use authorized by any improvement location permit must be commenced within twelve (12) months of the date of issuance of such permit; otherwise the same shall expire and become void. All work so authorized shall be completed within twenty four (24) months from the issuance of the permit, except provided that for good cause shown the Zoning Administrator may extend the work completion time.

4.	Failure to Obtain an Improvement Location Permit	
The failure to obtain an improvement location permit as required by this Article shall be deemed a violation of the Zoning Ordi¬nance and subject to the provisions of Article 20 (Enforcement).

5.	Limitation on Improvement Location Permits	
Improvement location permits, issued on the basis of plans and applica¬tions approved by the Zoning Administrator, authorize only the use or arrangement set forth in such approved application or amendments thereto, and no other use, ar¬rangements, or construction.  Any use, arrangement, or construction contrary to that authorized shall be deemed a violation of this ordinance and subject to the provisions of Article 20, (Enforcement).

6.	Records of Improvement Location Permits
Every improvement location permit issued pursuant to this Article shall be kept on file in the Office of the Director of Building and Planning Services and shall be available as a public record.

00-15-153-05.2	Certificates of Occupancy
It shall be unlawful to use, occupy, or permit the use or occupancy of any building or premises, or both, or part thereof hereafter created, erected, changed, converted, or wholly or partly altered or enlarged in its use or structure until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued by the Zoning Administrator. The certificate of occupancy shall state that the proposed use of the building and/or land conforms to the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance and that the Zoning Administrator has inspected the property and attested to that fact.

1.	This Section is not intended to prevent a single family homeowner undergoing a single room addition to move or store personal property items in the addition prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy, provided however, the addition is not used or occupied as a livable space until the certificate of occupancy is issued.

00-15-153-05.3	Application for Certificates of Occupancy
Applications for a Certificate of Occupancy shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator at least ten (10) days prior to completion of the improvements to any building or premises.  The application shall be in accordance with the requirements of Article 4 (Applications & Hearings) of this Ordinance.  

 
1.	Change in Use
No change shall be made in the use of land or the use of any building or part thereof, now or hereafter erected, reconstructed, or structurally altered, without a Certificate of Occupancy having been issued by the Zoning Administrator. Any such change shall be made in conformity with the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance.

2.	Change of Occupancy	
No persons, firms, or corporations shall move into or occupy any nonresidential structure or land, new or existing, without first obtaining a Certificate of Occupancy from the Zoning Administrator.

00-15-153-05.4	Issuance of Certificate of Occupancy
Certificates of Occupancy may be issued by the Zoning Administrator within ten (10) days after notification by the applicant that the lawful erection, reconstruction, or structural alteration of such building or other improvement of the land shall have been completed and the finding of the Zoning Administrator that such erection, reconstruction, or structural alteration is complete.

1.	Temporary Certificate of Occupancy
A Temporary Certificate of Occupancy may be issued by the Zoning Administrator for a period of six (6) months during alterations or partial occupancy of a building or structure pending its completion.  A temporary Certificate of Occupancy may be renewed by the Zoning Administrator for a period not to exceed six (6) months, however no Temporary Certificate of Occupancy shall be valid longer than twelve (12) months.

2.	Limitation on Improvement Location Permits	
Certificate of Occupancy permits issued on the basis of plans and applica¬tions approved by the Zoning Administrator authorize only the use or arrangement set forth in such approved application or amendments thereto, and no other use, ar¬rangements, or construction.  Any use, arrangement, or construction contrary to that authorized shall be deemed a violation of this ordinance and subject to the provisions of Article 20 (Enforcement).

3.	Records of Certificate of Occupancy
Every Certificate of Occupancy issued pursuant to this Section shall be kept on file in the Office of the Director of Building and Planning Services and shall be available as a public record.

4.	Failure to Obtain an Improvement Location Permit	
Failure to obtain an improvement location permit shall be a violation of the Zoning Ordi-nance and subject to the provisions of Article 20 (Enforcement).

00-15-153-05.5	Submission Requirements for Improvement Location Permits and Certificates of Occupancy
In addition to the requirements of Article 4 (Applications & Hearings), applications for Improvement Location Permits and Certificates of Occupancy shall include the following material. 

1.	A completed application containing the applicant’s name, address, and proof of interest in the subject property, and the owner’s name and address, if different than the applicant, and the owner’s signed consent to the filing of the application.

2.	The street address and legal description of the property subject to the application. 

3.	The zoning classification and present land use of the subject property.

4.	 Three (3) copies of detailed site plan prepared by a professional engineer, architect or surveyor under and bearing a professional seal and depicting the following elements:

A.	General vicinity map;
B.	Property boundary lines including any easements and all adjacent streets;
C.	Elevation marks and contours;
D.	Traffic and circulation plan and a pedestrian circulation plan;
F.	Parking and loading plan, including refuse and trash storage areas;
G.	Landscaping plan, indicating plant types, numbers, location, size, and method of installation and an open space plan;
H.	Grading and surface drainage plan in accordance with the Subdivision Control Ordinance;
I.	Utilities plan (existing and proposed) showing location and size, signage plan showing location and size, and lighting plan showing location and size;
J.	Proposed improvements showing location, dimensions and configuration of existing and proposed buildings, structures, and uses;
K.	Floor plans, building plans and elevations of all structures; and
L.	Development summary indicating lot area, building square footage, lot coverage building height, number and size of dwelling units and structures, and the number of parking spaces provided.

5.	Such other and further information or documentation as the Zoning Administrator may deem to be necessary or appropriate for a full and proper consideration and deposition of the particular application.

00-15-153-05.6	Administrative Interpretations
The interpretation authority established herein is intended to recognize that the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance, though detailed and extensive, cannot, as a practical matter, address every specific situation to which they may have to be applied. Many such situations can be readily addressed by an interpretation of the specific provisions of the Zoning Ordinance in light of the general and specific purposes for which those provisions have been enacted. Because the interpretation authority established is an administrative rather than a legislative authority, it is not intended to add to or change the essential content of the Zoning Ordinance but is intended only to allow authoritative application of that content to specific cases.

1.	Authority
The Zoning Administrator, subject to the procedures, standards, and limitations of this Section may, by written order, render interpretations of the provisions of this Ordinance and of any rule or regulation issued pursuant to it.

 
2.	Parties Entitled to Seek Interpretations
The owner or lessee of a property or other person having a legal or equitable interest in the subject property may file with the Zoning Administrator an application for interpretation. Application for interpretations shall not be accepted for solely hypothetical circumstances or where the interpretation would have no affect other than as an advisory opinion.

3.	Procedure for Review and Decision
A.	Application
Applications for an interpretation shall be filed in accordance with the requirements of Article 4 (Applications & Hearings). 

B.	Action on Application
Within ten (10) business days following the receipt of a properly completed application for interpretation, the Zoning Administrator shall inform the applicant in writing of his interpretation, stating the specific precedent, reasons, and analysis upon which the determination is based. 

C.	Records
A record of all applications for interpretations shall be kept on file in the Office of the Director of Building and Planning Services. At least once a year, the Zoning Administrator shall make public a listing of his decisions, by address, regarding the applications for interpretation.

D.	Appeal
Appeals from interpretations rendered by the Zoning Administrator may be taken to the Board of Zoning Appeals pursuant to Section 4-20-9 of the Zoning Ordinance.

4.	Standards for Interpretations
The following standards shall govern the Zoning Administrator, and the Board of Zoning Appeals on appeals from the Zoning Administrator, in issuing interpretations.

A.	Any term defined in Article 3 (Definitions) of the Zoning Ordinance shall be interpreted as therein defined;
B.	No interpretation shall permit any use in any zoning district unless evidence shall be presented that demonstrates that the use will comply with the general district regulations established for that particular zoning district;
C.	No interpretation shall permit any use in a particular zoning district unless such use is determined to be substantially similar to other uses permitted in the particular zoning district;
D.	Where a proposed use is most similar to a use permitted only as a special exception, then any interpretation permitting such use shall be conditioned on the issuance of a special exception permit for such use pursuant to Article 10 of the Zoning Ordinance; and
E.	No interpretation shall permit the establishment of any use that would be inconsistent with the statement of purpose of the zoning district in question.

5.	Effect of Favorable Interpretations
No interpretation finding a particular use to be permitted or permitted as a special exception shall authorize the establishment of such use nor the development, construction, reconstruction, alteration, or moving of any building or structure, but shall merely authorize the preparation, filing, and processing of applications for any permits and approvals that may be required by this Ordinance and ordinances of the Town. 

6.	Limitations on Interpretations
Subject to an extension of time granted by the Zoning Administrator, no use interpretation shall be valid for a period longer than twelve (12) months from the date of issue.  A use interpretation finding a use to be either permitted or a special exception shall apply only to the particular use for which it was issued.

7.	Submission Requirements for Administrative Interpretations
In addition to the requirements of Article 4 (Applications & Hearings), applications for Administrative Interpretations shall include the following material. 

A.	A completed application containing the applicant’s name, address, and proof of interest in the subject property, and the owner’s name and address, if different than the applicant, and the owner’s signed consent to the filing of the application.
B. 	The specific provision or provisions of the Zoning Ordinance for which the interpretation is being sought.
C.  	The facts and the specific situation giving rise to the request for interpretation.
D.  	The precise interpretation claimed by the applicant to be correct.
E.  	When a use interpretation is sought: 

(a)	The use permitted pursuant to the present zoning classification of the subject property that is claimed by the applicant to include, or to be most similar to, the proposed use.
(b) A statement containing all the circumstances, factors, and arguments that the applicant offers in support of the proposed use interpretation, including an explanation of how the petition satisfies each of the standards for interpretations set forth herein; and
(c)	Such other and further information or documentation as the Zoning Administrator may deem to be necessary or appropriate for a full and proper consideration and deposition of the particular application.


 
ARTICLE 6	DEVELOPMENT PLANS 

00-15-153-06.1		Development Plans 
00-15-153-06.2  	Authority
00-15-153-06.3	    Scope of Application
00-15-153-06.4  	Parties Entitled to Approval of a Development Plan
00-15-153-06.5		Procedure for Review and Decision 
00-15-153-06.6  	Criteria for Review
00-15-153-06.7  	Performance Guarantee
00-15-153-06.8  	Waivers from Development Requirements
00-15-153-06.9		Amendments to Approved Plans
00-15-153-06.10  Submission Requirements for Development Plan Review
_________________________________________________

00-15-153-06.1	Development Plans
Pursuant to Indiana Code 34-7-4-1401.5, the Cumberland Town Council has determined that before development or redevelopment may go forward in certain designated zoning districts, the review and approval of a development plan is required.  The development plan review process is designed to ensure that new development and redevelopment occur in a manner that:

1.	provides for the safe and efficient use of land; 
2.	protects property values in and around the project site; and 
3.	provides for an orderly and harmonious development pattern within the Town of Cumberland that is in accordance the Comprehensive Plan. 

00-15-153-06.2	Authority
The Plan Commission shall have exclusive authority to review all applications and approve or disapprove all development plans required by this Ordinance. 

00-15-153-06.3	Scope of Application
Development plans shall be required in the following zoning districts for all new construction, redevelopment of existing sites, conversion of a use from residential to commercial, or commercial to residential or industrial, or industrial to any other use, and additions or expansions of any existing use or structure by more than twenty-five percent (25%) of its current size.

1.	A-1 Agricultural District
2.	R-5 Multiple Family Residential District
3.	R-6 Multiple Family Residential District
4.	B-1 Business District
5.	B-2 Business District
6.	I-1 Industrial District
7.	I-2 Industrial District
8.   PUD Planned Unit Development District, excluding residential sections

00-15-153-06.4	Parties Entitled to Approval of a Development Plan
The owner or lessee of a property or other person having a legal or equitable interest in the subject property may file an application for development plan approval with the Zoning Administrator.


00-15-153-06.5	Procedure for Review and Decision
1.	Application	
Applications for development plan approval shall be filed in accordance with the requirements of Article 4 (Applications & Hearings). 

2.	Circulation to Relevant Departments
Upon receipt of properly completed application, the Zoning Administrator shall circulate copies of the application to all necessary local, county or state departments and agencies, including but not limited to, engineering, highway, health, police, fire, soil conservation, and the school board for their review and comment. 

3.	Staff Review Meeting
The Zoning Administrator shall schedule a meeting with the applicant or project representative to discuss the proposed project and the reviews of the various departments or agencies. At the Zoning Administrator’s discretion, other interested parties may be invited to the meeting.  The goal of the meeting will be to allow the applicant to discuss his project with the Zoning Administrator prior to the review of the Plan Commission and revise the Development Plan if necessary pursuant to the comments of Zoning Administrator.  A detailed report of this meeting, prepared by the Zoning Administrator, shall be forwarded with the application.

4.	Public Hearing and Notice
Upon completion of the Staff Review Meeting, the application shall be scheduled for a public hearing in accordance with the requirements of Article 4 (Applications & Hearings).  Notice of the public hearing shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of Article 4 (Applications & Hearings).  

A.	In addition, the applicant shall provide notice to the owners of all parcels of land joining or adjacent to the subject property to a depth of two (2) ownerships or six hundred sixty (660) feet, which ever is less, at least ten (10) days before the date of the hearing. The notice shall be provided at the applicant’s expense and proof of such notice by Affidavit shall be required. If however, the subject matter of the proposal abuts or includes a county line or a county line street, road, or body of water, then all owners of real property to a depth of two (2) ownerships or one-eighth (1/8) of a mile into the adjacent county, whichever is less, are interested parties who must receive notice.

5.	Decision of Plan Commission
At the close of the public hearing, the Plan Commission shall, in writing, either approve, approve with supplementary conditions, or disapprove the application. Upon reaching its decision, the Plan Commission shall instruct the Zoning Administrator to notify the applicant of its decision. If the application is approved or approved with supplementary conditions, the Chairperson and the Secretary of the Plan Commission shall sign and date a copy of the approved plan and this copy shall become the official approved Development Plan.  

 
A.	Supplementary Conditions and Safeguards
Pursuant to Indiana Code 36-7-4-1405, the Plan Commission may impose supplementary conditions on the approval of the Development Plan in order to achieve the purposes and objectives of this Article and the Zoning Ordinance. Such conditions shall be expressly set forth and made part of the Development Plan. Violation of any such condition shall be a violation of the Zoning Ordinance and subject to the provisions of Article 20 (Enforcement). 

B.	Special Studies Required
The Plan Commission may require additional information in order to make its decision.  Therefore, it may request of the applicant additional studies or to seek expert advice.  The cost of such additional studies or advice shall be the responsibility of the applicant; however, in no event shall the cost of such additional studies or advice, exceed One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00).

C.	Commitments
In addition to prescribing supplementary conditions, the Plan Commission may require the owner of the subject property to make written commitments concerning the use or development of the property.

D.	Effect of Approval	
The approval of a Development Plan shall not authorize the establishment or extension of any use nor the development, construction, reconstruction, alteration, or moving of any building or structure, but shall merely authorize the preparation, filing, and processing of applications for any permits and approvals that may be required by the Zoning Ordinance or any other ordinance or law.  

E.	Limitations of Approval 
The approval of a development plan shall be deemed to authorize only the particular construction or development for which it was approved. If such construction or development goes beyond the scope so authorized, it shall be deemed a violation of the Zoning Ordinance and subject to the provisions of Article 20 (Enforcement). 

F.	Expiration of Approval
The applicant shall have twelve (12) months from the date of approval to obtain an Improvement Location Permit. Should the applicant fail to obtain an Improvement Location Permit within the twelve (12) month period, the Development Plan approval shall become void.  The Plan Commission may, for good cause shown, extend this period up to six (6) additional months.

6.	Appeals
Every decision by the Plan Commission shall be subject to review by certiorari. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Plan Commission may present to the Hancock County Court, a petition duly verified setting forth that such decision is illegal in whole or in part and specifying the grounds of the illegality.  The petition shall be presented to the court within thirty (30) days after the entry of the decision of the Plan Commission.
  
7.	

00-15-153-06.6	Criteria for Review
Every application shall be considered on the basis of its meeting the requirements of this Article and the Zoning Ordinance, as well as the utility and functional aspects of its design.  In making its decision, the Plan Commission shall evaluate a Development Plan against the following criteria.

 
1.	The arrangement of the structure(s) on the site with respect to how well it:
A.	allows for the most effective use of the property;
B.	creates innovative and efficient environments and utilizes individual building designs which achieve an enhanced relationship between the development and the land;
C.	is compatible with development on neighboring property; and
D.	considers off-site utilities and services and minimizes potential impacts on existing or planned municipal services, utilities, and infrastructure.

2.	The architectural style of a project and its type, arrangement, and use of building materials to enhance the built environment of Cumberland.
3.	The arrangement of open space and landscape improvements on the site with respect to how well it:
A.	creates a desirable and functional environment for patrons, pedestrians, and occupants; 
B.	preserves unique natural resources where possible; and 
C.	respects desirable natural resources on adjacent sites.

4.	The management of traffic in a manner that creates conditions favorable to the health, safety, and general welfare of the community including:
A.	the design and location of proposed street and highway access points that minimize safety hazards and congestion;
B.	to ensure that the capacity of adjacent streets and highways are sufficient to safely and  efficiently accept the traffic proposed to be generated by development; 
C.	the creation of pedestrian circulation for the site that minimizes safety hazards for both pedestrians and vehicular traffic; and 
D.	the internal traffic circulation and the points of egress and ingress that are compatible with existing and planned streets and neighboring developments.

5.	Parking lots or garages with respect to how well they:
A.	are located, designed, and screened to minimize adverse visual impacts on adjacent properties; and
B.	provide perimeter parking lot screening and internal landscaped islands as required by Article 14 (Off-Street Parking and Loading). 

6.	Landscaping design with respect to how well it:
A.	creates a logical transition to adjoining lots and developments;
B.	screens incompatible uses; 
C.	minimizes the visual impact of the development on adjacent sites and roadways; and
D.	utilizes native plant materials selected to withstand the microclimate of central Indiana and the individual site microclimates.

7.	Site illumination with respect to how it has been designed, located and installed so as to minimize adverse impacts of glare and light spillage to adjacent properties.

8.	Signage to ensure that the location, size, and orientation of signs do not distract or impair the visibility of motorists or present hazards to pedestrians.

9.	The relationship of the Development Plan to the requirements of the goals and objectives of the Comprehensive Plan.

00-15-153-06.7	Performance Guarantee
The applicant shall also be required to furnish a performance guarantee in the form of a bond or Irrevocable Letter of Credit, in an amount as prescribed by the Subdivision Control Ordinance for performance bonds, to ensure the timely completion of all public improvements and improvements benefiting the public in the proposed development including, but not limited to streets, sidewalks, drainage, landscaping, lighting, and utilities.  These performance guarantees are intended to cover public improvements not associated with a subdivision plat and/or all ready under performance guarantee for same improvement.  An Improvement Location Permit will not be issued without the posting of a Performance Guarantee.  The applicant shall be responsible for notifying the Zoning Administrator of completion of all work covered by the Performance Guarantee and, if upon inspection, the Zoning Administrator determines that all installations are in conformance with the approved plan then he shall release the Performance Guarantee.  However, a Maintenance Guarantee for landscaping will be held for one (1) year after the release fo the performance guarantee by the Town Council to insure survival of the required landscaping.


00-15-153-06.8		Amendments to Approved Plans
1.	Minor Amendments
An amendment to a Development Plan, which has received prior approval from the Plan Commission, and which does not involve: 
 
A.	an increase in height, area, or bulk of a structure;   
B.	the designation of additional uses or the elimination of uses;   
C.	the reduction in landscaping requirements;
D.	the reduction in or alteration of building materials and building design elements; 
E.	the addition of driveways or access points to the development; or,   
F.	the reduction in the amount of parking for any use located within the development, 

may be authorized by the Zoning Administrator without a public hearing in his continuing administration of the Development Plan if, in the determination of the Zoning Administrator, the requested amendments do not adversely impact the purpose or intent of the overall development. Such minor amendments authorized by the Zoning Administrator shall be reported, in writing, to the Plan Commission at its next regular meeting.

2.	Major Amendments
If the Zoning Administrator determines that a requested amendment: 

A.	is of such a nature as to potentially have an adverse impact on the purpose or intent of the overall project, or 
B.	includes changes beyond those provided for above, 

the amendment shall require the approval of the Plan Commission. 

00-15-153-06.10		Submission Requirements for Development Plan Review
In addition to the requirements of Article 4 (Applications & Hearings), applications for Development Plan approval shall include the following material. 

1.	A completed application form containing: 

A.	the applicant’s name, address, and proof of interest in the subject property, and the owner’s name and address, if different, and the owner’s signed consent to the filing of the application;
B.	the street address and legal description of the subject property; 
C.	the zoning classification and present use of the subject property; 
D.	all proposed covenants, commitments, and restrictions subject to the property; and
E.	the name of the proposed project.

2.	Ten (10) copies of an architectural plan of the proposed project showing exterior elevations, floor plans and building materials to be used (façade and roof). The architectural plan shall be prepared by a professional architect licensed to practice in the State of Indiana and bearing a professional seal,

3.	Ten (10) copies of a development plan, prepared by a professional engineer, or surveyor licensed to practice in the State of Indiana under and bearing a professional seal containing the following plans and depicting the following elements:

A.	A site plan containing a general vicinity map; property boundary lines including any easements; elevation marks and contours; adjacent streets; proposed improvements showing location, dimensions and configuration of existing and proposed buildings, structures, and uses; road improvements, parking and loading areas, refuse and trash storage areas; and all proposed and existing utilities.
B.	A traffic and circulation plan, including a pedestrian circulation plan;
C.	A landscaping plan, indicating plant types, numbers, location, size, and method of installation and areas devoted to open space or recreational activities;
D.	Grading and surface drainage plan in accordance with the Subdivision Control Ordinance;
E.	Signage plan showing location and size;
F.	Lighting plan showing location and size;
G.	Development summary indicating lot area, building square footage, lot coverage building height, number and size of dwelling units and structures, and the number of parking spaces provided;

4.	The applicant shall obtain the names and addresses of the property owners within six hundred and sixty (660) feet of the property lines being considered or to a depth of two (2) ownership’s.

5.	Such other and further information or documentation as the Zoning Administrator may deem to be necessary or appropriate for a full and proper consideration and deposition of the particular application.

 
ARTICLE 7	ZONING AMENDMENTS 

00-15-153-07.1		Amendments to the Zoning Ordinance and Map
00-15-153-07.2  	Authority
00-15-153-07.3	    Parties Entitled to Initiate Amendments
00-15-153-07.4  	Standards for Amendments
00-15-153-07.5		Procedure for Review and Decision
00-15-153-07.6		Written Commitments
00-15-153-07.7  	Submission Requirements for Zoning Amendments
____________________________________________

00-15-153-07.1	Amendments to the Zoning Ordinance and Map
This Article is intended to provide standards and procedures for mak¬ing amendments to the text of the Zoning Ordinance and the Zoning Map that are of general significance or application. The amendment process is not intended to relieve particular hardships, nor to confer special privileges or rights upon any person, but only to make ad¬justments necessary in light of changed conditions or changes in public policy.

00-15-153-07.2	Authority
The text of the Zoning Ordinance and the Zoning Map may be amended from time to time by the passage of an ordinance duly adopted by the Town Council in accordance with the procedures set forth herein.

00-15-153-07.3	Parties Entitled to Initiate Amendments
1.	Amendment to Text
Amendments to text of the Zoning Ordinance may be initiated by adoption of a motion of the Plan Commission or by adoption of a resolution by Town Council.

2.	Amendment to Zoning Map
Amendments to the Zoning Map may be initiated by adoption of a motion of the Plan Commission; by adoption of a resolution by Town Council; or by the filing of a petition by at least fifty percent (50%) of the owners of property within the area proposed to be changed or affected by said amendment.

00-15-153-07.4	Standards for Amendments
The wisdom of amending the text of the Zoning Ordinance or the Zoning Map is a matter committed to the sound legislative discretion of the Town Council and is not controlled by any one standard. In making their determination, however, the Town Council should, in determining whether to adopt or deny, or to adopt some modification of the Plan Commission’s recommendation, shall pay reasonable regard to:

1.	the Comprehensive Plan, as adopted and amended from time to time by the Town Council;
2.	the current structures and uses within each zoning district; 
3.	the most desirable use for which the land in each zoning district is adapted;
4.	the conservation of property values throughout the jurisdiction; and
5.	responsible development and growth.

00-15-153-07.5	Procedure for Review and Decision
A petition to amend the text of the Zoning Ordinance or the Zoning Map shall be processed in accordance with the procedures set forth below.

1.	Petitions
Petitions for amendment to the Zoning Ordinance shall be filed in accordance with the requirements of Article 4 (Applications & Hearings). 

2.	Action by the Zoning Administrator
Upon receipt of a properly completed amendment petition, the Zoning Administrator shall transmit to the Plan Commission the petition together with any administrative reports and recommendations subject to the proposed petition. The application shall be scheduled for a public hearing in accordance with the requirements of Article 4 (Applications & Hearings).

3.	Notice
Notice of the public hearing shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of Article 4 (Applications & Hearings).  

A.	In addition, the Plan Commission has determined for purposes of IC 36-7-4-604 that interested parties are all persons with a legal interest in the property and all owners of real property within a distance of six hundred sixty (660) feet or a depth of two (2) ownerships, whichever is less. Such interested parties shall receive written notice by certified mail, at the applicant’s expense, at least ten (10) days before the date of the hearing. Proof of such notice by Affidavit shall be required. If however, the subject matter of the proposal abuts or includes a county line or a county line street, road, or body of water, then all owners of real property to a depth of two (2) ownerships or one-eighth (1/8) of a mile into the adjacent county, whichever is less, are interested parties who must receive notice.

4.	Plan Commission Action
Within sixty (60) days of receipt of the proposed amendment, the Plan Commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposed amendment. Within ten (10) business days after the Commission determines its recommendation, if any, the Commission shall certify proposed petition with a favorable recommendation, an unfavorable recommendation, or no recommendation to the Town Council. 

5.	Town Council Action	
Within ninety (90) days of receipt of Plan Commission recommendation, the Town Council shall vote on the proposed amendment in accordance with Indiana Code 36-7-4-607, as amended, if the petition is for a text amendment or Indiana Code 36-7-4-608, as amended, if the petition is to amend the Zoning Map.  

A.	Map Amendments
Pursuant to Indiana Code 36-7-4-610.5, as amended, if after the adoption of a petition to amend the Zoning Map, Town Council finds that the petition was adopted as a result of a person’s intentional misrepresentation or omission of material facts, the Town Council may, by a three-fourths (3/4) vote, adopt an ordinance to nullify any change in the Zoning Map that resulted from the misrepresentation or omission.  Such an ordinance may be adopted by the Town Council without being referred to the Plan Commission for consideration and recommendation.

00-15-153-07.6	Written Commitments
In approving a proposed amendment to the Zoning Map, the Plan Commission may require the owner of the subject property to make written commitments concerning the use or development of the property.

00-15-153-07.7	Submission Requirements for Zoning Amendments
In addition to the requirements of Article 4 (Applications & Hearings), petitions for amendment to the text of the Zoning Ordinance or Zoning Map shall include the following information.  

1.	A completed petition containing the petitioner’s names, address, and interest in the petition and the names, address and interest of every person, firm, corporation, or governmental agency represented by the petitioner in the petition.
2. 	If the amendment is a text amendment, the precise wording of the proposed amendment, together with concise explanation of its presumed effect.
3. 	A statement containing all the circumstances, factors, and arguments that the petitioner offers in support of the proposed amendment, including an explanation of how the petition satisfies each of the standards set forth in Article 7, Section 00-15-153-07.4 (Amendments);
4.  	In the event that the proposed amendment would result in the reclassification of any property:

A. A statement specifying the names of the owners of the land proposed to be reclassified. [Owners of a majority of the land must be parties to a petition to reclassify land.];
B.  The street address of the land proposed to be reclassified;
C.  A legal description of the land proposed to be reclassified; and
D.  The present zoning classification and use of the land proposed to be reclassified.

5.	Such other and further information or documentation as the Zoning Administrator may deem to be necessary or appropriate for a full and proper consideration and deposition of the particular petition.


 
ARTICLE 8	VARIANCES 

00-15-153-08.1		Variances
00-15-153-08.2     Parties Entitled to Seek Variance
00-15-153-08.3     Procedure for Review and Decision
00-15-153-08.4  	Standards for Variances
00-15-153-08.5		Conditions on Variances
00-15-153-08.6		Effect of Grant of Variance
00-15-153-08.7		Submission Requirements for Variances
____________________________________________

00-15-153-08.1	Variances
The variance procedures are intended to provide a narrowly circumscribed means by which relief may be granted from the strict applications of the Zoning Ordinance that may result in practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships. Where relief may be more appropriately remedied, if at all, pursuant to other provisions of the Zoning Ordinance, the variance procedure is inappropriate.

1.	Authority
The Board of Zoning Appeals may authorize, in specific cases, such variances from the terms of the Zoning Ordinance as will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to special conditions, a strict application of the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance would result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardships. 

00-15-153-08.2	Parties Entitled to Seek Variance
The owner or lessee of a property or other person having a legal or equitable interest in the subject property may file with the Zoning Administrator an application for variance.

00-15-153-08.3	Procedure for Review and Decision
1.	Application	
Applications for a variance shall be filed in accordance with the requirements of Article 4 (Applications & Hearings). 

2.	Action by Zoning Administrator	
Upon receipt of a properly completed application for variance, the Zoning Administrator shall transmit the application to the Board of Zoning Appeals together with all other administrative reports and recommendations regarding the proposed application.  The application shall be scheduled for a public hearing in accordance with the requirements of Article 4 (Applications & Hearings).

3.	Notice
Notice of the public hearing shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of Article 4 (Applications & Hearings).

A.	In addition, the Board of Zoning Appeals has determined for purposes of IC 36-7-4-920 that interested parties are all persons with a legal interest in the property and all owners of real property within a distance of six hundred sixty (660) feet or a depth of two (2) ownerships, whichever is less. Such interested parties shall receive written notice by certified mail, at the applicant’s expense, at least ten (10) days before the date of the hearing. Proof of such notice by Affidavit shall be required.  If however, the subject matter of the proposal abuts or includes a county line or a county line street, road, or body of water, then all owners of real property to a depth of two (2) ownerships or one-eighth (1/8) of a mile into the adjacent county, whichever is less, are interested parties who must receive notice.

4.	Action by Board of Zoning Appeals
At the close of the public hearing, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall either approve, approve with supplementary conditions, or disapprove the application. Upon reaching a decision, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall instruct the Zoning Administrator to notify the applicant in writing of its decision. If the application is approved or approved with modifications, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall instruct the Zoning Administrator to issue a variance permit listing the variance allowed and the specific conditions specified by the Board of Zoning Appeals for approval.

5.	Variance Less Than Requested	
The Board of Zoning Appeals may grant a variance less than or different from that requested when the record supports the applicant’s right to some relief but not to the relief requested.

6.	Review by Certiorari
Every decision by the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be subject to review by certiorari. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals may present to the Hancock County Court a petition duly verified setting forth that such decision is illegal in whole or in part and specifying the grounds of the illegality.  The petition shall be presented to the court within thirty (30) days after the entry of the decision or order of the Board of Zoning Appeals.

00-15-153-08.4	Standards for Variances
1.	Variances of Use  
The Board of Zoning Appeals may approve or approve with supplementary conditions, a variance of use from the terms of the Zoning Ordinance only upon the determination and written findings that:

A.	the approval will not be injurious to the public health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the community;
B.	the use and value of the area adjacent to the property included in the variance will not be affected in a substantially adverse manner;
C.	the need for the variance arises from some condition peculiar to the property involved;
D.	the strict application of the terms of the zoning ordinance will constitute an unnecessary hardship if applied to the property for which the variance is sought; and
E.	the approval does not interfere substantially with the comprehensive plan for the Town of Cumberland

 
2.	Variance of Development Standards 
The Board of Zoning Appeals may approve or approve with supplementary conditions a variance of the development standards (such as height, bulk, or area) of the Zoning Ordinance only upon the determination and written findings that:

A.	the approval will not be injurious to the public health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the community;
B.	the use and value of the area adjacent to the property included in the variance will not be affected in a substantially adverse manner; and
C.	the strict application of the terms of the zoning ordinance will result in practical difficulties in the use of the property. 

00-15-153-08.5	Conditions on Variances
The Board of Zoning Appeals may impose such supplementary conditions and limitations concerning the use, construction, character, location, landscaping, screening, and other matters relating to the purposes and objectives of the Zoning Ordinance. Such conditions shall be expressly set forth in the order granting the variance. Violation of any such condition shall be a violation of the Zoning Ordinance and subject to the provisions of Article 20, (Enforcement).  In addition to prescribing supplementary conditions, the Board of Zoning Appeals may require the owner of the subject property to make written commitments concerning the use or development of the property.  

00-15-153-08.6	Effect of Grant of Variance
The grant of a variance shall not authorize the establishment or extension of any use nor the development, construction, reconstruction, alteration, or moving of any building or structure, but shall merely authorize the preparation, filing, and processing of applications for any permits and approvals that may be required by the Zoning Ordinance and other ordinances of the Town of Cumberland.

1.	Limitations on Variances
A variance shall be deemed to authorize only the particular construction or development for which it was issued and shall automatically expire and cease to be of any force or effect if such construction or development is beyond the scope so authorized.

2.	Expiration of Grant
No variance shall be valid for a period longer than twelve (12) months unless a building permit is issued and construction is actually begun and diligently pursued to completion thereafter.  For good cause shown, the Zoning Administrator may extend this time period up to twelve (12) addition months.

00-15-153-08.7	 Submission Requirements for Variances
In addition to the requirements of Article 4 (Applications & Hearings), applications for a variance shall include the following material. 

1.	A completed application containing the applicant’s name, address, and proof of interest in the subject property, and the owner’s name and address, if different than the applicant, and the owner’s signed consent to the filing of the application.

2.	The address and legal description of the property subject to the application.

3.	The names and addresses of all professional consultants advising the applicant with respect to the proposed development.

4.	Ten (10) copies of a property survey, certified by a registered land surveyor, showing existing lot lines and dimensions as well as lot area, all easements, all public and private rights-of-way and all streets across and adjacent to the subject property.

5.	A statement indicating the specific provision of this Ordinance from which the variance is being sought.  The statement should also contain all the circumstances, factors, and arguments that the applicant offers in support of the proposed variance, including an explanation of how the application satisfies each standard for the type of Variance requested as set forth in Article 8, Section 00-15-153-08.4 (Standards for Variances).

6.	A description, plan or graphic representation of any development or construction that will occur or any use that will be established or maintained if the requested relief is granted. 

7.	A letter of acknowledgment from each adjacent property owner indicating, that he or she has notice of the proposed variance.

8.	Such other and further information or documentation as the Zoning Administrator may deem to be necessary or appropriate for a full and proper consideration and deposition of the particular application.

 
ARTICLE 9	APPEALS

00-15-153-09.1		Appeals
00-15-153-09.2 	Authority
00-15-153-09.3    Parties Entitled to Appeal
00-15-153-09.4    Procedure for Review and Decision
00-15-153-09.5		Conditions and Limitations on Rights Granted by Appeal
____________________________________________

00-15-153-09.1	Appeals
The appeal procedure is provided as a safeguard against arbitrary, ill-considered, or erroneous administrative decisions. It is intended to avoid the need for legal action by establishing local procedures to review and correct administrative errors. 

00-15-153-09.2	Authority
The Board of Zoning Appeals shall hear and decide appeals from, and review: 

1.	any order, requirement, decision, or determination, made by an administrative official or staff member under the Zoning Ordinance; and
2.	any order, requirement, decision, or determination, made by an administrative board or other body, except the Plan Commission, in relation to the enforcement of the Zoning Ordinance.

00-15-153-09.3	Parties Entitled to Appeal
Any person aggrieved by an order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative official, or staff member under the Zoning Ordinance, or any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative board or other body, except the Plan Commission, in relation to the enforcement of the Zoning Ordinance may take an appeal to the Board of Zoning Appeals. 

00-15-153-09.4	Procedure for Review and Decision
1.	Application
An appeal shall be filed in accordance with the requirements of Article 4 (Applications & Hearings). Every appeal must specify, in writing, the grounds under which the appeal is being taken.  Failure to do so shall cause the appeal to be deemed incomplete and it shall not be processed by the Board of Zoning Appeals and shall be returned to the applicant at the applicant’s expense.

2.	Action by Zoning Administrator
Upon receipt of a properly completed appeal, the Zoning Administrator shall forthwith transmit to the Board of Zoning Appeals the appeal together with all the documents, plans and papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. The appeal shall be scheduled for a hearing in accordance with the requirements of Article 4 (Applications & Hearings).

 
3.	Public Hearing and Notice
Notice of the hearing shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of Article 4 (Applications & Hearings).

A.	In addition, the Board of Zoning Appeals has determined for purposes of IC 36-7-4-920 that interested parties are all persons with a legal interest in the property and all owners of real property within a distance of six hundred sixty (660) feet or a depth of two (2) ownerships, whichever is less. Such interested parties shall receive written notice by certified mail, at the applicant’s expense, at least ten (10) days before the date of the hearing. Proof of such notice by Affidavit shall be required.  If however, the subject matter of the proposal abuts or includes a county line or a county line street, road, or body of water, then all owners of real property to a depth of two (2) ownerships or one-eighth (1/8) of a mile into the adjacent county, whichever is less, are interested parties who must receive notice.

4.	Stay Work Pending Appeal
The filing of an appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the administrative official or board, from which the appeal was taken, certifies to the Board of Zoning Appeals that, by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property.   

5.	Action by Board of Zoning Appeals
At the close of the hearing, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall render a written decision on the appeal. Such decision may reverse, affirm, or modify, in whole or in part, the action appealed from and may include such order or determination as, in the opinion of the Board of Zoning Appeals, is proper to be made in the premises. The failure of the Board of Zoning Appeals to act at the close of the hearing, unless continued, shall be deemed to be a decision denying the appeal.

6.	Appeals of Board of Zoning Appeals Decisions
Every decision by the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be subject to review by certiorari. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals may present to the Hancock County Court a petition duly verified setting forth that such decision is illegal in whole or in part and specifying the grounds of the illegality.  The petition shall be presented to the court within thirty (30) days after the entry of the decision or order of the Board of Zoning Appeals.

7.	Right to Grant Variance in Deciding Appeals
In any case where the appeal is accompanied by an application for a variance in accordance with Section 4-8-1 of Article 8, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall notice, hear, decide to grant, or deny such variance in compliance with the provisions of Section 4-8-1 et seq.

00-15-153-09.5	Conditions and Limitations on Rights Granted by Appeal
In any case where the Zoning Ordinance imposes conditions and limitations upon any right, any such right granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals on appeal shall be subject to said conditions and limitations in the same manner and to the same extent as if secured without the necessity of an appeal.

ARTICLE 10	SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS

00-15-153-10.1		Purpose
00-15-153-10.2    Authority
00-15-153-10.3    Parties Entitled to Seek Special Exceptions
00-15-153-10.4    Procedure for Review and Decision
00-15-153-10.5		Standards for Special Exceptions
00-15-153-10.6    Supplementary Conditions and Safeguards
00-15-153-10.7    No Presumption of Approval
00-15-153-10.8   	Limitations on Special Exceptions
00-15-153-10.9    Effect of Approval
____________________________________________

00-15-153-10.1	 Purpose
Special Exceptions are those uses that, because of their unique characteristics and potentially adverse impact upon the immediate area, as well as the Town as a whole, require a greater degree of scrutiny and review of site characteristics and impacts to determine their suitability in a given location. Therefore, the determination of a Special Exception as appropriate shall be contingent upon its meeting a set of standards, intended in each case, to weigh the public need and benefit of the use against its impact.  Consideration in approving a Special Exception shall be given to the measures proposed by the applicant for the amelioration of any adverse impacts through special site planning and development techniques, as well as the provisions of public improvements, sites, right-of-way and services.

00-15-153-10.2	 Authority
The Board of Zoning Appeals, in accordance with the procedures and standards set forth herein and this Ordinance, may approve, approve with supplemen¬tary conditions, or deny an application for a Special Exception.

00-15-153-10.3	 Parties Entitled to Seek Special Exceptions
The owner or lessee of the subject property or other person having a legal or equitable interest in the subject property may file an application for a Special Exception with the Zoning Administrator.

00-15-153-10.4	 Procedure for Review and Decision
1.	Application
Applications for a Special Exception permit shall be filed in accordance with the requirements of Article 4 (Applications & Hearings). In addition, the application, at a minimum, shall contain the following information:

A.	Name, address, and phone number of the applicant or the name, address, and phone number of the applicant’s agent along with a signed consent of the owner, and proof of interest of the owner in the subject property, 

B.	Name, address, and phone number of all professional consultants advising the applicant with the respect to the proposed Special Exception;

C.	Legal description of the property;

D.	Description of the existing use, if any;

E.	The particular zoning district;

F.	Description of the proposed Special Exception;

G.	A plan of the proposed site for the Special Exception showing the location of all buildings, parking and loading areas, traffic access and traffic circulation, open spaces, landscaping, refuse and service areas, utilities, signage, yards, and such other information as the Board deems warranted; and

H.	A narrative statement evaluating the effects of the Special Exception on abutting property, as well as other properties in the district, and the relationship of the Special Exception to the Comprehensive Plan, or any specific land use objective’s of the Town of Cumberland.

2.	Action by the Zoning Administrator
Upon receipt of a properly completed application for a Special Exception permit, the Zoning Administrator shall transmit to the Board of Zoning Appeals the application together with any administrative reports and recommendations subject to the proposed application. The application shall be scheduled for a public hearing in accordance with the requirements of Article 4 (Applications & Hearings).

3.	Notice
Notice of the public hearing shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of Article 4 (Applications & Hearings).

A.	In addition, the Board of Zoning Appeals has determined for purposes of IC 36-7-4-920 that interested parties are all persons with a legal interest in the property and all owners of real property within a distance of six hundred sixty (660) feet or a depth of two (2) ownerships, whichever is less. Such interested parties shall receive written notice by certified mail, at the applicant’s expense, at least ten (10) days before the date of the hearing. Proof of such notice by Affidavit shall be required. If however, the subject matter of the proposal abuts or includes a county line or a county line street, road, or body of water, then all owners of real property to a depth of two (2) ownerships or one-eighth (1/8) of a mile into the adjacent county, whichever is less, are interested parties who must receive notice.

4.	Action by the Board of Zoning Appeals
At the close of the public hearing, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall, in writing, either approve, approve with supplemen¬tary conditions, or deny the application.  Upon reaching a decision, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall instruct the Zoning Administrator to notify the applicant in writing of its decision. If the application is approved or approved with conditions, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall also instruct the Zoning Administrator to issue a Special Exception permit which shall specify all conditions associated with the Special Exception approval. 

5.	Review by Certiorari
Every decision by the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be subject to review by certiorari. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals may present to the Hancock County Court a petition duly verified setting forth that such decision is illegal in whole or in part, and specifying the grounds of the illegality.  The petition shall be presented to the court within thirty (30) days after the entry of the decision or order of the Board of Zoning Appeals.

00-15-153-10.5	 Standards for Special Exceptions
1.	The Board of Zoning Appeals shall review the particular facts and circumstanc¬es of each proposed Special Exception in terms of the following standards and shall find adequate evidence showing that such use at the proposed location:

A.	is in fact a use listed as a Special Exception for the specific zoning district involved;
B.	will not be detrimental to or endanger the public's health, safety, or general welfare;
C.	will not be injurious to the use and enjoyment of other property in the immediate vicinity or substantially diminish or impair property values within the specific zoning district;
D.	will be served adequately by essential public facili¬ties and services such as highways, streets, police and fire protec¬tion, drainage structures, refuse disposal, water and sewer, and schools; or that the persons or agencies responsible for the establishment of the proposed Special Exception shall be able to provide adequate¬ly any such services;
E.	will not create excessive additional requirements at public expense for public facilities and services, nor be detrimental to the economic welfare of the community or result in the destruction, loss, or damage of a natural, scenic, or historic feature of major impor-tance; and
F.	at least one year has elapsed since any denial by the Board of any prior application for a Special Exception that would have authorized substantially the same for all or part of the site, unless the Board determines that conditions in the area have substantially changed.

2.	For the purpose of supplementing the above standards, the Board of Zoning Appeals in making its decision, may take into consideration, the extent to which the following facts, favorable to the applicant, have been established by the evidence.

(a) 	In what respects the proposed Special Exception meets the requirements and standards of this Ordinance and its relationship and compatibility to adjacent properties and neighborhoods.
(b) 	The method by which the proposed Special Exception makes adequate provision for public services, provides adequate control over vehicular traffic, provides for and protects designated common open space and furthers the amenities of light and air, recreation and visual enjoyment.
(c) 	Whether the proposed Special Exception is in accordance with the general objectives of the Comprehensive Plan.

00-15-153-10.6	 Supplementary Conditions and Safeguards
The Board of Zoning Appeals may impose such supplementary conditions and limitations concerning the use, construction, character, location, landscaping, screening, and other matters relating to the purposes and objectives of this Ordinance. Such conditions shall be expressly set forth in the order granting the Special Exception. Violation of any such condition shall be a violation of this Ordinance and subject to the provisions of Article 20, (Enforcement).  In addition to prescribing supplementary conditions, the Board of Zoning Appeals may require the owner of the subject property to make written commitments concerning the use or development of the property.  

00-15-153-10.7 	No Presumption of Approval
The listing of a Special Exception within each zoning district shall not constitute an assurance or presumption that such Special Exception will be approved. Rather, each proposed Special Exception shall be evaluated on an individual basis, in relation to its compliance with the standards and conditions set forth herein and with the development standards for the district in which it is to be located.

00-15-153-10.8	 Limitations on Special Exceptions
A Special Exception permit shall be deemed to authorize only the particular use at the particular location for which the Special Exception was granted. A Special Exception permit shall automatically expire should, for any reason, the Special Exception be discontinued or abandoned for a period of twelve (12) months.

00-15-153-10.9	 Effect of Approval
The approval of a proposed Special Exception shall not authorize the development, construction, reconstruction, alteration or moving of any building or structure, but shall merely authorize the preparation, filing and processing of applications for such permits or approvals as may be required by the regulations of the Town.
 
ARTICLE 11	PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS

00-15-153-11.1	Purpose
00-15-153-11.2 	Authority to Vary Regulations
00-15-153-11.3 	Ownership
00-15-153-11.4 	Minimum Project Area
00-15-153-11.5	Permitted Uses
00-15-153-11.6 	Project Density
00-15-153-11.7	 Development Standards
00-15-153-11.8	Water and Sewer Availability 
00-15-153-11.9 	Public Streets
00-15-153-11.10 	Utilities
00-15-153-11.11 	Procedure for Approval
00-15-153-11.12	Extension and Abandonment 
00-15-153-11.13 	Recording
00-15-153-11.14 	Limitation of Rezoning
00-15-153-11.15 	Financial Assurances Requirements
00-15-153-11.16	Procedures for Platting Planned Unit Development 
00-15-153-11.17 	Minimum Submission Requirements for Planned Unit Developments District
____________________________________________

00-15-153-11.1	Purpose.   
The Planned Unit Development District is intended to provide a greater degree of flexibility in the design of development. To that end, the District will: 

1. 	Encourage innovation and creativity in the design and layout of developments;
2.	Provide for more efficient use of land including the reduction of land area disturbed for utility lines and motor vehicle access;
3.	Permit special consideration of property with outstanding natural or topographical features, historical significance, landscape amenities, and size and shape;
4.	Encourage imaginative uses of common areas and open space; and
5.	Provide for a comprehensive review and approval process aimed at furthering the Comprehensive Plan.

00-15-153-11.2 	Authority to Vary Regulations. 
In connection with approving a Planned Unit Development District, the Plan Commission and the Town Council shall have the authority to approve a Planned Unit Development District that varies from the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance or of the Subdivision Control Ordinance provided, such variation:

1.	Will achieve the purposes for which planned unit developments may be approved pursuant to the requirements of this Article;
2.	Will not violate the general purposes, goals, and objectives of the Zoning Ordinance and the Town’s Comprehensive Plan; and
3.	Will result in a development providing compensating amenities to the Town.

00-15-153-11.3	Ownership. 
The owner of the subject property or other person having a legal or equitable interest in the subject property may file a petition for a Preliminary Plan approval and Zoning Map Amendment.  At the time of such petition, the subject property shall be held or controlled in a unified manner.

00-15-153-11.4 	Minimum Project Area. 
The minimum acreage for a Planned Unit Development District shall be as follows:

1.	Residential Planned Unit Development Districts:		five (5) acres.
2.	Mixed use Planned Unit Development Districts:		seven (7) acres.
3.	Commercial Planned Unit Development Districts:	ten (10) acres.
4.	Industrial Planned Unit Development Districts:		fifteen (15) acres.

00-15-153-11.5 	Permitted Uses.   
The uses permitted in a Planned Unit Development District shall be any use or range of uses specified in the petitioner’s Planned Unit Development District Petition establishing such District. The uses shall be reflected in text form and noted on the approved Preliminary Plan and made part of the Planned Unit Development District Petition. Permitted uses may include any residential, commercial, industrial, or other land use identified in Article 12 (Districts and Boundaries) or any individual land use or combination of land uses deemed appropriate by the Plan Commission for the real estate. 

1.	Specific Limitations
Uses in a Residential Planned Unit Development plan shall be limited to the following:

A.	Dwelling units in detached, semi-detached, attached or multi-storied structures or any combination thereof.
B.	Non-residential uses of a religious, cultural, recreational, and business character, which are an integral part of a residential development logically oriented to and coordinated with the total Planned Unit Development. These uses shall be planned and gauged primarily for the service and convenience of the anticipated population of the Planned Unit Development.
C.	No business use, nor building devoted primarily to a business use, shall be built or established prior to the establishment of at least twenty-five percent (25%) of the residential buildings or uses it is designed and intended to serve.

00-15-153-11.6 	Project Density. 
The overall density of the development in a Planned Unit Development District, either in terms of residential units per acre, gross floor area of business, industrial or manufacturing uses, or other units of measure contained elsewhere in this Ordinance, shall be those specified in the petitioner’s Planned Unit Development District Petition establishing such District. 

1.	Specific Limitations
A.	Residential Planned Unit Development Districts

(a)	Single Family.  For Planned Unit Development District’s containing single family development, the gross density for single family lots shall not exceed 5.8 dwelling units per acre.
(b)	Multiple Family.  For Planned Unit Development District’s containing multiple family development, the gross density for multiple family lots shall not exceed 7.26 dwelling units per acre.

B.	Commercial Planned Unit Development Districts
For Planned Unit Development District’s containing commercial development, the minimum lot size requirement of the B-1 zoning district shall apply.

C.	Industrial Planned Unit Development Districts
For Planned Unit Development District’s containing industrial development, the minimum lot size requirement of the I-1 zoning district shall apply.

00-15-153-11.7 	Development Standards 
Development standards applicable to a Planned Unit Development District shall be those standards specified in the petitioner’s Planned Unit Development District Petition establishing such District.  The development standards shall be reflected in either text form or noted on the approved Preliminary Plan and made part of the Planned Unit Development District Petition. Every petition for a Planned Unit Development District shall specify development standards applicable to each use permitted in the Planned Unit Development.					
1.	Specific Limitations
A.	Open Space
No Planned Unit Development District shall be approved unless such district provides for passive or active open space of at least twenty-five percent (25%) of its gross density.  Such space may take the form of parks, playgrounds, landscaped green space, nature walks, and natural areas but such space shall not include schools, community centers, roads and streets, residential yards or areas of public ownership.  Only fifty percent (50%) of the area of a detention or retention pond or other body of water may count towards satisfying the open space requirement. Where a planned unit development is to be developed in phases, a portion of the required open space shall be provided in each phase.  Maintenance of the open space shall be provided for in the planned unit development’s restrictive covenants recorded as part of the project.

B.	Building Space Requirements
No residence or principal building shall be closer than fifteen (15) feet to any other residence or principal building.  All residential structures shall be set back from the perimeter of the total tract at least twenty (20) feet.  Commercial structures shall be separated from any residential structure a minimum of fifty (50) feet.  Industrial structures shall be separated from any residential structure a minimum of one hundred (100) feet. 

C.	Height Requirements
Residential structures shall not exceed a height of forty (40) feet.  Commercial and industrial structures shall not exceed a height of thirty-five (35) feet.

D.	Parking
All Planned Unit Development Districts shall meet the parking requirements set forth in Article 14 (Off-Street Parking and Loading).

 
E.	Transitional Landscaped Yards
All transitional landscaped yards shall meet the general requirements of Article 15 (Landscaping Requirements).  More Specifically:
(a)	Where a commercial use abuts a residential use, a transitional yard of at least ten (10) feet in width shall be provided. Within the transitional landscaped yard there shall be provided shade trees, shrubs or dense hedges, walls, fences, or mounding in sufficient combination to effectively screen the commercial use from the residential use.  Areas not planted with trees, shrubs, and hedges or covered with walls shall be maintained as turf or other pervious ground cover. At a minimum, such yards shall meet the requirements of Section 4-15-10(B).

(b)	Where an industrial use abuts a residential use, a transitional landscape yard of at least twenty (25) feet in width shall be provided. Within the transitional landscaped yard there shall be provided shade trees, shrubs or dense hedges, walls, fences, or mounding in sufficient combination to effectively screen the industrial use from the residential use. Areas not planted with trees, shrubs, and hedges or covered with walls shall be maintained as turf or other pervious ground cover. At a minimum, such yards shall meet the requirements of Section 4-15-10(B).

(c)	Where an industrial use abuts a commercial use, a transitional landscape yard of at least fifteen (15) feet in width shall be provided. Within the transitional landscaped yard there shall be provided shade trees, shrubs or dense hedges, walls, fences, or mounding in sufficient combination to effectively screen the industrial use from the commercial use. Areas not planted with trees, shrubs, and hedges or covered with walls shall be maintained as turf or other pervious ground cover. At a minimum, such yards shall meet the requirements of Section 4-15-10(B).

F.	Perimeter Landscaped Yards
Perimeter landscaped yards, a minimum of 10 feet in width, shall be provided along the perimeter of all Planned Unit Developments in accordance with Article 15, Section 4-15-10(D) (Landscaping Requirements).  In cases where the perimeter of a Planned Unit Development meets the conditions set forth above in Subparagraphs (a), (b), or (c) such Subparagraphs will control and the perimeter landscape yard requirement shall be satisfied with the establishment of the transitional yard.  

00-15-153-11.8 	Water and Sewer Availability. 
Attachment to the Cumberland Sanitary Sewer Utility, and to public water facilities, shall be mandatory for any Planned Unit Development developed pursuant to this Section, unless a waiver is approved by the Town of Cumberland for an alternative water or sanitary sewer system which has received prior approval by the State Department of Health or the Indiana Department of Environmental Management.

00-15-153-11.9 	Public Streets
Each Planned Unit Development developed pursuant to this Article shall have frontage on a public street and gain access from said street.

00-15-153-11.10 	Utilities
Underground utilities, including telephone and electrical systems are required within the boundaries of the Planned Unit Development District.  Appurtenances to these systems that can be screened may be exempted from these requirements if the Plan Commission finds that such exemption will not violate the intent or character of the Planned Unit Development District.

00-15-153-11.11 	Procedure for Approval
The complete review and approval process for a Planned Unit Development Petition consists of the following elements:

1.	Preliminary Plan Review by Staff
2.	Preliminary Plan Review by the Plan Commission;
3.	Preliminary Plan Review by the Town Council and Zoning Map Amendment, and;
4.	Final Plan Review by the Plan Commission.

A.	Preliminary Plan Review by Staff
(a)	Filing of a Preliminary Plan for Review by the Staff
The petitioner shall submit a proposed Preliminary Plan consisting of a written description of the proposed planned unit development and the plans and data required by Section 4-18-17(A).  The Preliminary Plan shall take the form of a Zone Map Amendment.  In addition to the Preliminary Plan, the petitioner shall be required to submit a Petition and Filing Fee for Preliminary Plan and Zoning Map Amendment pursuant to Article 4, Section 4-4-1(5) (Applications and Hearings). 

(b)	Conceptual Review of Preliminary Plan by Staff
Staff shall review the proposed Preliminary Plan taking into consideration information regarding the terrain of the site and any unique natural features of the site. In doing so, Staff’s review may include, but shall not be limited to, the following:

(1)	The protection of unique topographical features on the site, including, but not limited to, slopes, streams, and natural water features;
(2)	The protection and preservation of wooded areas, individual trees of significant size, wetlands, and other environmentally sensitive features;
(3)	The protection and preservation of historically designated or historically significant buildings, structures and roads;
(4)	The development of common space and recreational areas (passive or active) accessible to the residents or user of the planned unit development by way of sidewalks, footpaths or combined trails and bikeways;
(5)	The efficient use of the land including the reduction of land area disturbed for utility lines and motor vehicle access;
(6)	The creation of innovative residential and business environments;
(7)	The petition’s ability to minimize the alteration of the natural site features through the design and situation of individual lots, streets and buildings;
(8)	The diversity and originality in lot layout;
(9)	The utilization of individual building designs which achieve an enhanced relationship between the development and the land;
(10)	The development’s relationship and connectivity to surrounding properties.

(c)	Notification of Petitioner
The Staff shall notify the petitioner of any comments related to the conceptual design of the proposed Preliminary Plan submitted for conceptual design review within twenty (20) business days of the submittal. Staff, at its discretion, may also schedule the proposed Preliminary Plan for technical review by the Town. 

(d)	Limitation on Staff’s Review
Notwithstanding anything contained in this Article to the contrary, neither the Staff’s review of the proposed Preliminary Plan, nor its comments to the petitioner relating thereto, shall be considered a denial, approval or decision concerning the proposed Preliminary Plan.

(e)	Revisions to the Preliminary Plan
The petitioner shall have thirty (30) business days to revise the Preliminary Plan in accordance with the comments of staff or the technical review before proceeding to preliminary plan review by the Plan Commission.  Failure to meet this time period, unless extended for good cause, shall be deemed a withdrawal of the petition for the Planned Unit Development District.

B.	Preliminary Plan Review by the Plan Commission
(a)	Filing of a Preliminary Plan for Review by the Plan Commission
Upon completion of staff review and any other technical review necessary or required, the petition shall be forwarded to the Plan Commission for review. The petition shall be accompanied by the written recommendations of staff and any other technical review conducted. The Plan Commission shall consider the petition at a public hearing held and noticed in accordance with its rules and Article 4 (Applications and Hearings). The Petition shall be considered at the first available regularly scheduled meeting.  

(b)	Determination by the Plan Commission
In its determination of the appropriateness of the proposed Planned Unit Development and its recommendation of the petition to the legislative body, the Plan Commission shall be guided by the extent to which the proposal:   

(1)	accomplishes the purpose set forth in Section 4-18-1 above;
(2)	 meets the requirements of this Ordinance 
(3)	provides for the protection or provision of the site features and amenities outlined above; and,   
(4)	conforms to development guidelines set forth in the Cumberland Comprehensive Plan.

(c)	Commitments required by the Plan Commission
The Plan Commission may allow or require the owner of a parcel of property to make written commitments concerning the use or development of the subject property in connection with the recommendation of approval of a Planned Unit Development District. Such written commitments shall be recorded and made part of the Planned Unit Development District. 

(d)	Covenants and Maintenance
(1)	All covenants, required by the Plan Commission, shall be set forth in detail and shall be suitable for recording. Such covenants shall provide that their benefits run with the land and shall be specifically enforceable by the Plan Commission in addition to the property owners.  Such covenants shall also provide a provision for the release of such restriction by execution of a document so stating and suitable for recording, signed by the Plan Commission President and Secretary upon authorization by the Plan Commission and the owners of the property in the area involved in the petition for whose benefit the covenant was created. 

(2)	The Plan Commission shall require the recording of covenants for any reasonable public or semi-public purpose, including, but not limited to, the allocation of land by the petitioner for public thoroughfares, parks, schools, recreational facilities, and other public and semi-public purposes. Such covenants shall specify that if a governmental unit or agency thereof does not proceed with acquisition of the allocated land within a specified period of time, the covenants shall automatically terminate. If such termination occurs, the petitioner shall then submit for approval by the Plan Commission a modified final detailed plan for such land, otherwise consistent with the approved Preliminary Planned Development.

(3)	The Plan Commission shall require the recording of covenants for any reasonable purpose, including, but not limited to, imposing standards for development of property in a Planned Unit Development District. Such development standards may include, but are not limited to, requirements as to the following:

(i)	Lot area;
(ii)	Floor area;
(iii)	Ratios of floor space to land space;
(iv)	Area in which structures may be built (buildable area);
(v)	Open space;
(vi)	Setback lines and minimum yards;
(vii)	Building separations;
(viii)	Height of structures;
(ix)	Signs;
(x)	Off street parking and loading space;
(xi)	Design standards (including landscaping requirements);
(xii)	Phasing of development.
(xiii)	Sidewalks, trails and interconnections between the development and other residential or commercial developments.

(4)	Adequate provision shall be made for a private organization with direct responsibility to, and control by, the property owners involved to provide for the operation and maintenance of all common facilities including private streets jointly shared by such property owners if such facilities are a part of the Planned Unit Development, and, in such instance legal assurances shall be provided and recorded which show that the private organization is self perpetuating. The Final Plan, approved by the Plan Commission, for the Planned Unit Development shall specify that the common facilities shall be made available to the residents and users of the overall Planned Unit Development at a reasonable and non-discriminatory rate of charge, prior to obtaining final plat approval.

(5)	Common facilities that are not dedicated to the public shall be maintained to standards assuring continuous and adequate maintenance. Common facilities not dedicated to the public shall be operated and maintained at no expense to any governmental unit or agency.

(6)	All private streets shall be maintained by the aforementioned private organization in such a manner that adequate access is provided at all times to vehicular traffic so that fire, police, health, sanitation, and public utility vehicles can serve the properties contiguous or adjacent thereto, and so that said vehicles will have adequate turning area. All streets and roadways not dedicated to the public shall be operated and maintained at no expense to any governmental unit or agency.

(e)	Concurrent filing of a Final Plan
If the Preliminary Plan expresses Development Standards in detailed terms, the Petitioner may also request a Secondary Review of a Final Plan by the Plan Commission.  However, approval of a Final Plan by the Plan Commission shall be conditioned upon the Town Council adopting the Zone Map Amendment for the Planned Unit Development District.  The requirements for a Final Plan Approval are set forth in Section 4-18-11 D, below. Approval of the Final Plan by the Plan Commission shall be required prior to the issuance of an Improvement Location Permit for any development pertinent to the Planned Unit Development District.

C.	Preliminary Plan Review by the Town Council and Zoning Map Amendment
Within thirty (30) days of the public hearing, the plan commission shall forward its written findings and recommendation to the Town Council.  Town Council shall consider the petition for the Planned Unit Development District in accordance with its procedures for amending the Zoning Map set forth in Article 7 (Zoning Amendments).

D.	Final Plan Review by the Plan Commission
(a)	Filing of a Final Plan for Review by the Plan Commission
If Final Plan approval is not obtained jointly with the petition for Preliminary Plan approval and Zoning Map Amendment, the petitioner shall have a period of up to three (3) years from the date of the approval of the Preliminary Plan and Zoning Map Amendment to file a Final Plan for the Planned Unit Development District. The petitioner shall submit a proposed Final Plan in conformance with submission requirements, plans and data required by Section 4-18-17(B) and the Requirements of Article 4 (Application and Hearings).  If a Final Plan approval is filed in phases, each subsequent phase shall be filed for within one (1) year of the prior phase’s approval. 

(b)	Determination by the Plan Commission
A determination by the Plan Commission on whether or not to approve a Final Plan shall be made at a public hearing of the Plan Commission, notice of which shall be given in the same manner as for a petition for Zone Map Amendment.
 
 (c)	Modifications to an Approved Preliminary Plan
The Final Plan shall be in substantial compliance with the approved Preliminary Plan. The Plan Commission may, however, as part of its determination to approve a Final Plan, authorize modifications to the permitted uses or the development requirements or standards specified in an approved Preliminary Plan which involve:

(1)	an increase in the height or area of a structure;
(2)	a decrease in any required yard, provided no residence or principal building shall be closer than fifteen (15) feet to any other residence or principal building.
(3)	an increase in intensity of land uses, provided such increase does not exceed the requirements of Section 4-18-6;
(4)	the designation of additional permitted uses or the elimination of permitted uses;   
(5)	the reduction in perimeter yards for the Planned Unit Development, but not more than ten percent (10%); or
(6)	the addition of driveways or access points to the Planned Unit Development; 

(d)	Expiration of Planned Unit Development
(1)	In the event that Final Plan approval is not obtained for all or a portion of the Project within the time frames outlined above, the Preliminary Plan shall be deemed expired for that portion of the Project that has not received Final Plan approval. 

(2)	Once a Preliminary Plan has expired for any portion of the Planned Unit Development, no development shall occur within the expired portions of the Planned Unit Development until:   

(i) 	A new Preliminary Plan is recommended for approval by the Plan Commission to the legislative body at a public hearing, notice of which shall be given in the same manner as for a petition for Zone Map Amendment;   
(ii) 	Such new Preliminary Plan is approved by the legislative body; and,   
(iii) 	The Plan Commission approves a Final Plan in accordance with the requirements of this Article.

(e)	Minor Modifications to an Approved Planned Unit Development District Ordinance
Minor modifications to an approved Planned Unit Development District Ordinance, which do not involve:

(1)	an increase in the height, area, bulk, or intensity of land uses;
(2)	the designation of additional permitted uses or the elimination of permitted uses;
(3)	the reduction in perimeter yards for the Planned Unit Development; 
(4)	the addition of driveways or access points to the Planned Unit Development; or
(5)	the reduction in the amount of required parking for any use located within the Planned Unit Development; 

may be authorized by the Plan Commission without a public hearing in its continuing administration of the Planned Unit Development if, in the determination of the Plan Commission, the requested modifications do not adversely impact the purpose or intent of the overall development. Such minor modifications authorized by the Plan Commission shall be set forth in writing, and made part of the approved Final Plan.

(f)	Major Modifications to an Approved Planned Unit Development District Ordinance.
If the Plan Commission determines that a proposed modification is of such a nature as to adversely impact the purpose or intent of the overall project, or if the proposed modification includes changes beyond those provided for above, the modifications shall be deemed major.  In this case, the petitioner shall then be required to file a new petition for Preliminary Plan approval and Zone Map Amendment.

00-15-153-11.12	 Extensions and Abandonment
1.	Extensions of Time
Extensions of the time for accomplishing any matters set forth herein may be granted by the Plan Commission at a public hearing for good cause shown. Staff may, for good cause shown, grant extensions of time, in six (6) month increments not to exceed a total of two (2) years, for obtaining Final Plan approval. In the event that Staff disallows a requested extension, the petitioner may appeal said determination to the Plan Commission within thirty (30) days of being notified of such determination.

2.	Abandonment
Abandonment shall be deemed to have occurred when no improvements have been made pursuant to the approved Final Plan for twenty four (24) consecutive months, or upon the expiration of three (3) years from the date of approval of the Final Plan.  An amendment may be initiated as provided by law to the zoning map so that the land will be zoned into a category or categories that most nearly approximate its then existing use or such other zoning category or categories that the legislative body deems appropriate.

00-15-153-11.13	 Recording
1.	Recording Prior to Construction
All approved plans (Preliminary and Final) and plats (Primary and Final), and any modifications thereof, for any Planned Unit Development District shall be recorded in the office of the County Recorder before an Improvement Location Permit may be issued or any development takes place. 

 
2.	Recording after Construction Completed
Where upon completion of all development, the exact measurements, as to the location of buildings and structures erected during the development, are deemed desirable for public record and the recording thereof, the developer shall submit a copy of the approved Final Plan(s), as amended, to the Plan Commission with the exact measurements thereon shown. The Plan Commission, after being satisfied that the measurements are substantially the same as indicated on the originally approved Final Plan(s), shall re-approve, date and sign said completed Final Plan(s) for the project, which the developer shall then record.

00-15-153-11.14	 Limitation of Rezoning.
Unless the project is abandoned, the Plan Commission, nor the Town Council, shall not initiate any amendments to the zoning map concerning the Planned Unit Development District before completion of the development, provided however, the development is in conformity with the approved Final Plans and the development is proceeding in accordance with the time requirements imposed therein.

00-15-153-11.15		 Financial Assurance Requirements.
The petitioner shall provide financial assurance for the satisfactory installation of all public facilities in the form of bonds or any other assurances as are required in the normal procedures of platting pursuant to the provisions of the Cumberland Subdivision Control Ordinance.

00-15-153-11.16		 Procedures for Platting Planned Unit Development.
Primary and Final Plat Approval for any development pursuant to this Article shall be issued in a manner consistent with that for any other plat under the jurisdiction of the Plan Commission in compliance with the procedures set forth in the Cumberland Subdivision Control Ordinance and with any additional requirements or commitments entered into in connection with the approval of a Final Plan pursuant to this Section.

00-15-153-11.17 	Minimum Submission Requirements for Planned Unit Developments District
1.	Preliminary Plan
A.	Petition.  A completed petition containing the petitioner’s name (including the beneficial owners of a land trust), address, and proof of interest in the subject property, and the owner’s name and address, if different than the petitioner, and the owner’s signed consent to the filing of the petition.

B.	Legal Description. A legal description of the site proposed for development and the street address of the subject property. The title under which the proposed development is to be recorded, with names and addresses of owners, and notation stating acreage.

C.	Preliminary Plan. Ten copies of a Preliminary Plan of the Planned Unit Development District prepared at a scale not less than 1" = 200', intended to show the basic concept, scope, character, and nature of the entire proposed planned unit development. The submission may be composed of one or more sheets and drawings, and shall include:

(a)	Boundary lines --bearings, distances and acreage.
(b)	Easements -- location, width and purpose.
(c)	Existing land-use adjacent to the site.
(d)	General conditions on adjoining land -- actual direction and gradient of ground slope, including any embankments or retaining walls; character and location of major buildings, railroads, power lines, towers and other nearby nonresidential land-uses or adverse influences; for owners of adjoining platted land refer to subdivision plat by name, recording date and number and show approximate percent built up, typical lot size, and dwelling type.
(e)	Zoning on and adjacent to the tract.
(f)	Proposed public improvements -- highways and other collector roads planned by public authorities for future construction on or near the tract.
(g)	Utilities on, adjacent to, the tract -- location, size and invert elevation of sanitary and storm sewers; location and size of water mains; location of gas lines, fire hydrants, electric and telephone lines and street lights; direction and distance to, and size of nearest water mains and sewers adjacent to the tract showing the invert elevations of the sewers.
(h)	Ground elevation on the tract and on the first 50 feet on all adjacent tracts of land showing one (1) foot contours for land which slopes less than one/half (1/2) percent along with all breaks in grades, at all drainage channels or swells, and at selected points not more than 100 feet apart in all directions; for land that slopes more than one-half (1/2) percent showing two (2) foot contours. Any land within the 100 year floodplain within the project area shall be identified on these plans.
(a)	Open space -- all parcels of land intended to be dedicated for public use or reserved for the use of all property owners, with the purpose indicated.
(b)	Location, delineation and elevation of all floodway and floodway fringe areas within the boundaries of the Planned Unit Development District.
	
D.	Schedule. Development schedule indicating:

(a)	Stages in which project will be built, with emphasis on area, density, use and public facilities, such as open space to be developed with each stage. Each stage shall be described and mapped as a unit of the project. Overall design of each unit shall be shown on the plan and through supporting graphic material.

(b)	Anticipated dates for beginning and completion of each stage.

E.	Typical Floor Plans and Elevations. Ten copies of typical floor plans and elevation plans for all prototype buildings shall be submitted to permit an understanding of the style of the development, the design of the building, and the number, size, and type of dwelling units.

F.	Preliminary Engineering Site Plan. Ten copies of preliminary engineering site plans and feasibility reports for:

(a)	Roads, including classification, width of right-of-way, width of pavement, and construction details.
(b)	Sidewalks.
(c)	Sanitary sewers.
(d)	Storm drainage,
(e)	Water supply system.
(f)	Street lighting.
(g)	Public utilities.

G.	Landscaping Plans. Ten copies of a landscaping plan depicting the location of all buffer and transitional landscaping areas for the planned unit development and a typical perimeter landscaping cross-section plan for the site.

H.	Traffic Analysis. Ten copies of a traffic study indicating the impact caused by the planned unit development on the street and highway systems operating in the Town will be required.

I.	Additional Surveys and Studies. If requested by the Zoning Administrator, the following additional surveys and studies shall be provided:

(a)	Market Survey. Documentation indicating the extent of market demand for the uses proposed in the planned unit development including analysis of demographics, sales potentials, competitive alignment, assessment of market share and market positioning of each component of the planned unit development.

(b)	Fiscal Impact Analysis. A study indicating the fiscal impact of the planned unit development on major taxing bodies which shall include, but not be limited to, the municipal corporation, school district(s), and other taxing bodies. Information will include detailed estimates on: expected population of the development; the operating cost to be incurred by each taxing body; any additional major capital investments required, in part or in whole, because of the planned unit development; revenue generated for each taxing body by the planned unit development to offset service and fiscal demands created by the planned unit development. The study should include a cash flow analysis based on the proposed staging of the planned unit development. 

(c)	Community Impact Analysis. A study of the impact caused by the planned unit development on planning and development, infrastructure and utilities, transportation, community character, social and development character, and fiscal impact within the City will be required.

(d)	Environmental Analysis. A study analyzing the major impacts of the planned unit development on the environment and all major negative impacts shall be disclosed. Generally, these impacts would include effects on discrete ecosystems, and effects on sensitive land areas, such as floodplains, wetlands, forests, aquifer recharge areas, historic buildings, structures, and roads or prairie landscapes, and mineral resource reserves.

J. 	Miscellaneous. Staff may require additional documents.  Staff shall inform the petitioner of such requirements during the staff review stage.  In addition, Staff may, in its professional judgment, waive any of the aforementioned requirements if upon examination such information or data is not relevant to the approval of the Planned Unit Development District.

2.	Final Plan
A.	Final Detailed Plan. The petitioner shall submit ten copies of a final plan. The Final Plan of the planned unit development shall include, but not be limited to:

(a)	Area map insert showing the general location of the proposed subdivision in Cumberland referenced to major streets and section lines;

(b)	Location map showing the names of all metes and bounds property owners, boundary lines of recorded subdivisions, zoning and land use of adjacent properties;

(c)	Topographic contour every five (5) feet superimposed upon the Final Plan;

(d)	Proof of final approval of Engineering Site Plans;

(e)	Designation of the location of all buildings envelopes, and a designation of the specific internal uses to which each building shall be put;

(f)	Location and name of all existing and proposed public and private roads, access easements and rights-of-way within two hundred (200) feet of the real estate;

(g)	Sidewalk plan or alternative plan for pedestrian ways;

(d) General location, purpose, and height of each building, including construction details, showing center line elevations, pavement type, curbs, gutters, culverts, etc., and a street numbering designation shall be furnished for each building;

(e)	Certifications, seals, and signatures required for the dedication of land and recording of the document;

(f)	Tabulation on each separate subdivided use area, including land area, number of buildings, floor area, building height, the amount and location of common open space, the hours of operation, number of employees, and specific uses, and the number of dwelling units per acre;

(g)	Construction schedule;

(h)	Service Facilities. Provide information on all service facilities, driveways, private streets, paths and off-street parking facilities; and

(k)	Covenants. Final restricted covenants that will govern the use, maintenance, and continued protection of the planned unit development and any of its common open space. Proposed condominium declaration and by laws of condominium form of ownership or homeowners association if it is to be used in the planned unit development.

B.	Architectural Plans. Ten copies of preliminary architectural plans for all primary buildings shall be submitted in sufficient detail to permit an understanding of the style of the development, the design of the building, and the number, size, and type of dwelling units.

C.	Landscape Plan. Ten copies of a detailed landscape planting plan for the site including a plant list containing the common and botanical names, sizes at the time of installation, and quantities of all plants, permanent signs and street fixtures. A "typical" planting detail may be provided for any area such as a building foundation that will use a specific planting layout in more than one location on the site.

D.	Environmental Analysis. If requested by Staff, the specific impacts of the planned unit development on the environment shall be analyzed and all major negative impacts shall be disclosed.  Generally, these impacts would include effects on discrete ecosystems, any deterioration in the groundwater or surface water quality, and effects on sensitive land areas, such as floodplains, wetlands, forests, aquifer recharge areas, historic buildings, structures, and roads or prairie landscapes, and mineral resource reserves.

E.	Any other information requested in writing by the Plan Commission, Staff or other members of the Architectural and Technical Review Committee.


 
ARTICLE 12	DISTRICTS AND BOUNDARIES

00-15-153-12.1		Establishment of Districts
00-15-153-12.2    Interpretation of District Sequence
00-15-153-12.3	   Annexed Land
00-15-153-12.4    Official Zoning Map
00-15-153-12.5		Interpretation of District Boundaries
00-15-153-12.6		Special Districts and Regulations
00-15-153-12.7    Residential Districts and Regulations
00-15-153-12.8	   Business Districts and Regulations
00-15-153-12.9		Industrial Districts and Regulations
____________________________________________

00-15-153-12.1		Establishment of Districts. 
In order to classify, regulate and restrict the location of specified uses, and to regulate and limit the height and bulk of buildings for those uses, the Town of Cumberland, Indiana, is hereby divided into the following districts.

1.	Special Districts
A.	A-1 Agricultural District
B.	C-1 Conservation District

2.	Residential Districts
A.	R-1 Residential District
B.	R-2 Residential District 
C.	R-3 Residential District 
D.	R-4 Residential District
E.	R-5 Residential District
F.	R-6 Residential District

3.	Business Districts
A.	B-1 Business District
B.	B-2 Business District

4.	Industrial Districts
A.	I-1 Industrial District
B.	I-2 Industrial District

5.	Other Districts
A.	Planned Unit Development Districts
00-15-153-12.2		Interpretation of District Sequence
1.	General Rule  
This Ordinance rejects the concept of hierarchical and cumulative zoning districts as outdated and inappropriate. Therefore, except as noted below, this Ordinance is based on the concept that each district should be designed to accomplish a specific purpose, to encourage a particular type of development, and to protect that development from being encroached upon by incompatible types of development.

2.	Special Rule  
Within the foregoing philosophy, however, it is recognized that, when different districts are juxtaposed, their differing characters may require special treatment to ameliorate incompatibilities that might otherwise result.  For this limited purpose, this Ordinance recognizes the concept of "more restrictive" and "less restrictive" districts, and the districts established by this Ordinance shall be considered "more restrictive" or "less restrictive" in accordance with the following rules:

A.	the special districts shall be deemed to be the most restrictive districts; 
B.	the residential districts shall be deemed to be more restrictive than any business, or industrial district;
C.	the R-1 Residential District shall be deemed to be the most restrictive residential district and the R-6 Residential District shall be deemed to be the least restrictive Residential District, and the residential districts shall be deemed to become less restrictive as the district number increases;
D.	the business districts shall be deemed to become less restrictive as the district number increases; 
E.	the industrial districts shall be deemed to become less restrictive as the district number increases; and
F.	the Planned Unit Development Districts shall be deemed to stand alone and may be fashioned to be less or more restrictive than other districts;

00-15-153-12.3		Annexed Land
Where land is to be annexed into the Town of Cumberland, the Town Council shall direct the Plan Commission to make a recommendation on the appropriate zoning district classification for the property. In such circumstances, the Plan Commission shall follow the process for amendments to the Zoning Map set forth in Article 7 of this Ordinance.  Town Council action on the Plan Commission’s recommendation shall be scheduled in conjunction with the Town Council’s adoption of the annexation ordinance.

00-15-153-12.4		Official Zoning Map
1.	Map Incorporated  
The location and boundaries of the zoning districts established by this Ordinance shall be shown on the Official Zoning Map.  The Official Zoning Map shall be identified by certification by and bearing the seal of the Town of Cumberland under the following words: 

“THIS IS TO CERTIFY THAT THIS IS THE OFFICIAL ZONING MAP REFERRED TO IN ARTICLE 12 OF ORDINANCE #_______, 200_ OF THE TOWN OF CUMBERLAND, INDIANA, ADOPTED ON THE __ DAY OF _______ 200_.”

Certification shall be by the signature of the Town Council, and attested by the Clerk-Treasurer.



2.	Omitted Land 
It is the intent of this Ordinance that the entire area of the Town of Cumberland, including all land and water areas, be included in the districts established by this Ordinance.  Any area lying within the Town but not shown on the Official Zoning Map as being included in a district shall be deemed to be, and is hereby classified as being, within the R-1 Residential District.

3.	Maintenance and Availability of Official Zoning Map  
The official copy of the Zoning Map shall be maintained by the Zoning Administrator and shall be available for public inspection during Town business hours at the Town Hall.  

4.	Amendments to Map
Changes to zoning district boundaries or any change in any other information shown on the Zoning Map made by amendment to this Ordinance shall be indicated on the Official Zoning Map promptly after adoption. The date of such amendment shall also be shown on the Official Zoning Map, as well as the signature of the President of the Plan Commission and attested by the Secretary of the Plan Commission.  No amendments shall be made on the Official Zoning Map except in conformance with procedures set for in Article 7 (Zoning Amendments).

5.	Reproduction of Zoning Map  
A revised, up-to-date copy of the official Zoning Map, certified as to being inclusive of all amendments and drawn to a convenient scale, shall be published from time to time and made available for sale.

6.	Replacement of the Official Zoning Map
In the event that the Official Zoning Map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost or difficult to interpret because of the nature or number of changes and additions, the Town Council may, by resolution, adopt a new Official Zoning Map that shall supersede the prior Official Zoning Map.   The new Official Zoning Map may correct drafting errors or other errors or omissions in the prior Official Zoning Map, but no correction shall have the effect of amending the Official Zoning Map.  The new Official Zoning Map shall be identified by the signature of the President of the Plan Commission and attested by the Secretary of the Plan Commission and shall bear the seal of the Town of Cumberland under the following words:

“THIS IS TO CERTIFY THAT THIS OFFICIAL ZONING MAP SUPERSEDES AND REPLACES THE OFFICIAL ZONING MAP ADOPTED ON THE __ DAY OF _______ 200_ BY ORDINANCE #_______, 200_ OF THE TOWN OF CUMBERLAND, INDIANA. 

Unless the prior Official Zoning Map has been lost, or has been totally destroyed, the prior map or any significant parts remaining shall be preserved, together with all available records pertaining to its adoption or amendment.

 
00-15-153-12.5		Interpretation of District Boundaries  
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the Official Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply.

1. 	Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerline of thoroughfares or highways, street lines or highway right-of-way lines, or alleys shall be construed to follow such centerlines.
2. 	Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines.
3. 	Boundaries indicated as approximately following Town limits shall be construed as following such Town limits.
4. 	Boundaries indicated as approximately following railroad lines shall be construed to be midway between the main tracks.
5.	Boundaries indicated as following shore lines shall be construed to follow such shore lines, and in the event of change in the shore line, shall be construed as moving with the actual shore line. 
6.	Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerline of streams, rivers, canals, lakes or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such centerlines.
7.	Boundaries indicated as approximately following floodplain lines shall be construed to follow such floodplain lines.
8.	Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated in subparagraphs above shall be so construed.  Distances not specifically indicated on the Official Zoning Map shall be determined by the scale on the Map. 
9. 	Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at variance with those shown on the Official Zoning Map, or in other circumstances not covered by the subparagraphs above, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall interpret the location of district boundaries. 

00-15-153-12.6		Special Districts and Regulations  
1.	Purpose Statements	
The Special Districts set forth herein are comprised of the A-1 Agricultural District and the C-1 Conservation District.  The A-1 Agricultural District is intended to preserve and protect agricultural lands within the Town of Cumberland from the expansion of uncontrolled urban growth.  The C-1 Conservation District is generally intended to provide area for public land and associated public buildings and utilities.  The district also provides for limited recreational activities.

2.	Cross-reference Guide to Additional Regulations
A.	Land Use Interpretation
All applications for a permitted uses or special exceptions which are not listed in Table 4-12-6.1 (Special District Use Matrix) shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator for a use interpretation pursuant to the standards and procedures set forth in Article 4, Section 4-5-6 (Administrative Interpretations).

B.	Temporary Uses
Certain temporary uses may be permitted in the Special Districts subject to the provisions of Article 16 (Temporary Uses). 


C.	Parking and Loading
The parking and loading requirements applicable in the Special Districts are set forth in Article 14 (Off-Street Parking and Loading).  

D.	Signs
Sign regulations applicable in the Special Districts are set forth in Article 18 (Signs).
	
E.	Performance Standards
Requirements relating to performance standards in the Special Districts are set forth in Article 17 (Performance Standards).

F	Landscaping and Screening 
Requirements relating to landscaping, screening, and buffering in the Special Districts are set forth in Article 15 (Landscaping and Screening).

G	Nonconforming Lots
Requirements relating to nonconforming lots, use, and structures in the Special Districts are set forth in Article 19 (Nonconforming Lots, Uses and Structures).

3.	Specific District Regulations
A.	Permitted Uses  
The uses permitted in the Special Districts established herein are listed in the Special Districts Use Matrix set forth in Table 4-12-6.1.  The uses shall be considered permitted as of right, subject to any limitations therein, this Ordinance, or other Town ordinances or codes, and the securing of an Improvement Location Permit.  

B.	Special Exceptions
The uses allowed as special exceptions in the Special Districts established herein are listed in the Special District Use Matrix set forth in Table 4-12-6.1. The uses may be allowed subject to any limitations set forth in Table 4-12-6.1, this Ordinance, or other Town ordinances or codes, and the securing of a special exception permit pursuant to Article 10 (Special Exceptions).

C.	Accessory Uses
Accessory uses, buildings, and structures customarily incidental to and commonly associated with a principal use may be permitted, subject to the provisions of Article 13 (Specific Use Requirements) and any limitation contained herein. Specifically permitted or allowed accessory uses, buildings and structures are listed in Table 4-12-6.2 (Special Districts Accessory Use Matrix). 

D.	Bulk Regulations 
Subject to the limitations contained therein and elsewhere in this Ordinance, the bulk regulations that apply to the Special Districts are listed in Table 4-12-6.3 (Special Districts Bulk Matrix). 
 

E.	Prohibited Uses 
Uses not listed as permitted or special uses in the Special Districts Use Matrix set forth in Table 4-12-6.1 are hereby strictly prohibited.

Table 00-15-153-12.6.1 	Special Districts Use Matrix
USES	A-1	C-1
Agricultural uses 	P(1)	
Animal hospitals and kennels	S	
Cellular towers	S	S
Cemeteries	P	
Child care centers	S	
Community centers – public		
Commercial outdoor recreation establishments		P
Conservation areas, including flood plains and retention basins, forest preserves, and unique environmental areas		P
Country Clubs, golf courses, tennis clubs, swim clubs, and other outdoor recreational facilities	S	S
Cultural facilities – Libraries	P	
Dwellings - farm homestead 	P(2)	
Feed mills and fertilizer sales	S	
Greenhouses and nurseries	S	
Grain elevators	S	
Hospitals and health care clinics	S	
Municipal buildings and facilities	P	P
Nursing homes	S	
Parks and playgrounds – public	P	P
Places of worship	P	
Public Utilities/ Essential services	P	P
Recreational Vehicle Parks		
Riding academy 	S	S
Roadside stands	P(3)	
Schools - public and private	P	
P = Permitted / S = Special Exceptions 

Note:	
1. 	Agricultural uses shall include confined feeding operations, provided any confined feeding operation and any structures associated therewith are located at least 200 feet from a street right-of-way line and 750 feet from a residential district boundary line or residential use. 
2.	The dwelling must be a farm homestead occupied by a family engaged in agricultural use.
3.	The use shall be permitted as a temporary use limited to a total of six (6) months out of a twelve (12) month period.
	
 

Table 00-15-153-12.6.2 	Special Districts Accessory Use Matrix
E.	Accessory Uses	A-1	C-1
Accessory uses customary and incidental to a permitted or special exception	P	P
Agricultural buildings under 5,000 square feet	P	
Agricultural buildings over 5,000 square feet	S	
Horse barns and stables	P(1)	P(1)
Home occupations	P	P
P = Permitted / S = Special Exception 

Note 1.	All horses shall be housed in a barn. No barn shall be located closer than 100 feet from any property line.  Furthermore, horses shall not be grazed in any required front yard setback.

Table 00-15-153-12.6.3 	Special Districts Bulk Matrix
Developments Standards	Districts
	A-1	C-1
Minimum Lot Size	2.5 acres (farm homestead)	1 acre
Minimum Lot Width	200 ft.	100 ft.
Yards		
	Front 	50 ft.	25 ft.
	Side (for each side)	20 ft. or 10% of the lot frontage	10 ft.
	Rear	40 ft.	20 ft.
Maximum Height		
	Principal	35 ft.	35 ft.
	Accessory	20 ft.	20 ft.
Minimum Size of Dwelling Unit	1,600 sq. ft. (1)	

Note: 1. This figure represents livable floor area, exclusive of garages and any story below grade.  All residential units shall be required to have an attached garage with the minimum space to accommodate two passenger automobiles. 

00-15-153-12.7		Residential Districts and Regulations  
1.	Purpose Statements	
The Residential Districts, set forth herein are comprised of three single-family districts and two multiple family districts.  The districts are intended to provide for a variety of housing choices for the citizens of the Town of Cumberland. 

2.	Cross-reference Guide to Additional Regulations
A.	Land Use Interpretation
All applications for a permitted uses or special exceptions which are not listed in Table 4-12-7.1 (Residential District Use Matrix) shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator for a use interpretation pursuant to the standards and procedures set forth in Article 4, Section 4-5-6 (Administrative Interpretations).

 
B.	Temporary Uses
Certain temporary uses may be permitted in the Residential Districts subject to the provisions of Article 16 (Temporary Uses). 

C.	Parking and Loading
The parking and loading requirements applicable in the Residential Districts are set forth in Article 14 (Off-Street Parking and Loading).  

D.	Signs
Sign regulations applicable in the Residential Districts are set forth in Article 18 (Signs).
	
E.	Performance Standards
Requirements relating to performance standards in the Residential Districts are set forth in Article 17 (Performance Standards).

F.	Landscaping and Screening 
Requirements relating to landscaping, screening, and buffering in the Residential Districts are set forth in Article 15 (Landscaping and Screening).

G.	Development Plan Review
Certain development activity within the R-5 and R-6 Residential District shall be subject to development plan review pursuant to Article 6 (Development Plans).

H.	Nonconforming Lots
Requirements relating to nonconforming lots, use, and structures in the Residential Districts are set forth in Article 19 (Nonconforming Lots, Uses and Structures).

3.	Specific District Regulations
A.	Permitted Uses  
The uses permitted in the Residential Districts established herein are listed in the Residential Districts Use Matrix set forth in Table 4-12-7.1.  The uses shall be considered permitted as of right, subject to any limitations therein, this Ordinance, or other Town ordinances or codes, and the securing of an Improvement Location Permit.  

B.	Special Exceptions
The uses allowed as special exceptions in the residential districts established herein are listed in the Residential District Use Matrix set forth in Table 4-12-7.1. The uses may be allowed subject to any limitations set forth in Table 4-12-7.1, this Ordinance, or other Town ordinances or codes, and the securing of a special exception permit pursuant to Article 10 (Special Exceptions).




C.	Accessory Uses
Accessory uses, buildings, and structures customarily incidental to and commonly associated with a principal use may be permitted, subject to the provisions of Article 13 (Specific Use Requirements) and any limitation contained herein. Specifically permitted or allowed accessory uses, buildings and structures are listed in Table 4-12-7.1 (Residential Districts Accessory Use Matrix). 

D.	Bulk Regulations 
Subject to the limitations contained therein and elsewhere in this Ordinance, the bulk regulations that apply to the Residential Districts are listed in Table 4-12-7.3 and Table 4-12-7.4 (Residential Districts Bulk Matrix). 

(a)	Design Standards for Residential Districts
(1)	All residential construction shall conform in street orientation and massing to adjacent dwellings.
(2)	All residential construction shall be designed to avoid having front façades that produce street orientation monotony. 
(3)	Schools, churches, and government buildings shall be built so that they terminate at a street vista whenever possible, and shall be of sufficient design to create visual anchors for the community.
(4)	All dwelling roofs, whether principal or accessory, shall be designed with a pitch consistent with neighboring dwellings.  
(5)	Where two wall materials are combined horizontally on one façade, the heavier material must be below.
(6)	In accordance with Indiana Code 36-7-2-4, all dwellings with a side yard setback of seven and half (7-1/2) feet or less shall have all exterior wall surfaces comprised of brick or stone, exclusive of windows and doorways.  Dwellings with a side yard setback more than seven and half (7-1/2) feet shall have all first floor exterior wall surfaces comprised of brick or stone, exclusive of windows and doorways.  Where vinyl siding or wood is used, such siding or wood shall be of premium grade.
(7)	 For all dwellings, no garage door or doors shall constitute more than thirty (30%) percent of the area of the front façade of the dwelling.
(8)	Exterior chimneys shall be finished in brick or stucco.
(9)	Schools, churches, and government buildings shall be constructed of stone, brick, marble or cast concrete.  All rooftop equipment shall be enclosed in building materials that match the structure or that are visually compatible.
 
E.	Prohibited Uses 
Uses not listed as permitted or special uses in the Residential Districts Use Matrix set forth in Table 4-12-6.1 are hereby strictly prohibited.
 

Table 00-15-153-12.7.1 	Residential District Use Matrix
Uses	R-1	R-2	R-3	R-4	R-5	R-6
Assisted living facilities						P
Bed and Breakfast Establishments	S	S	S	S	S	S
Boarding and rooming Houses					S	S
Cemeteries	S	S	S	S	S	S
Community centers – public	P	P	P	P	P	P
Country Clubs, golf courses, tennis clubs, swim clubs, and other outdoor recreational facilities	
S	
S	
S	
S	
S	
S
Dwellings – single-family detached	P	P	P	P		
Dwellings – Condos/Town house					P	P
Dwellings - multiple family					S	S
Funeral home and mortuaries						P
Home child care	S	S	S	S	S	S
Libraries and Museums	P	P	P	P	P	P
Municipal buildings, utilities, and services	P	P	P	P	P	P
Parks and playgrounds	P	P	P	P	P	P
Places of worship	S	S	S	S	P	P
Transportation utility services	S	S	S	S	S	S
Residential care homes	P	P	P	P	P	P
Schools - public and private	P	P	P	P	P	P
P = Permitted / S = Special Exception 	

Table 00-15-153-12.7.2 	Residential Districts Accessory Use Matrix
Accessory Uses	R-1	R-2	R-3	R-4	R-5	R-6
Accessory uses customary and incidental to a permitted or special exception	P	P	P	P	P	P
Garages and carports	P	P	P	P	P	P
Home occupations (See Article VI)	P	P	P	P	P	P
Mini barns (1)	P	P	P	P	P	P
Swimming pools	P	P	P	P	P	P
P = Permitted / S = Special Exception 	

Note: 1.	Mini barns shall be limited to a height of twelve (12) feet and shall not exceed one hundred forty-four (144) square feet. 

Table 00-15-153-12.7.3     Multiple-Family Residence District Dwelling Unit Size Matrix
Multiple-Family Residence District 
Dwelling Unit Type	Minimum Size of Dwelling Unit
	R-5	R-6
Efficient unit	850 sq. ft.	800 sq. ft.
One Bedroom	950 sq. ft.	900 sq. ft.
Two Bedroom	1,100 sq. ft.	1,000 sq. ft.
Three Bedroom	1,300 sq. ft.	1,150 sq. ft.
Each additional bedroom unit over three	250 sq. ft.	150 sq. ft.


Table 00-15-153-12.7.4 	Residential Districts Bulk Matrix
	R-1	R-2	R-3	R-4	R-5	R-6
Lot Requirements				
Min. Lot Size	16,000 
sq. ft.	14,000 
sq. ft.	12,000 
sq. ft.	10,000
sq. ft.	7,500 
sq. ft.	6,000 
sq. ft.
Min. Lot Width	100 ft.	90 ft	80 ft.	70 ft.	60 ft.	50 ft.
Max Lot Depth to Width Ratio	
3:1	
3:1	
3:1	
3:1	
3:1 	
3:1 
Max Lot Coverage				
Principal	35%	35%	35%	40%	40%	40%
Accessory	3% or 600 sq. ft. 1 	3% or 600 sq. ft. 1 	3% or 600 sq. ft. 1 	360
sq. ft.	360 
sq. ft.	360 
sq. ft.
Yards 				
Front	50 ft.	45 ft.	40 ft.	35 ft.	30 ft.	30 ft.
Side (for all buildings)						
	For each side 	10 ft.	7.5 ft.	5 ft.	5 ft.	5 ft.	5 ft.
Rear (for all buildings	25 ft.	20 ft.	20 ft.	20 ft.	20 ft.	20 ft.
Max Height				
Principal	40 ft.	40 ft.	40 ft.	40 ft.	40 ft.	40 ft.
Accessory	18 ft.	18 ft.	18 ft.	18 ft.	18 ft.	18 ft.
Minimum Gross Floor Area of Dwelling Unit			A.		
Single Story	1,600 
sq. ft.	1,400 
sq. ft.	1,200 
sq. ft.	1,000
sq. ft.	1,000 
sq. ft.	1,000 
sq. ft.
Multiple Story						
	First Floor	1,000
sq. ft	900
sq. ft	900
sq. ft.	800 
sq. ft	800 
sq. ft	800 
sq. ft
	Min. Total	1,650
sq. ft.	1,450
sq. ft	1,250
sq. ft.	1,050 
sq. ft.	1,050 
sq. ft.	1,050 
sq. ft.

NOTE: 1.	The greater of the two standards shall apply.

00-15-153-12.8	Business Districts and Regulations  
1.	Purpose Statements	
The Business Districts, set forth herein are comprised of two districts which, are intended to provide for a variety of business activities.  The B-1 district is established to provide areas for low intensity business operations where the B-2 district is geared to providing areas for more intensive business activities. 

2.	Cross-reference Guide to Additional Regulations
A.	Land Use Interpretation
All applications for permitted uses or special exceptions which are not listed in Table 4-12-8.1 (Business District Use Matrix) shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator for a use interpretation pursuant to the standards and procedures set forth in Article 4, Section 4-5-6 (Administrative Interpretations).

B.	Temporary Uses
Certain temporary uses may be permitted in the Business Districts subject to the provisions of Article 16 (Temporary Uses). 

C.	Parking and Loading
The parking and loading requirements applicable in the Business Districts are set forth in Article 14 (Off-Street Parking and Loading).  

D.	Signs
Sign regulations applicable in the Business Districts are set forth in Article 18 (Signs).
	
E.	Performance Standards
Requirements relating to performance standards in the Business Districts are set forth in Article 17 (Performance Standards).

F.	Landscaping and Screening 
Requirements relating to landscaping, screening, and buffering in Business Districts are set forth in Article 15 (Landscaping and Screening).

G.	Development Plan Review
Certain development activity within the Business Districts shall be subject to development plan review pursuant to Article 6 (Development Plans).

H.	Nonconforming Lots
Requirements relating to nonconforming lots, uses, and structures in the Business Districts are set forth in Article 19 (Nonconforming Lots, Uses and Structures).

3.	Specific District Regulations
A.	Permitted Uses  
The uses permitted in the Business Districts established herein are listed in the Business Districts Use Matrix set forth in Table 4-12-8.1.  The uses shall be considered permitted as of right, subject to any limitations therein, this Ordinance, or other Town ordinances or codes, and the securing of an Improvement Location Permit.  

B.	Special Exceptions
The uses allowed as special exceptions in the Business Districts established herein are listed in the Business District Use Matrix set forth in Table 4-12-8.1. The uses may be allowed subject to any limitations set forth in Table 4-12-8.1, this Ordinance, or other Town ordinances or codes, and the securing of a special exception permit pursuant to Article 10 (Special Exceptions).

C.	Accessory Uses
Accessory uses, buildings, and structures customarily incidental to and commonly associated with a principal use may be permitted, subject to the provisions of Article 13 (Specific Use Requirements) and any limitation contained herein. Specifically permitted or allowed accessory uses, buildings, and structures are listed in Table 4-12-8.2 (Business Districts Accessory Use Matrix). 

D.	Bulk Regulations 
Subject to the limitations contained therein and elsewhere in this Ordinance, the bulk regulations that apply to the Business Districts are listed in Table 4-12-8.3 (Business Districts Bulk Matrix). 

E.	Prohibited Uses 
Uses not listed as permitted or special uses in the Business Districts Use Matrix set forth in Table 4-12-8.1 are hereby strictly prohibited.

























Table 00-15-153-12.8.1 	Business District Use Matrix
USES	B-1	B-2
Animal clinics and hospitals		P
Auto filling station and service repair		P
Bakery		P
Bed and Breakfast establishments	S	S
Building materials service and supply		P
Business service establishments	P	P
Car wash		S
Child care center	S	S
Clinics (medical and dental)		S
Commercial indoor recreation establishments	S	P
Commercial outdoor recreation establishments		S
Commercial parking lot	S	P
Commercial shopping centers		P
Convenience mart fueling station		P
Cultural facilities and libraries 	P	P
Farm implement sales and services		S
Financial institutions	P	P
Funeral homes	S	S
Government buildings/ Post offices 	P	P
Greenhouses and nurseries - commercial		P
Grocery retail		P
Hospitals 		S
Hotels/ Motels	S	P
Indoor recreation and entertainment		P
Leasing/Rental agents, vehicles		P
Leasing/Rental agents, equipment 		S
Lumber yard		S
Manufactured home sales		S
Media broadcast stations		S
Membership organizations and halls	S	S
Motor Vehicle sales (new or used)		P
Municipal buildings and facilities	P	P
Nursing homes	S	S
Office – general	P	P
Parks	P	P
Places of Worship		S
Personal service establishments	P	P
Public transportation centers		S
Public utilities/ Essential services	P	P
Retail goods establishments	P	P
 

Business District Uses continued	B-1	B-2
Restaurants	
	Fast food	S	P
	Table service	P	P
Recreational vehicle sales		P
Schools – public and private	P	P
Studios, artist, dance and music	P	P
Taverns and Lounges	S	S
Theaters (indoor)		S
Wholesale sales		S
P = Permitted / S = Special Exception

Table 00-15-153-12.8.2 	Business District Accessory Use Matrix
Accessory Uses	B-1	B-2
Accessory uses and structures(2) (3)	P	P
Drive-through window facilities 	S	S
Kennels in association with animal hospitals		S
Outdoor storage(1) 		S
P = Permitted / S = Special Exception

Note  1.	The outdoor storage shall be of uncontaminated bulk materials. Outdoor storage shall also be enclosed effectively screened on all sides by a fence or a dense hedge. 
2.	No front yard shall be used for the sale or display of merchandise, and seasonal sales of merchandise or the display of merchandise shall not encroach into areas of required parking areas.
3.	Outdoor dining and beer gardens shall be set back from any residential district or dwelling a minimum of one hundred (100) feet. 

Table 00-15-153-12.8.3 	Business District Bulk Matrix
Development Standards	Districts
	B-1	B-2
Minimum Lot Size	5,500 sq. ft.	6,500 sq. ft.
Minimum Lot Frontage	50 ft.	60 ft.
Yards(1)		
	Front	25 ft.	30 ft.
	Side (for each side)	5 ft.	5 ft.
	Rear	25 ft.	25 ft.
Maximum Height	35 ft.	35 ft.
Maximum Coverage	65%	75%

00-15-153-12.9		Industrial Districts and Regulations  
1.	Purpose Statements	
The Industrial Districts, set forth herein are comprised of two districts which, are intended to provide for a variety of industrial activity.  The I-1 district is established to provide areas for low intensity industrial operations and service related activities where the I-2 district is geared to providing areas for more intensive industrial activities. 

 
2.	Cross-reference Guide to Additional Regulations
A.	Land Use Interpretation
All applications for permitted uses or special exceptions which are not listed in Table 4-12-8.1 (Industrial District Use Matrix) shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator for a use interpretation pursuant to the standards and procedures set forth in Article 4, Section 4-5-6 (Administrative Interpretations).

B.	Temporary Uses
Certain temporary uses may be permitted in the Industrial Districts subject to the provisions of Article 16 (Temporary Uses). 

C.	Parking and Loading
The parking and loading requirements applicable in the Industrial Districts are set forth in Article 14 (Off-Street Parking and Loading).  

D.	Signs
Sign regulations applicable in the Industrial Districts are set forth in Article 18 (Signs).
	
E.	Performance Standards
Requirements relating to performance standards in the Industrial Districts are set forth in Article 17 (Performance Standards).

F.	Landscaping and Screening 
Requirements relating to landscaping, screening, and buffering in the Industrial Districts are set forth in Article 15 (Landscaping and Screening).

G.	Development Plan Review
Certain development activity within the Industrial Districts shall be subject to development plan review pursuant to Article 6 (Development Plans).

H.	Nonconforming Lots
Requirements relating to nonconforming lots, use, and structures in the Industrial districts are set forth in Article 19 (Nonconforming Lots, Uses and Structures).

3.	Specific District Regulations
A.	Permitted Uses  
The uses permitted in the industrial districts established herein are listed in the Industrial Districts Use Matrix set forth in Table 4-12-9.1.  The uses shall be considered permitted as of right, subject to any limitations therein, this Ordinance, or other Town ordinances or codes, and the securing of an Improvement Location Permit.  



B.	Special Exceptions
The uses allowed as special exceptions in the Industrial Districts established herein are listed in the Industrial District Use Matrix set forth in Table 4-12-9.1. The uses may be allowed subject to any limitations set forth in Table 4-12-9.1, this Ordinance, or other Town ordinances or codes, and the securing of a special exception permit pursuant to Article 10 (Special Exceptions).

C.	Accessory Uses
Accessory uses, buildings, and structures customarily incidental to and commonly associated with a principal use may be permitted, subject to the provisions of Article 13 (Specific Use Requirements) and any limitation contained herein. Specifically permitted or allowed accessory uses, buildings, and structures are listed in Table 4-12-8.2 (Industrial Districts Accessory Use Matrix). 

D.	Bulk Regulations 
Subject to the limitations contained therein and elsewhere in this Ordinance, the bulk regulations that apply to the Industrial Districts are listed in Table 4-12-9.3 (Industrial Districts Bulk Matrix). 

E.	Prohibited Uses 
Uses not listed as permitted or special uses in the Industrial Districts Use Matrix set forth in Table 4-12-9.1 below are hereby strictly prohibited. 


















Table 00-15-153-12.9.1 	Industrial District Use Matrix
Industrial Uses	I-1	I-2
Airport 		S
Animal hospital 	P	P
Auto body repair	P	S
Auto service repair	P	P
Auto filling station	P	P
Auto and scrap salvage		S
Business and manufacturing service establishments	P	P
Clinics - medical 	S	S
Commodity dealers (including sales) fuel oil, heavy equipment and farm implements, and seed and fertilizer		P
Cellular towers 	S	S
Essential services and public utilities	P	P
Financial institutions and currency exchanges	S	S
Government buildings and facilities	P	P
Heavy manufacturing and industrial activities		S
Light manufacturing and industrial activities	P	P
Lumber and supply yards	S	P
Manufacture service facilities	S	P
Materials and equipment sales and service 		S
Media print establishments	P	
Membership organizations and halls	P	P
Municipal buildings and facilities	P	P
Offices – trade	P	
Outdoor amusement and entertainment establishments	P	P
Research and development industries	P	P
Schools – vocational		P
Self storage facility	P	P
Switching stations	P	P
 

Industrial District Uses continued	I-1	I-2
Trade contractor’s yard	P	P
Technology industries	P	P
Truck and distribution terminals		P
Vehicle towing facilities		S
Warehousing and distribution	P	P
Wholesale goods establishments		P
P = Permitted / S = Special Exception

Table 00-15-153-12.9.2 	Industrial District Accessory Use Matrix
USES	I-1	I-2
Accessory uses and structures(1)	P	P
Caretaker’s residence (located on same lot as the principal use)		S
Kennels in association with Animal hospitals	P	P
Outdoor storage 	S	S(2) 
P = Permitted / S = Special Exception

1. 	Accessory uses, buildings and structures customarily incidental to and commonly associated with a permitted or special exception may be permitted, provided they are operated and maintained under the same ownership, on the same parcel, and do not include structures or features inconsistent with the permitted use or special exception.
2. 	The outdoor storage shall be of uncontaminated bulk materials and shall be enclosed by a fence and effectively screened on all sides. 

Table 00-15-153-12.9.3 	Industrial Districts Bulk Matrix
Developments Standards	Districts
	I-1	I-2
Min. Lot Size	20,000 sq. ft.	40,000 sq. ft.
Min. Lot Width	80 ft.	100 ft.
Yards(1)		
	Front 	30 ft.	30 ft.
	Side	15 ft.	20 ft.
	Rear	35 ft. 	30 ft.
Maximum  Height	35 ft. (1)	35 ft. (1)
Floor Area Ratio	0.8	0.8
Maximum Coverage	40%	40%
           
1.	In the Industrial Districts, the height requirement shall not include stacks, tanks,
and other appurtenances related to a structure’s operation or safety, provided 
that such stacks, tanks or other appurtenances do not exceed a height of ten (10)
feet above the highest point of the structure or a maximum height of forty-five 
(45) feet.

 
ARTICLE 13	SPECIFIC USE REQUIREMENTS

00-15-153-13.1 	Lots
00-15-153-13.2 	Permitted Obstruction in Required Yards
00-15-153-13.3 	Accessory Uses and Structures
00-15-153-13.4 	Swimming Pools and Hot Tubs
00-15-153-13.5 	Fences and Walls
00-15-153-13.6		Home Occupations
00-15-153-13.7 	Bed and Breakfast Establishments
00-15-153-13.8		Residential Facility for the Mentally Ill
00-15-153-13.9 	Manufactured Home Standards
00-15-153-13.10 	Satellite Dish Antenna 
00-15-153-13.11 	Amateur Radio Antenna
00-15-153-13.12 	Wireless Communication Service Facilities
00-15-153-13.13	House, Apartment, Garage and Yard Sales
_______________________________________

00-15-153-13.1		Lots
1.	Number of Buildings on a Lot
Unless otherwise provided for in this Ordinance, no more than one principal use and no more than one principal building may be located on a single lot of record or a single zoning lot.

2.	Division of Lots 
No lot shall hereafter be divided into two or more lots for the purpose of transfer of ownership, unless the division shall conform to the applicable regulations of the Subdivision Control Ordinance and this Ordinance.

3.	Corner Lots
On a corner lot, the front lot line shall be the lot line having the shortest dimension along the street right of way line. The required front yard setback on corner lots shall apply to each side of the lot facing a street.

4.	Street Frontage and Access 
Every lot must have frontage on a public street and must be provided with facilities (traffic access points) for ingress and egress to and from such public street.  The number of facilities for ingress and egress for lots having one hundred (100) feet or less of frontage shall not exceed one (1).

5.	Lot Area Exclusions
Any portion of a lot located within the 100 year floodplain or floodway, within wetlands, lakes, ponds, areas used for stormwater detention, or areas used for floodplain compensatory storage, may not be counted towards the minimum lot area.

6.	Yards, Courts, and other Open Spaces on Lots
A.	Open Spaces
The provisions of yards, courts, and other open spaces and minimum lot area legally required for a building shall be a continuing obligation of the owner of such building or property on which it is located, as long as the building or property is in existence. Furthermore, no legally required yards, courts, or other open space, or minimum lot area allocated to any building, shall by virtue of change of ownership, or for any other reason, be used to satisfy yard, court, or other open space or minimum lot area requirements for any other building.

B.	Location of Required Yards, Courts, and other Open Space 
All yards, courts, and other open space allocated to a building or group of buildings shall be located on the same zoning lots as such building or group of buildings.

C.	Yards for Existing Buildings
No yard now or hereafter provided for a building existing on the effective date of this Ordinance shall subsequently be reduced below, or further reduced if already less than, the minimum yard requirement of this Ordinance for equivalent new construction. 

7.	Vision Clearance Areas
No building, structure or improvement, including landscaping, shall be erected, placed, planted or maintained so as to interfere with a vision clearance area located between the heights of two and one half (2 ½) feet and nine (9) feet above the crown of a street, driveway or alley.  A vision clearance area shall be established for all streets whether public or private, in one of the following manners:

(a)	on a corer lot, the clear sight triangular area is formed by the street right-of-way lines and the line connecting points twenty-five (25) feet from the intersection of such streets right-of-way lines, or in case of a round or cut property corner, from the intersection of the street right-of-way lines extended; or
(b)	on a lot adjacent to an at grade railroad crossing, the clear sight triangular area is formed by the side lot line coterminous with the railroad right-of-way, the street right-of-way line, and the line connecting points twenty-five (25) feet from the intersection of such lines, or
(c)	on a lot which has a driveway, abuts an alley or which is next to a lot which has a driveway, the two clear sight triangular areas are formed by the street right-of-way line, both sides of either the alley right-of-way or of the surface edge of the driveway, and the line connecting points (10) feet from the intersection of the street right-of-way line and driveway or alley lines extended.


00-15-153-13.2	 	Permitted Obstruction in Required Yards 
The following shall not be considered to be obstructions when located in the required yards specified.

1. 	All Yards
A. 	Open porches, patios, terraces, and decks not over eighteen (18) inches above the average grade, but not including permanently roofed-over porches, patios, terraces, and decks, provided, however, such porches, patios, terraces, and decks shall not extend more than two (2) feet into the required yards.
B. 	Residential window awnings attached to the principal dwelling, but not projecting more than three (3) feet out, and at least seven (7) feet above the average level of the adjoining ground.
C. 	Steps, four (4) feet or less above grade which are necessary for access to a permitted building.
D. 	Chimneys projecting eighteen (18) inches or less into the yard;
E. 	Arbors, trellises, flag poles, fountains, sculptures, plant boxes, and other similar ornamental objects. 
F.	Overhanging eaves and gutters projecting three (3) feet or less into the yard.
G.  No structure or obstruction shall be located within a utility easement.

2.	Front Yards 
A.	One story bay windows projecting, three (3) feet or less into the yard.
B.	Down spouts projecting not more than six (6) feet into the yard.

3.	Side and Rear Yards 
A.	Air conditioning units and compressors.
B.	One story bay windows projecting, three (3) feet or less into the yard.

4.	Rear Yards
A.	Enclosed, attached, or detached off street parking spaces. 
B.	Accessory sheds and similar buildings or structures for domestic or agricultural storage, provided that such buildings or structures shall be no nearer than five (5) feet to the rear lot line, and no nearer than ten (10) feet to any principal building.
C.	Balconies and breezeways.
 

00-15-153-13.3		Accessory Uses and Structures
1.	Accessory uses and structures are allowed in the various districts, subject to any particular limitations therein, and provided they shall be:

A.	incidental to the principal use or structure;
B.	operated and maintained under the same ownership and on same lot as the principal use or structure;
C.	subordinate in height, area, purpose, and location to the principal use or structure; 
D.	located at least ten (10) feet away from the principal use or structure; and
E.	compatible in style and materials with the principal use or structure.
	
Where authorized by this Ordinance, wireless communication service facilities may be considered an accessory use.

2.	Accessory buildings, except mini barns, shall be constructed on a concrete slab or other approved impervious surface. 

3.	Except as provided elsewhere in this Ordinance, no accessory use, building, or structure or portion thereof, shall be located in front of the rear building line of the principal building.  Furthermore, each accessory use, building, or structure or portion thereof, shall adhere to the side or rear yard requirements of the district in which it is located. 

4.	No accessory use, building, or structure shall be constructed prior to the start of construction of the principal building.

5.	Porches, patios or decks eighteen (18) inches above grade shall comply with all yard setback requirements of the district in which it is located except for stairs, which may encroach into the required yards.  Such porches, patios or decks shall require an Improvement Location Permit.  


00-15-153-13.4		Swimming Pools and Hot Tubs
In addition to conforming to the regulations for accessory uses and structures set forth above, all swimming pools and hot tubs shall meet the following requirements.

1.	No accessory swimming pool or hot tub shall be located in any required front yard or in front of the front building line of a principal use.

2.	No accessory swimming pool or hot tub shall be located in any required side or rear yard.

3.	In order to prevent persons, children or animals from the potential harm posed by swimming pools and hot tubs, a fence or other structural barrier shall enclose all swimming pools and hot tubs. The fence or other structural barrier shall be equipped with a self-latching gate.  In the alternative, a property owner may employ a safety pool cover complying with Indiana Administrative Code 20-4-27(c).  Such safety cover shall be deployed at all times when the pool is not in use.

4.	No pools or hot tubs shall be erected or constructed unless adequate distance from overhead electrical wires is provided in accordance with the most current additions of the National Safety Code and the National Electrical Code. 

5.	All swimming pools and hot tubs, including associated decking shall be included in the calculation of maximum lot coverage.


00-15-153-13.5		Fences and Walls
In addition to conforming to the regulations for accessory uses and structures set forth above, all fences, walls, and like structural barriers shall meet the following requirements.

1	Improvement Location Permit
No fence, wall, or like structural barrier shall be erected or substantially altered in the Town without first being issued an Improvement Location Permit pursuant to Article 5, Section 4-5-1 (Improvement Location Permits).

2.	Fences Permitted Generally
A.	Residential Districts
The following fences are permitted in the residential districts:
(a)	Wood. 
(b)	Wrought iron.
(c)	Split-rail.
(d)	Picket.
(e)	Masonry or stucco wall. 
(f)	Zinc coated chain link with a vinyl coating.  The use of slats in chain link fencing is prohibited.
(g)	Live continuous dense hedge of a non-noxious nature.

B.	Non-residential Districts
(a)	Wood.
(b)	Wrought iron.
(c)	Split-rail.
(d)	Picket.
(e)	Chain-link of conventional construction utilizing metal piping or tubing for fence post [except on properties located along US 40 (Old National Road)].
(f)	Masonry or stucco wall.
(g)	Live continuous dense hedge of a non-noxious nature. 
(h)	Barbed wire, subject to Section 4-13-4[6].

C.	Safety Fencing
The Zoning Administrator may require safety fencing and railings for all construction sites that present an immediate danger to the public health, safety and welfare. Specific requirements for safety fencing and railings are set forth in Title 15, Chapter 
154, Section 00-15-154-03 of the Cumberland Code of Ordinances. 

3.	Location and Height Limitations
A.	Residential Districts
(a)	Fences, walls, or like structural barriers located in a front yard shall be limited to a maximum height of four (4) feet, except for live continuous dense hedges which shall be limited to a maximum height of three (3) feet.
(b)	Fences, walls, or like structural barriers located in a side or rear yard shall be limited to a maximum height of six (6) feet. 
(c)	Fence posts or support framework may exceed these height limitations by four (4) inches. 

B.	Non-residential Districts
(a)	In all Business Districts, fences, walls, or like structural barriers shall be prohibited in any front yard.  For side and rear yards in the Business Districts, fences, walls, or like structural barriers shall be limited to a maximum height of six (6) feet.
(b)	In all Industrial Districts, fences, walls, or like structural barriers shall be limited to a maximum height of eight (8) feet. 
(c)	Fence posts or support framework may exceed these height limitations by six (6) inches.

C.	Highways, Streets and Public Right of Ways
No fence, wall, or like structural barrier shall be erected or allowed on a public street, highway, alley or other public right-of-way. Fences, walls, or like structural barriers erected or placed in such areas shall be a violation of this Ordinance, subject to the provisions of Article 20 (Enforcement), and may be summarily removed by the Town of Cumberland.

 
D.	Utility Easements
No fence, wall, or like structural barriers is permitted within a utility easement. 

4.	Construction and Maintenance Requirements
A.	Construction
(a)	All fences shall be designed and constructed in conformity with the wind, stress, foundation, structural, and other requirements of the Building Code and other ordinances of the Town of Cumberland. 
(b)	All fences, walls, and like structural barriers shall meet the vision clearance requirements set forth in Section 4-13-1(7) above.
(c)	All fence posts and support framework shall be located on the side of the fence facing the fence owner's property, and the fence’s finished side shall face the exterior of the lot.
(d)	All chain link fences must be a minimum of nine (9) gauge. 
(e)	All fences that completely enclose a lot or portion thereof shall have at least one gate access.
(f)	No fence shall be constructed of a material or in a manner obviously intended to inflict great bodily harm should a person or animal attempt to climb or scale it.  Such material includes, but is not limited to, electrically charged wires or other electrical conduit, broken glass, razor blades, and sharp or ragged metal spikes or spears.  Barbed wire may be permitted pursuant to Paragraph 6 of this Section.
 
B.	Maintenance
Every fence shall be maintained in a structurally sound and safe condition at all times. Every fence shall be maintained in a good and presentable condition, free of clutter, debris, damage or missing elements. Every damaged or missing element of any fence shall be repaired or replaced immediately.

5.	Enforcement 
A.	Any fence, wall, or like structural barrier erected, enlarged, expanded, altered, relocated, maintained, or repaired contrary to this Section shall be deemed a violation of this Ordinance and shall be subject to the provisions of Article 20 (Enforcement). 

B.	Subject to the requirements of Article 19 (Nonconforming Lots, Uses and Structures) any fence lawfully existing at the time this Ordinance is adopted that does not conform to this Section may be continued so long as it otherwise remains lawful.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, the following fences, due to the public safety risk they pose, shall be immediately removed or immediately brought in full compliance with this Section upon adoption of this Ordinance:

(a)	Nonconforming barbed wire or electrically charged fences, and
(b)	Dilapidated or deteriorated fences.

6.	Special Regulations for Barbed Wire Fences
Barbed wire fences may be permitted only in Industrial Districts and B-2 Business Districts, and then only where the Zoning Administrator first makes a finding that such a fence is necessary to protect the safety of persons or for security of the property, and issues a permit accordingly.  In making his determination the Zoning Administrator may consider the type of use involved, the property’s security needs or its inherent danger to the public safety.

A.	Where the Zoning Administrator determines that a barbed wire fence is appropriate, the fence shall be installed at least six (6) feet above ground level, and either: 

(a)	in a gable configuration having five strands or less, or 
(b) 	attached to an angled arm supported approximately forty-five (45) degrees to the vertical and having three strands or less.

7.	Conflicts with Other Provisions
Nothing in this Section shall be interpreted as requiring permits for ordinary landscaping, flowers or the like.  Furthermore, nothing in this Section shall modify any requirements of Chapter 15 (Landscaping Requirements).  Should any provision of this Section be in conflict with any other provision of this Ordinance, the provision most restrictive shall control.


00-15-153-13.6	 	Home Occupations
1.	In addition to conforming to the general regulations for accessory uses and structures set forth in this Chapter, all home occupations shall comply with each of the following requirements.

A.	The operator of every home occupation shall reside in the dwelling unit in which the home occupation operates.

B.	The home occupation shall be conducted entirely within the principal residential structure and shall be incidental and subordinate to the principal residential use of the structure. No work shall be conducted within any attached or detached garage.  Limited storage may be allowed in any attached or detached garage provided, such storage does not create a nuisance or prevents the utilization of the garage for parking motor vehicles.

C.	The home occupation shall not interfere with the delivery of utilities or other services to the neighborhood in which the principal residential structure is located.

D.	No traffic shall be generated by such home occupation in greater volume than would normally be expected in a residential neighborhood, and the need for off-street parking shall be accommodated on site.

E.	The activity shall not generate any noise, vibrations, smoke, dust, odors, heat, glare, or interfere with radio or television reception in the area that would exceed that normally produced by a dwelling unit used solely for residential purposes.

F.	No toxic, explosive, flammable, radioactive, or other hazardous materials shall be used, sold, or stored on the site. However, materials common to ordinary household use are permitted, provided the quantity of such materials does not exceed that found in an ordinary household.

G.	Alteration of the residential appearance of the principal residential structure designed to promote or draw attention to the home occupation shall not be permitted.  Furthermore, no signs, displays, or other indications of a home occupation in the yard, on the exterior of the dwelling unit, or visible from anywhere outside of the dwelling unit shall be permitted.

H.	No visitors in conjunction with the home occupation (clients, patrons, pupils, sales persons, etc.) shall be permitted between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., and the home occupation shall not cause a significant increase in the amount of traffic or parking on any residential street.  Furthermore, deliveries for the home occupation shall not restrict traffic circulation and may only occur between 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. Monday through Friday.

I.	No outdoor display or storage of materials, goods, supplies, or equipment shall be permitted on the premises.

J.	The home occupation shall, at all times, comply with all other applicable laws and ordinances.

K.	The total interior floor area used for the home occupation shall not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the total interior floor area of the dwelling, provided that in no case shall the area of a home occupation exceed six hundred (600) square feet.

L.	No more than one (1) person may be employed on the site in connection with the home occupation that is not an actual resident of the dwelling unit.

M.	More than one home occupation may be permitted within an individual dwelling unit, provided all other standards and criteria applicable to home occupations are complied with.  Such criteria shall be applied cumulatively to both uses as opposed to singularly to each use.  

2.	Certain uses by their very nature of investment or operation have a pronounced tendency, once commenced, to expand beyond the scope of activity permitted for home occupations, and thereby impair the integrity of the residential district in which they are located.  For this reason, the following uses, regardless of their possible compliance with the standards set for accessory use or home occupations are strictly prohibited:

A.	Animal hospitals, kennels, or exotic bird or wildlife retailing;
B.	Barber Shops or beauty parlors;
C.	Clubs, including fraternities and sororities;
D.	Funeral parlors;
E.	Firearm and ammunition sales
F.	Medical or dental clinics;
G.	Nursing homes;
H.	Restaurants;
I.	Vehicle  or machine repair;
J.	Welding or machine shops;
K.	Other similar uses as determined by the Zoning Administrator pursuant to Article 5, Section 4-5-6 (Administrative Interpretations).

3.	Any violation of this Section 4-13-6 shall be deemed to a violation of this Ordinance and subject to the provisions of Chapter 20 (Enforcement). 

00-15-153-13.7		Bed and Breakfast Establishments
Bed and breakfast establishments, where allowed, shall adhere to the following requirements.

1.	Bed and breakfast establishments shall only be located within and accessory to an owner-occupied single-family detached home.
2.	Bed and breakfast establishments shall comply with all local, county and state fire and health regulations.
3.	No ancillary commercial use shall be operated in connection with an approved bed and breakfast establishment. 
4.	The operation of a bed and breakfast establishment shall not be considered or classified as a Home Occupation.
5.	A bed and breakfast establishment shall include no more than five (5) guestrooms for rent.
6.	Accommodations shall not be provided to a particular guest for more than fourteen (14) consecutive days.

00-15-153-13.8		Residential Facility for the Mentally Ill
A residential facility for the mentally ill as defined in this Ordinance and by Indiana Code 12-7-2-167 may not be located within three thousand (3,000) feet of another residential facility for the mentally ill, as measured between lot lines.

00-15-153-13.9		Manufactured Homes Standards
Manufactured homes as scattered-site residences shall, in addition to the requirements for all residential uses in such districts, meet each of the following requirements and limitations.

1.	The home shall meet all requirements of this Ordinance, possess all necessary improvement location, building and occupancy permits and other certification required by this Ordinance.
2.	The home shall be attached and anchored to a permanent foundation in conformance with the regulations of the Indiana Residential Code and the manufacturer's installation specifications. 
3.	The home shall comply with the provisions of the Town Building Code, pertaining to the exterior covering material, the roof covering material, roof pitch, and other materials and exterior features customarily used on site-built residential dwellings.  All exterior covering material shall extend over the top of the foundation.
4.	The home shall meet the minimum square footage requirements for the appropriate zoning district.
5.	The home shall be oriented such that its longest side is the side that faces the street frontage.

 
00-15-153-13.10		Satellite Dish Antenna 
These regulations shall apply to satellite dish antenna and other satellite reception devices greater than two (2) feet in diameter. 

1.	General Purposes
A.	The regulations contained herein are designed to promote the public health and safety by providing criteria for the placement of these antennae that ensures that all such installations are performed in a manner that limits endangerment of life and property on the site and on surrounding properties due to collapse or destruction.

B.	These regulations are also designed to decrease the potential for urban blight in residential neighborhoods generated by guy wires, poles, cables, and other appurtenances. 

C.	These regulations are, however, intended to allow satellite dish antenna and other satellite reception devices to be located in a manner that: (1) does not unreasonably delay or prevent the installation, maintenance or use of the antenna; (2) does not unreasonably increase the cost of installation, maintenance or use of the antenna; or (3) preclude reception of an acceptable quality signal.

2.	General Requirements
A.	No person shall install a satellite dish antenna greater than two (2) feet in diameter without first obtaining an improvement location permit.

B.	Satellite dish antenna may be erected in any residential zoning district provided the following criteria are met.

(a)	The satellite dish antenna shall be ground mounted.  
(b)	The diameter shall not exceed ten (10) feet.
(c)	The height shall not exceed twelve (12) feet.
(d)	It shall be located between the rear building line of the principal structure and the required rear yard set back line.  It case of a corner lot, such antenna shall not be located within the exterior side yard set back line.

C.	In the R-6 residential district, a satellite dish antenna may be roof mounted provided the diameter does not exceed ten (10) feet, and the height of the antenna does not exceed twelve (12) feet.  A roof mounted satellite dish antenna shall be located at least ten (10) feet behind the front roofline of the structure.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, a roof-mounted antenna shall not exceed the maximum height requirement of the zoning district within which it is located.

D.	Satellite dish antenna may be erected in any non-residential zoning district provided the following criteria are met.

(a)	The diameter shall not exceed twelve (12) feet.
(b)	The height of a ground-mounted antenna shall not exceed twenty-five (25) feet.
(c)	The height of a roof-mounted antenna shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a roof-mounted antenna shall not exceed the maximum height requirement of the zoning district within which it is located.  Furthermore, a roof mounted satellite dish antenna shall be located at least ten (10) feet behind the front roofline of the structure.
(d)	A ground-mounted antenna shall comply with the yard setback requirements of the district within which it is located. However, no antenna shall be located in any front yard or open space. 

E.	Satellite dish antennas shall be installed and maintained in compliance with all applicable building and electrical codes, and shall be subject to the following standards.

(a)	Satellite dish antennae shall be solid in color.
(b)	Satellite dish antennae must be permanently mounted except for portable antennas that may be allowed as a temporary use subject to Article 16  (Temporary Use Requirements).
(c)	Not more than one (1) antenna greater than two (2) feet in diameter shall be allowed on any lot unless shown on an approved site plan.


00-15-153-13.11		Amateur Radio Antenna
Amateur radio serves the community by providing emergency communications that benefit both the Town of Cumberland, and central Indiana generally.  The Town of Cumberland supports these valuable community services and therefore, individual amateur transmitting and receiving antennae and associated support structures owned or operated by licensed amateur radio operators shall be permitted as accessory structures in accordance with these provisions.

1.	Amateur Radio Club and repeater station antennae and support structures are permitted to such a height as necessary to maintain reliable communications.

2.	Antenna structures of amateur radio operators licensed by the Federal Communication Commission may, as of right, have a height not exceeding seventy-five (75) feet above grade.  The height shall be measured vertically and shall include the height of any building upon which the antenna support structure is mounted.

3.	Antennae may be located above the antenna support structure as reasonably necessary for effective radio communications.

4.	Upon the Federal Communication Commission licensed operator’s cessation of ownership or leasehold rights in the subject antenna support structure, or on loss of his or her federal amateur radio license (whichever occurs first), the operator shall forthwith (but in no case more than thirty (30) days) safely remove all antenna support structures at no expense to the Town.  In the event that the operator fails or refuses to remove the antenna support structure, then the owner of the subject lot shall be responsible for the removal of all such structures.

5.	On residential lots, any antenna support structure shall be located in an area between the rear building line of the principal structure and the required rear yard setback line.  It case of a corner lot, such antenna shall not be located within the exterior side yard setback.

6.	Nothing in this Section shall affect any existing antenna support structure utilized by any federally licensed amateur radio operator which has been constructed and is in place prior to the passage of this Ordinance.

00-15-153-13.12	Wireless Communication Service Facilities
1.	Purpose 
The purpose of this Section is to regulate the placement, construction, and modification of wireless communication service facilities in order to protect the health, safety, and general welfare of the public while at the same time not unreasonably interfering with the development of the competitive wireless telecommunications marketplace within the corporate limits of the Town of Cumberland.

2.	District Requirements
Wireless communication service facilities may be allowed in the following districts. (Subject to the limitations set forth herein, wireless communication service facilities shall be exempt from the maximum height limitations established in each zoning district.)  Wireless communication service facilities requiring a special exception shall be subject to Article 10 (Special Exceptions). Wireless communication service facilities permitted as of right shall be subject to the requirements of Article 5, Section 4-5-1 (Improvement Location Permits). 

Districts	Use Status	Height Limitations –(Freestanding or Guy Wire)
		
A-1 and C-1	Permitted	Not to exceed 75 feet
A-1 and C-1	Special Exception	Not to exceed 200 feet
B-1 and B-2	Permitted	Not to exceed 200 feet
B-1 and B-2	Special Exception	Not to exceed 350 feet
I-1 and I-2	Permitted	Not to exceed 500 feet
		
Roof or Building Mounted
Towers and antennas may be erected on existing buildings in the aforementioned districts by right provided the height of such towers or antennas shall be thirty percent (30%) or less of the height of the host building.    Towers or antennas exceeding thirty percent (30%) shall require a Special Exception permit.  No roof or building mounted tower or antenna shall exceed fifty percent (50%) of the height of the host building.

A.	For the purpose of determining compliance with the requirements of this Section, measurement of a facility’s height shall include the structure itself, the base pad, and any other equipment attached thereto that extends more than twenty (20) feet over the top of the structure itself.  The structure height shall be measured from grade.

3.	Town Policy
The Town of Cumberland encourages the co-location of commercial wireless telecommunications service facility antennae on existing or planned commercial wireless telecommunications service facilities in order to minimize the proliferation of antenna support structures and to achieve the most efficient use of land within the community.  Therefore, the co-location of a commercial wireless telecommunications service facility antenna on existing facilities, whether such facilities were originally permitted as of right or through the special exception process, will only require obtaining an Improvement Location Permit pursuant to Article 5, Section 4-5-1 (Improvement Location Permit).

4.	Applications
In addition to requirements of Article 10 (Special Exceptions), Article 5, Section 4-5-1 (Improvement Location Permit) or any other requirement prescribed by this Ordinance as the case may be, applications for the establishment of a commercial wireless telecommunications service facility shall include at least the following information.

A.	The name, address, and telephone number of the owner and lessee of the parcel of land upon which the commercial wireless telecommunications service facility is to be situated.  If the applicant is not the owner of the property, documentation that the owner of the property has granted, by agreement, use of the property for the proposed facility shall be required.

B.	The name, address, and telephone number of all owners of other wireless communication service facilities within the service area of the proposed facility, including municipally owned property. 

C.	Documentation, signed by an Engineer licensed in the State of Indiana, that the facility is designed in accordance with the Town’s Building Code, in addition to all other state and federal laws and regulations applicable thereto.

D.	An affidavit attesting to the fact that the applicant made diligent, but unsuccessful, efforts to receive permission to install or co-locate the applicant’s facility on another service provider’s facility within the service area desired by the applicant and that the proposed site is therefore, of practical necessity for the applicant.

5.	General Requirements 
In addition to any other requirement prescribed by this Ordinance, a wireless communication service facility shall be required to meet the following requirements.

A.	No wireless communication service facility shall be established or used within the Town of Cumberland until all necessary approvals and permits, whether local, state, or federal have been secured.

B.	No wireless communication service facility shall be located in any required yard setback, nor shall a free standing or guy anchored wireless communication service facility be located within fifty (50) feet of any property boundary line. All guy wires must be situated on the same lot as the wireless communications service facility it is supporting.

C.	A free standing or guy anchored wireless communication service facility shall not be located any closer than five hundred (500) feet from a residential use, residential district or Planned Unit Development district containing residential structures. 

D.	Free standing or guy anchored wireless communication service facilities and their related accessory structures when located on a site as an accessory use shall be located behind the rear building line of the structure housing the principal use.  Vehicle access to the tower and related accessory structure shall not interfere with the parking or vehicular circulation provided for the principal use.

E.	Wireless communication service facilities shall be designed to be compatible with neighboring buildings and uses. Efforts shall be taken when locating wireless communication service facilities to preserve or enhance the existing character of a site’s topography and vegetation.

F.	All wireless communication service facilities shall be designed to accommodate three or more wireless communication providers in order to facilitate the co-location of other service provider’s facilities.

G.	Free standing or guy anchored wireless communication service facilities, including any associated accessory building or structure, shall be enclosed by a fence or wall at least eight (8) feet in height. All fences and walls shall be screened with appropriate landscaping and screening techniques, so that no more than two-thirds (2/3) of the surface of the fence or wall is visible within three (3) years after erection of facility from a public street or from any adjoining residential lot.

H.	No signs, including advertising, logos, or corporate symbols shall be permitted on any wireless communication service facility or any building or structure accessory thereto.

I.	Every wireless communication service facility shall be fully automated.  No employee of the communication provider shall be stationed at the site, except for the completion of periodic maintenance.

J.	Equipment storage shelters associated with a wireless communication service facility shall be compatible with the surrounding buildings or natural environment and shall not exceed a height of fifteen (15) feet, nor exceed a size of four hundred and fifty (450) square feet. No such accessory use shall be established prior to the principal use. 

K.	No signals or lights or other illumination shall be permitted on the wireless communication service facilities unless required by the Federal Communication Commission, the Federal Aviation Administration, or by the Town of Cumberland.  Where lights are provided, such lights shall not exceed the minimum standards of the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) for red obstruction lighting system contained in Advisory Circular No. 70/460-IF dated 27 September 1978, as amended.

L.	Every wireless communication service facility shall be separated from all other wireless communication service facilities a minimum of one thousand (1,000) feet.

M. No wireless communication service facility may disturb or diminish the radio or television or similar reception for any adjoining property.

 
6.	Abandonment or Obsolescence
Where a wireless communication service facility becomes abandoned, obsolescent, or ceases to be used, except in relation to acts of God, it shall be taken down and removed from the premises by the owner of the facility, or its agents, or the person having control of the premises on which the facility is located within six (6) months of a finding by the Zoning Administrator of its abandonment, obsolescence, or cessation of use.

00-15-153-13.13	House, Apartment, Garage and Yard Sales

House, apartment, garage and yard sales may be allowed in any residential district subject to the following conditions.

1.	Sale merchandise shall be limited to the personal possessions of the owner – occupant of the dwelling unit at which such sale is being conducted.
2.	Such use shall be limited to a period not to exceed three (3) consecutive days.
3.	No more than two (2) such sales shall be conducted from the same residence in any twelve (12) month period.
4.	The hours of operation shall be limited to 8 a.m. to 7 p.m.
5.	One sign may be permitted in connection with the sale provided such sign shall be placed only in the yard of the premises conducting the sale.



00-15-153-13.14	Flags
Flags of any country, state, or unit of local government are allowed in all zoning districts. Flags shall not exceed sixty (60) square feet.  Flagpoles accompanying such flags shall meet all setback requirements and shall be limited to a height of thirty (30) feet in residential districts and forty (40) feet in non-residential districts.  Flags for sports teams, schools, athletic programs, social organizations, or similar flags supporting a cause as long as they are no larger than 24 square feet in area.  Commercial flags of a advertising nature are subject to the requirements of Article 18, Signs.


 
ARTICLE 14	OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING

00-15-153-14.1	Off-Street Parking and Loading Required
00-15-153-14.2 	General Requirements
00-15-153-14.3 	Location of Off-Street Parking Facilities
00-15-153-14.4 	Specifications for Off-Street Parking Areas
00-15-153-14.5	Computation for Required Spaces
00-15-153-14.6 	Stacking Requirements for Drive-Through Facilities
00-15-153-14.7 	Off-Street Parking Requirements
00-15-153-14.8	Mobility Impaired Accessible Parking
00-15-153-14.9 	Specific Requirements Related to the Storage of Recreational Vehicles
00-15-153-14.10	Off-Street Loading General Requirements
00-15-153-14.11  Off-Street Loading Specific Requirements
_________________________________________________________

00-15-153-14.1	 Off-Street Parking and Loading Required 
Subject to the limitations herein and elsewhere in this Ordinance, off-street parking and loading facilities shall be permitted as an accessory use in all zoning districts.  All uses, buildings, and structures established after the effective date of this Ordinance shall provide accessory parking and loading facilities in the amount and manner specified herein.  

00-15-153-14.2	 General Requirements
1.	Previously Issued Building Permits 
Where a building permit or improvement location permit has been issued prior to the effective date of this Ordinance, and construction has begun within one year of such issuance and diligently pursued thereafter, parking and loading facilities may be provided in the amounts required for the issuance of the building permit regardless of any different amounts required by this Ordinance.

2.	Change of Use or Intensity of Use 
Where the use of an existing building or structure is changed; or where the intensity of a use is increased through addition of dwelling units, gross floor area, or other units of measurement, parking and loading facilities shall be provided for the increase required for the new use or the increase in intensity.

3.	No Reduction of Existing Parking and Loading Facilities 
Accessory off-street parking facilities in existence on the effective date of this Ordinance and located on the same lot as the building or use served shall not hereafter be reduced below the requirements for this Ordinance unless a new use requires a lesser number of spaces and the reduction has been approved by the Plan Commission.

4.	Additional Parking and Loading Facilities for Existing Uses
Nothing in this Ordinance shall be deemed to prevent the voluntary establishment of off-street parking or loading facilities to serve any existing use or building, provided such parking or loading facilities meet all regulations of this Ordinance governing the location, design, amount, and operation of such facilities.

 
5.	Type of Facilities 
Off-street parking and loading facilities for all types of uses may be provided in either paved surface lots, under ground, including under a building or structure, or in parking structures conforming to the provisions of this Ordinance.

6.	Parking Plan Required
Any application for a building permit, or improvement location permit, shall include a parking site plan, drawn to scale and fully dimensioned, showing all proposed parking or loading facilities to be provided.

00-15-153-14.3	 Location of Off-Street Parking Facilities
Except for Town owned property, off street parking and loading facilities shall be located on the same lot as the use for which it is provided.  In the residential districts, off-street parking facilities shall not be located in any required setback or yard.  (This provision shall not be interpreted to prevent the parking of vehicles on driveways which, may cross through a required yard.)  In the business and industrial districts, off-street parking facilities may be located in any yard provided that no such facility is closer than five (5) feet to any side or rear property line and ten (10) feet to any right-of-way line. No customer or employee parking shall be permitted on driveway approaches, landscaped areas, cross access driveways, frontage roads, adjacent alleys, streets, public right-of-ways, or vacant lots, except as authorized below. 

1.	Special Location Provisions
Notwithstanding the foregoing provision for on-site parking, off-street parking may be provided off-site in the following limited circumstances. 

A. 	In all business districts, parking facilities may be located within three hundred (300) feet of the building they are required to serve.
B.	In all industrial districts, parking facilities may be located within six hundred (600) feet of the building they are required to serve.
C.	The distances specified above shall be measured from the nearest point of the parking facility to the nearest point of the building that such facility is required to serve.

2.	Shared or Collective Off-Street Parking
A.	Off-street parking facilities for separate uses may be provided collectively if the total number of spaces so provided collectively is not less than the sum of the separate requirements for each such use, and further provided, that such collective facilities meet all regulations governing location of accessory parking spaces in relation to the use served.

B.	The Board of Zoning Appeals Plan Commission may, by special exception, authorize up to a twenty-five percent (25%) reduction of the total number of required parking spaces for two or more uses jointly providing off-street parking when their respective hours of operation do not substantially overlap.  The property owners involved in the shared off-street parking facility shall be provided to the Zoning Administrator.  In consideration of this reduction, the property owner and/or petitioner shall provide the following to the Plan Commission:

(a)	Sufficient data to indicate that there is not a substantial conflict in the principal hours of operation of the uses.

(b)	A cross-parking agreement or similar legal agreement approved by the Town Attorney  in a recordable format and executed by all owners of all the affected shared parking areas.  The instrument shall also be recorded with the Hancock County Recorder’s Office.

00-15-153-14.4	 Specifications for Off-Street Parking Areas
1.	Size and Access
A.	The dimension of a required off-street parking space shall be as set forth below. 

B.	Each required off-street parking space shall open directly upon an aisle or driveway in such a width and design as set forth below to provide safe and efficient means of vehicular access to such parking space.  No portion of a street or alley may be used in computing such aisle or access area.  All off-street parking facilities shall be designed with appropriate means of vehicular access to a street.

Standards for Parking Spaces, Aisles and Parking Bays
Angle of Parking	Width of 
Space	Vertical
Clearance	Depth of 
Space 	Width of Aisle
One way/two way
30	9.0’
8.0’	18.0’
11.0’/22.0’
45	9.0’
8.0’	19.0’
12.6’/24.0
60	9.0’
8.0’	20.0’	12’.6”/24.0’
70	9.0’
8.0’	20.0’
14’.6”/24.0’
80	9.0’
8.0’	19.0’
14’.6”/24.0’
90	9.0’
8.0’	18.0’	24.0’/24.0’
Parallel	10.0’	8.0’	24.0’	14.0’/22.0’
				

3.	Grading, Surfacing and Striping. 
A.	Grading
Off-street parking lots or areas shall be graded for proper drainage. No area of any parking lot or structure, excluding access ramps, shall have a slope in excess of five percent (5%).  No ramp shall have a slope in excess of eight percent (8%).

B.	Surfacing
Off-street parking lots or areas shall be fully improved with a hard surface pavement such as bituminous asphalt or concrete material capable of carrying a wheel load of four thousand (4,000) pounds.  Such lots or areas shall be maintained at all times in a manner to prevent the release of dust and to be free of trash and debris. In addition, Off-street parking lots or areas shall provide curbing along the perimeter of the parking area and along any interior island.

C.	Striping 
Striping of the surface to define each parking space shall be provided and visible at all times.

 
4.	Curbing  
Off-street parking lots or areas shall provide concrete curbing along the perimeter of the parking area and along any interior island.  Furthermore, off-street parking lots or areas shall have no pavement or curbing located closer than five (5) feet in non-residential areas and two (2) feet in residential areas from any property line unless it can be specifically demonstrated that the intent is to extend the parking to adjoining properties. A parking plan must be submitted and approved during the review process that shows how the extension of parking will occur.

5.	Sight Clearance
At points of ingress and egress for off street parking areas, no structure, parked vehicle, sign, or plant material shall obstruct the vision clearance requirements set forth in this Ordinance. 

6.	Illumination
All off-street parking lots or parking structures of five (5) or more spaces shall provide lighting.  The level of illumination at any point in the parking lot or structure shall not be less than one foot-candle measured at the pavement.  All lighting used shall be shielded or otherwise optically controlled so to provide non-glare illumination in a manner that does not create a nuisance on adjacent property.

7.	Landscaping
For all parking areas, regardless of size, a 5 foot wide landscaped divider strip shall be placed between all public sidewalks and parking areas.  Additional landscape requirements for off-street parking and off-street loading areas are provided in Article 15 (Landscaping and Screening).  

8.	Use
Unless otherwise authorized by this Ordinance, off-street parking lots or areas shall not be used for the commercial sale, repair, dismantling, or serving of any vehicles, equipment, materials, or supplies.

00-15-153-14.5	 Computation of Required Spaces
1. 	Basis for Computation  
The total number of required parking spaces shall be based upon the parking requirement stated for the principal use of the zoning lot in question except that where residential uses and non-residential uses occupy the same zoning lot, the number of parking spaces for the residential uses shall be calculated separately from, and in addition to, the parking requirements for the non-residential uses.

2. 	Fractional Spaces  
When the determination of the number of required parking spaces results in the requirement of a fractional space, any fraction shall require one additional parking space.

 
3.	Bench Seating  
In places of assembly in which patrons or spectators occupy benches, pews, or other similar seating facilities, each twenty-two (22) inches of such seating facility shall be counted as one seat for the purpose of determining the requirement for off-street parking facilities under this Ordinance. 

00-15-153-14.6	 Stacking Requirements for Drive-Through Facilities
Every drive-through facility shall provide stacking spaces in the amount prescribed below.  The stacking spaces shall be designed so to not interfere with the ingress and egress of the off-street parking provided on the site.

Type of Use	Total Stacking Spaces Required
Bank Teller	4
Automated Teller	3
Restaurants	6
Car Wash Automated	6
Car Wash Non-automated	3
Pharmacies	3
Gas Stations	2
	

00-15-153-14.7	 Off-Street Parking Requirements
The off-street parking requirements applicable in each district are set forth below.  The minimum off-street parking for a use shall be provided at the rate set forth below.  A property owner may provide off-street parking in excess of the minimum requirement for non-residential uses up to but not to exceed fifteen percent (15%) of the minimum requirement.  For increases above fifteen percent (15%), a property owner is required to demonstrate a need for the additional parking in his parking plan and be subject to approval by the Plan Commission or the Zoning Administrator. 

Residential Uses	Number of Spaces Required
	
Dwellings, Single Family Detached	2 spaces per dwelling unit.
Townhouses (single family attached)	2 spaces per dwelling unit, plus 0.25 space per/du for guest parking.
Two Family	2 spaces per dwelling unit.
Dwellings, Multiple Family	1.5 spaces per dwelling unit, plus 0.25 space per/du for guest parking.
Mobile home	1 spaces per lot & 1 visitor space per 2 units
Mobile home park office	1 space per 153 Sq. Ft. of gross floor area.
Mobile home park recreation buildings	1 space per 300 Sq. Ft. of gross floor area.

Institutional Uses	Number of Spaces Required
	
Auditorium, theater (not including outdoor theater) or other place of  assembly	1 space for every 5 seats of capacity.
Colleges or Universities	1 space for every 4 students based on maximum enrollment.
Assisted Living Facilities	1 space per every four beds, plus 1 space per employee, limited to employees on greatest shift.
Independent Living Facilities	1 space per dwelling unit.
Child Care Facilities	4 spaces per 1,500 Sq. Ft. of gross floor area.
Hospitals	1 space per 5 beds, plus 1 space per physician with privileges, plus 1 space for every 3 employees, including nurses.
 

Institutional Uses continued
Places of Worship	1 space for every 5 seats in the main auditorium, sanctuary, nave or similar place of assembly and other rooms (gymnasiums, classrooms, offices) which are to be occupied simultaneously.  
Schools – Elementary	1 spaces per classroom, plus 
1 space per 200 Sq. Ft of area devoted to offices, plus 1 space for every 5 seats in the main auditorium
Schools- High school	1 space for each classroom, plus 
1 space per 200 Sq. Ft. of area devoted to offices, plus
1 space for every 8 students based on maximum enrollment. (For auditoriums: 1 space for every 10 seats)
Bowling Alleys	4 spaces per lane, plus 1 space for every 4 seats in the lounge or restaurant.
Children Indoor Amusement Establishments	1 space for every 150 Sq. Ft. of gross activity area.
Community or Recreation buildings	1 space for every 300 Sq. Ft. of gross activity area.
Cultural Institutions	1 space for every 500 Sq. Ft. of gross floor area.
Golf Courses and Driving Ranges	1 space for every 400 sq. ft. of gross floor area in the main building or club house, plus 
1 space for every 2 practice tees in the driving range, plus 
 2 spaces for each green.
Gymnasiums, Health Clubs and Pools – indoors	1 space for every 500 Sq. Ft. of gross activity area, 
Libraries	1 space for every 750 Sq. Ft. of gross floor area.
Parks – outdoor	A minimum of 2 spaces, plus
 1 space for every 1/2 acre.
Taverns or Clubs	1 space for every 125 Sq. Ft. of gross floor area.
Theaters – indoor	1 space for every 5 seats.
Theaters – outdoor	1 space per ten percent (10%) of designed capacity.

Commercial and Office Uses
	Number of Spaces Required
	
Bed and Breakfast Establishments	1 space per guest room, plus 2 spaces for the dwelling.
Hotels or Motels	1 space per guest room, plus 
1 space per 200 sq. ft of area devoted to public meeting areas and offices.
Automotive Repair Shops	2 spaces per service bay, plus
1 space for every 200 Sq. Ft. of accessory retail.
Automotive and Recreational Vehicular Sales Lots	1 space for every 200 Sq. Ft. of gross floor area, plus
1 space for every 6,000 Sq. Ft. of vehicle display areas.
Automotive Fuel Stations	2 spaces per pump, plus
1 space for every 200 Sq. Ft. of accessory retail.
Banks and Financial Institutions	1 space for every 250 Sq. Ft. of gross floor area.
Car Washes	2 spaces for each self-service or manual washing rack or bay, plus stacking spaces. (See Sec. 13-6)
Funeral Homes	1 space for every 4 seats in each chapel or parlor, plus
1 space for every company vehicle.  However, in no event shall the use provide less than 50 spaces.
Furniture and Appliance Stores	1 space for every 600 Sq. Ft. of gross floor area.
Groceries	1 space for every 350 Sq. Ft. of gross floor area.
Laundromats	1 space for every 200 Sq. Ft. of gross floor area.
Medical and Dental Offices	1 space per 350 Sq. Ft. of gross floor area.
Nurseries, Building Material yards, Equipment Rental, and similar uses	1 space for every 500 Sq. Ft. of gross floor area.

 

Off-Street Parking Regulations continued
Offices, including Government Buildings	1 space per 750 Sq. Ft. of gross floor area.
Outdoor recreational facilities	1 space per 500 square feet of gross activity area, plus 1 space per 100 square feet of gross floor area devoted to swimming pools.
Restaurants	
	Class A	1 space for every 75 Sq. Ft. of gross floor area.
	Class B	1 space for every 50 Sq. Ft. of gross floor area.
Retail Establishments	1 space per 250 Sq. Ft. of gross floor area.
Retail Establishments/Shopping Centers	0-400,000 Sq. Ft. 	1 space per 250 Sq. Ft. of gross floor area.
	400,001-600,000 Sq. Ft.	1 space per 225 Sq. Ft. of gross floor area.
	600,000 Sq. Ft. and above	1 space per 200 Sq. Ft. of gross floor area.
Retail Service Establishments	1 space per 225 Sq. Ft. of gross floor area.
Trade or Commercial Schools	1 space for each employee, plus
1 space for each 4 students based on maximum enrollment.

Industrial Uses	Number of Spaces Required
	
Industrial and Manufacturing Uses	2 spaces per every 3 employees, plus 1 space per company vehicle.
Utility and Service Buildings and Uses	2 spaces per every 3 employees, plus 1 space per company vehicle.
Warehousing and Wholesaling	2 spaces per every 3 employees, plus 1 space per company vehicle.

00-15-153-14.8	 Mobility-Impaired Accessible Parking
The Town of Cumberland encourages all developments that serve the public to provide parking facilities that are accessible to people with disabilities. In accordance with this goal, accessible parking shall be provided for any building or use initiated after the effective date of this Ordinance according to the following minimum requirements and any further requirements hereafter adopted by federal, state, or local law.

1.	Required Spaces   
Accessible parking spaces shall be provided at the rate listed below.

Total Off-Street Parking Spaces Provided	Accessible Spaces Required
1 to 25	1
26 to 50	2
51 to 75	3
76 to 100	4
101 to 150	5
151 to 200	6
201 to 300	7
301 to 400	8
401 to 500	9
501 to 1,000	2% of total parking spaces provided
 Over 1,000	20 plus 1 space for each 50 parking spaces over 1,000

2.	General Requirements
A.	Every accessible parking space shall be sixteen (16) feet in width and nineteen (19) feet in length. 
B.	Every accessible parking space shall be located in close proximity to the most accessible entrance of the principal building.
C.	The ramp from the access aisle to the sidewalk or other transition to the principal use shall not exceed a slope of 1:12.
D.	The vertical clearance for accessible parking spaces shall be no less than eight (8) feet and two (2) inches, and the vertical clearance for passenger loading zones shall be no less than nine (9) feet and six (6) inches. 
E.	All accessible spaces shall be designated by the international access symbol. Signs shall be placed a minimum of five one half (51/2) feet above ground level so as not to be obscured by parked vehicles. The mobility-impaired symbol shall also be painted on the ground to the rear of the parking space.

00-15-153-14.9	 Specific Requirements related to the Storage of Recreational     Vehicles
The following requirements shall apply to the parking or storage of recreational vehicles in residential districts.

1.	Recreational vehicles may be parked or stored in permitted accessory buildings.
2.	Recreational vehicles may be parked or stored in the open provided no part of such vehicle shall project into any required side or rear yard.  A recreational vehicle may be parked in the open in a front yard, provided such vehicle is parked on a hard surface driveway.
3.	Not more than one (1) recreational vehicle shall be parked or stored in the open on a lot at any one time.
4.	Parked or stored recreational vehicles shall not be occupied or used for living, sleeping or housekeeping purposes.

00-15-153-14.10	 Off-Street Loading General Requirements
1.	Location  
The following requirements shall pertain to the location of loading berths.

A.	All required loading berths shall be located on the same zoning lot as the use served. 
B.	All loading berths shall be completely screened by a uniformly solid fence, wall, or densely planted, mature shrubbery or any combination thereof, not less than six (6) feet but not more than eight (8) feet in height.
C.	No permitted or required loading berth shall be located within thirty-five (35) feet of the nearest point of intersection of any two streets. 
D.	No loading berth shall be located in a required front yard and any loading berth located in a required rear yard may be open to the sky. 
E.	No pavement or curbing shall be located closer than five (5) feet to any property line unless it can be specifically demonstrated that the intent is to extend the loading to adjoining properties. A plan that shows how the extension of loading will occur must be submitted and approved during the review process.

2.	Size  
Unless otherwise specified, a required off street loading berth shall be at least twelve (12) feet in width and at least forty (40) feet in length, exclusive of aisle and maneuvering space, and shall have a vertical clearance of at least fifteen (15) feet.

 
3.	Access  
Each required off street loading berth shall be designed with appropriate means of vehicular access to a street or alley in a manner which will least interfere with traffic movement, and shall be subject to approval by the Zoning Administrator.

4.	Surfacing 
All off street loading berths shall be surfaced with a bituminous asphalt or concrete material capable of bearing a live load of two hundred (200) pounds per square foot.

5. 	Repair and Service
No motor vehicle repair work or service of any kind shall be permitted in conjunction with loading facilities, except washing of accessory vehicles and emergency repair service necessary to start vehicles.

6.	Utilization 
Space allocated for off street loading use shall not, while so allocated, be used to satisfy the space requirements for any off street parking facilities or portions thereof.

7.	Central Loading Berth
Central loading facilities may be substituted for loading berths on the individual zoning lots provided the following conditions are fulfilled:

A. 	Each zoning lot serviced shall have direct access to the central loading area without cross streets or alleys at grade.

B. 	Total off street loading berths provided shall meet the minimum requirements herein specified based on the sum of the several types of uses served. (Areas of types of uses may be totaled before computing number of loading berths.)

C. 	No zoning lot served shall be more than five hundred (500) feet removed from the central loading area.

D. 	The tunnel or ramp connecting the central loading area with the zoning lot served shall not be less than seven (7) feet in width and have a clearance of not less than seven feet.

8.	Minimum Facilities
Uses for which off street loading facilities are required herein, but which are located in buildings of less floor area than the minimum prescribed, shall provide adequate receiving facilities accessible by motor vehicles off any adjacent alley, service drive, or open space on the same lot.

 
00-15-153-14.11	 Off-Street Loading Specific Requirements
The requirements for off-street loading facilities shall be as follows:

Use Type 	Number of Spaces Required
	
Retail/ Commercial	
	7,500 - 75,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area	1 loading space
	each additional 50,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area	1 loading space(1)
Office	
	10,000 - 100,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area	1 loading space
	each additional 100,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area	1 loading space(1)
Institutional and Recreational	
	10,000 - 100,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area	1 loading space
	each additional 75,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area	1 loading space(1)
Industrial	
	5,000 - 25,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area	1 loading space(1)
	25,000 - 75,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area	2 loading space(1)
	each additional 50,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area	1 loading space(1)

Note 1	Each such loading berth shall be not less than twelve (12) feet in width and fifty-five (55) feet in length, exclusive of aisle and maneuvering space, and shall have a vertical clearance of at least fifteen (15) feet. 
 

ARTICLE 15	LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS & STANDARDS

00-15-153-15.1	Purpose
00-15-153-15.2	Enforcement of Landscaping Requirements
00-15-153-15.3	Landscape Plan
00-15-153-15.4	Selection, Installation and Maintenance of Plant Materials
00-15-153-15.5	Design Standards and Guidelines
00-15-153-15.6	Minimum Landscaping of Yards
00-15-153-15.7	Foundation Plantings
00-15-153-15.8	Parkway Landscaping
00-15-153-15.9	Parking Lot Landscaping
00-15-153-15.10	Landscape Buffers
00-15-153-15.11	Screening of Refuse Disposal Dumpsters and Loading Berths
00-15-153-15.12	Changes to Approved Landscape Plans
________________________________________________

00-15-153-15.1		 Purpose.
The landscaping and screening requirements specified herein are intended to foster developments that will protect and preserve the appearance, character, health, safety, and welfare of the community. Specifically, these regulations are intended to increase the compatibility of adjacent uses, and, in doing so, minimize the harmful impact of noise, dust and other debris, motor vehicle headlight glare or other artificial light intrusions, and other objectionable activities or impacts conducted or created by adjoining or nearby uses. 

00-15-153-15.2		Enforcement of Landscaping Requirements.
Wherever a landscape plan is required by this Ordinance, such plan shall become an integral part of any development review application. No improvement location permit shall be issued without first obtaining approval of a required landscape plan. Failure to implement an approved landscape plan shall be deemed a violation of this Ordinance and subject to the procedures of Article 20 (Enforcement).

00-15-153-15.3	 	Landscape Plan
A landscape plan shall be required for any development or redevelopment that requires development plan review pursuant to Article 6 (Development Plans). The Zoning Administrator may also require a landscape plan as part of a site plan required for the issuance of an improvement location permit.  All landscape plans shall be prepared in conformance with the requirements of this Article; however, innovative landscape design is encouraged and shall be considered as a positive attribute in connection with meeting the requirements of this Article.

1.	Content of Landscape Plan  
All landscape plans submitted for review and approval shall contain, or have attached thereto, the following information.

A. 	The location and dimension of all existing and proposed structures, parking lots and drives, roadways and rights of way, sidewalks, bicycle paths, ground signs, refuse disposal areas, bicycle parking areas, fences, freestanding electrical equipment, tot lots and other recreational facilities, and other freestanding structural features as determined necessary by the Zoning Administrator.

B. 	The location, quantity, size and name, both botanical and common, of all proposed planting materials at time of planting and the location, quantity, size and name, both botanical and common, of all existing planting materials.

C. 	The location of existing buildings, structures and plant materials on adjacent property within twenty feet of the site.

D. 	Existing and proposed grading of the site, including proposed berming, indicating contours at five (5) foot intervals, or as determined to be appropriate by the Zoning Administrator.

E. 	Specification of the type and boundaries of all proposed ground cover.

F. 	Elevations of all fences proposed for location on site and an indication of material to be used.

G.	Elevations, cross sections, and other details as determined necessary by the Zoning Administrator.

H. 	A legend, scale and north arrow. 

00-15-153-15.4		 Selection, Installation and Maintenance of Plant Materials
1.	Selection 
All planting materials used shall be of good quality, and capable of withstanding the climate extremes of central Indiana, as well as, an individual site’s microclimate. Size and density of plant material, both at the time of planting and at maturity, are additional criteria that shall be considered when selecting plant materials. The use of drought tolerant plant material is preferred. The use of salt tolerant plant material is required for landscaping near streets and other rights-of-way. The use of “ball and burlap” planting materials, where applicable, is preferred in commercial and industrial zoning districts.

2.	Installation
All landscaping materials shall be installed in accordance with the current planting procedures established by the American Association of Nurserymen, or other applicable landscaping standards. The installation of all plant material required by this Article may be delayed until the next optimal planting season, as determined by the Zoning Administrator.

3.	Maintenance
All landscaping materials shall be maintained in good condition so as to present a healthy and orderly appearance, and plant material not in this condition shall be replaced when necessary and shall be kept free of refuse and debris. The owner of the premises shall guarantee all plant material to live and be in good condition for one year from the date of installation, and shall provide the Town with a maintenance bond to that effect in an amount to be determined by the Zoning Administrator or 25% of the landscaper’s estimate to install the plant material. The owner shall be responsible for the maintenance, repair, and replacement of all failed landscaping materials. Irrigation systems, if required, shall be maintained in good operating condition to promote the health of the plant materials and the conservation of water. The replacement of all failed landscaping materials shall be done within three (3) months of a determination by the Zoning Administrator, at his discretion, that a plant is dead or severely damaged or diseased. 

00-15-153-15.5		Design Standards and Guidelines
Landscape plans shall be prepared based on the following design standards and guidelines. Design standards are numerically measurable and can be definitively evaluated for compliance, however, design guidelines are not precisely measurable and therefore, compliance shall be evaluated based on appropriateness, subject to approval by the Zoning Administrator or Plan Commission. 

1.	Preservation of Existing Plant Material
The purpose of this section is to promote clean air quality, reduce noise, heat and glare, to improve surface drainage and minimize flooding, to provide visual buffers, to beautify and enhance both improved and undeveloped areas, to advance the aesthetic quality of the community, to maintain property values and the quality of life in the Town of Cumberland and to promote the public health, safety and welfare through the preservation and replacement of trees.
A.	Protected Trees
Consistent with the expressed purposes of this Section, all persons shall make reasonable efforts to preserve and retain any existing, self-supporting trees as defined herein.  The size tree deemed self-supporting, referred to herein as “minimum protected size,” for Category I trees is six (6) caliper inches; for Category II trees, eight (8) caliper inches; and for Category III trees two (2) caliper inches.  Protected tree species shall be as listed in Table 15-1.  No person shall take out, destroy, cause to be destroyed, move or remove any protected tree in preparation for development activity without first obtaining an Improvement Location Permit from the Zoning Administrator.
To further encourage the preservation of existing trees, each tree preserved greater than eight (8) inches in caliper may be counted toward the required landscape materials at a rate of two (2) required shade or evergreen trees or four (4) required ornamental trees.  Preserved trees may not count toward the caliper inches required for mitigation of any trees removed.
B.	Exemptions
The requirements of this Section shall be followed except:
1.	During a period of emergency, such as a tornado, ice storm, flood or any other such extreme act of nature;
2.	If the failure to remove a tree would constitute an imminent danger to the environment, property, public health, safety, or welfare to the hazardous or dangerous condition of such tree as verified prior to removal by the Zoning Administrator.
3.	For necessary tree removal by a public agency or utility company within plotted or dedicated utility easements;
4.	In an area upon which a permanent structure is located or will be located within a lot building area for all zoning districts;
5.	With respect to trees on developed single-family lots;
6.	With respect to trees of less than twelve (12) caliper inches on all lots less than 20,000 square feet (approximately 0.459 acres);
7.	With respect to dead, substantially injured, diseased or damaged trees as verified prior to removal by the Zoning Administrator;
8.	Government agencies, tree farms, nurseries and agricultural uses shall be exempt from this Section provided tree removal is consistent with normal and regular business activity.
C.	Requirements for Development Plans
In addition to the requirements listed in Section 00-15-153-06.6 of this ordinance, all applications for an Improvement Location Permit or Development Plan Review that will require tree removal shall include the following items:
1.	A tree survey plan which shall include:
a)	A scale map or a plot plan prepared and sealed by a registered landscape architect, registered land surveyor, or qualified professional engineer showing the proposed development (including but not limited to buildings, parking area, streets, sidewalks, driveways, utilities, and water retention areas) and noting the location of all protected trees, as defined in Table 15-1, at or greater than the minimum protected size within the area to be modified from its natural state.  Areas of stands of trees can be outlined giving number, species, caliper and category of trees.  Trees at or greater than the minimum protected size to be removed shall be so indicated.
b)	A schedule indicating the number and caliper inches by species of protected trees to be removed that are of the minimum protected size or greater.
2.	A tree replacement plan which shall include:
a)	The proposed location of all replacement trees within the proposed development.  This information can be included as part of the overall landscape plan for the development.
b)	A schedule indicating the number, size (caliper inches and height), and species of all replacement plantings.  A total shall be provided for each species type.
D.	Tree Removal Areas
Permitted tree removal areas are as follows:
1.	Removal of protected trees is permitted within the area used, or to be used, by a permanent structure within the lot building area and ten (10) feet to either side, front, or rear of the structure, without replacement planting.
2.	Removal of protected trees is permitted on the entire site for access roads, parking areas, canopies, patios, decks, sidewalks, utility installation, water retention and similar necessary development needs provided replacement plantings are installed consistent with this ordinance.
However, it is required that reasonable effort shall be demonstrated to preserve protected trees at or greater than the minimum protected size within all tree removal areas.  Reasonable effort shall include but not be limited to consideration of alternate building design, building location, parking area layout, parking area location, or water retention location.
E.	Tree Replanting
1.	When used for the replacement of protected trees of twenty-four (24) caliper inches or less, replanted Category I and Category II trees shall be at least ten (10) feet tall and have a trunk of not less than two (2) caliper inches, and replanted Category III trees shall be at least six (6) feet tall and have a trunk of not less than one (1) caliper inch.
2.	When used for the replacement of protected trees greater than twenty-four (24) caliper inches, replanted Category I, II, or III trees shall be at least twelve (12) feet tall and have a trunk of not less than three and one half (3 ½) caliper inches.
3.	It is desirable that the replanting of trees be compatible with the sites, ad that native trees be used.  Accordingly, replanted trees shall be from the same Category as those protected trees removed.
4.	Trees shall be planted replacing one (1) caliper inch for every one and one half (1 ½) caliper inches designated to be removed and requiring replacement on the Tree Survey Plan.  If the site cannot physically accommodate the number of caliper inches required to be replanted the Plan Commission may, as an alternative, approve a financial contribution for the value of the trees to the Town’s Parks Department in lieu of a specific number of caliper inches.
F.	Tree Removal without Approval
1.	Replanted Category I and Category II trees shall be at least ten (10) feet tall and have a trunk of not less than three (3) caliper inches, and replanted Category III trees shall be at least six (6) feet tall and have a trunk of not less than two (2) caliper inches.
2.	Replanted trees shall be from the same Category as those protected trees removed.
3.	Protected trees shall be replaced at the rate of one (1) caliper inch for every one (1) caliper inch that has been removed.
4.	If the site cannot physically accommodate the number of caliper inches required to be replanted the Plan Commission may, as an alternative, approve a financial contribution for the value of the trees to the Town’s Parks Department in lieu of a specific number of caliper inches.

Table 15-1.  Protected Trees by Genus and Species
CATEGORY I:  Deciduous
Genus	Species	Common Name	Genus	Species	Common Name
Acer	negundo	Boxelder	Gymnocladus	dioicus	Kentucky Coffee
Acer	nigrum	Black Maple	Juglans	cinerea	Butternut
Acer	rubrum	Red Maple	Juglans	nigra	Black Walnut
Acer	saccharum	Sugar Maple	Liquidambar	styraciflua	Sweetgum
Aesculus	flava	Yellow Buckeye	Liriodendron	tulipifera	Yellow-poplar
Aesculus	glabra	Ohio Buckeye	Magnolia 	acuminate	Cucumbertree
Aesculus	hippocastanum	Horse-chestnut	Morus	alba	White Mulberry
Aesculus	octandra	Sweet Buckeye	Morus 	rubra	Red Mulberry
Amelanchier	arborea	Downy Serviceberry	Nyssa 	sylvatica	Blackgum
Betula	alleghaniensis	Yellow Birch	Ostrya	virginiana	Eastern Hophornbeam
Carya	(all)	Hickory, Pecan	Populus 	(all)	Poplar, Aspen, Cottonwood
Castanea	dentate	American Chestnut	Quercus	(all)	Oak
Catalpa	(all)	Catalpa	Robinia	pseudoacacia	Black Locust
Celtis	laevigata	Sugarberry	Salix	alba	White Willow
Fagus	grandifolia	American Beech	Sassafras	albidum	Sassafras
Fagus	sylvatica	European Beech	Tilia	americana	American Basswood
Gledisia	triacanthos	Honey locust	Tilia	heterophylla	White Basswood
			Ulmus	(all)	Elm
Category II:  Evergreens
Genus	Species	Common Name
Juniperus	virginiana	Eastern Redcedar
Pinus	(all)	Pine
Taxodium	distichum	Baldcypress
Thuja	occidentalis	White-cedar
Tsuga 	canadensis	Eastern Hemlock

Category III: Ornamentals
Genus	Species	Common Name
Cercis	canadensis	Eastern Redbud
Cornus	alternifolia	Alternate-leaf Dogwood
Cornus	florida	Flowering Dogwood
Magnolia	tripetala	Umbrella Magnolia
Malus	coronaria	Sweet Crab Apple
Malus	ioensis	Prairie Crab Apple
Prunus	(all)	Cherry, Plum, Peach

2.  Landscaping Materials
A.	Plant Materials
1. 	Shade Trees
All shade trees shall have a minimum trunk size of two and one half (2-1/2) inches in caliper. At maturity, shade trees shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) feet in height. 

	      2. 	Ornamental Trees
Ornamental trees may, in some cases, be substituted for shade trees. Such substitution shall be subject to the approval, as the case may be, by the Plan Commission or the Zoning Administrator. These trees may be single or multiple trunk specimen plants providing screening and seasonal interest with attractive fruit, flowers and trunks or branching.

	3.	Evergreen Trees
Evergreen trees shall have a minimum height of twenty-four (24) inches at planting and a maximum height of eight (8) feet when used around buildings or structures, and a maximum height of twelve (12) feet when used for screening or buffering.

	     4.	Shrubs
All shrubs shall have minimum height of eighteen (18) inches at planting and a maximum height of four (4) feet at maturity, except for parkway shrubs, which shall have no minimum height at planting and which shall have a maximum height of eighteen (18) inches at maturity.  Shrubs used to form hedges shall be of a non-deciduous species and shall be spaced not more than three (3) feet apart so as to form a continuous visual screen.

5.	Perennials and Ground Cover
Perennials and ground cover materials should be used in landscaped areas where effective ground cover is preferred and where lawn and turf grasses are not desirable. Perennials and ground cover shall not exceed six (6) inches in height at maturity.
	      
	      6.	Lawn and Turf Grasses
Lawn and turf grasses should be used in areas with little or no slope to prevent the runoff  of irrigation water.

B.	Mounds
Mounds shall have a minimum top width of at least two (2) feet, a maximum side slope for front and back sides of three (3) feet horizontal to one (1) foot vertical (3:1) and not to exceed ten (10) feet in height.  Mounds shall be set back from the right-of-way line of a street and the property line of adjoining property so that the toe of the slope is not closer than five (5) feet from the right-of-way line and/or property line. Mounds shall be set back from retention and detention areas so toe of the slope is not closer than fifteen (15) feet from the top of bank or high water level of the retention or detention area.  The design and location of a mound shall not interfere with the sight triangle district of two or more intersecting streets or roads. Mounds shall not be located or positioned so as to create positive drainage onto an adjoining property.

C.	Fences and Walls
Fences and walls shall be, when provided as part of a landscaped treatment, consistent in shape, character, and placement with other fencing used within the development. Unless otherwise approved by the Plan Commission or the Zoning Administrator, fences and walls shall not exceed six (6) feet in height, measured vertically from the lowest average surrounding grade. 

D.	Prohibited Materials Under Certain Applications
Prohibited materials include rocks, gravel, asphalt, thorn-bearing plant species and ground cover that exceeds six (6) inches in height at maturity.

3.	Design Guidelines
A.	Scale and Nature of Landscaping Material 
The scale and nature of landscaping materials shall be appropriate to the size of the structures. For example, large scaled plants should complement large scaled buildings.

B.	Selection of Plant Material 
Plant material shall be selected for its form, texture, color, pattern of growth, suitability to local conditions, and multi-seasonal effectiveness. Evergreens should also be incorporated into the landscape treatment of a site. 
(Note:   See Appendix B of this Zoning Code for approved Plant List.)

C.	Placement of Plant Material
(a) Plant material placement should be designed to reduce the energy consumption      	needs of a development.

(b)	Deciduous trees should be placed on the south and west sides of buildings to provide shade from the summer sun.

(c)	Evergreens and other plant materials should be concentrated on the north and west sides of buildings to dissipate the effect of winter winds.

(d)  Mass planting of plant materials is preferred over mixed specimen planting.


D.	Softening of Walls and Fences 
Plant material should be placed intermittently in mass groupings against long expanses of building walls, fences, and other barriers to create a softening effect.

E.	Planting Beds 
Planting beds should be mulched with bark chips, or similar organic materials. Mulch shall not be used as a substitute for plant materials.

F.	Detention/Retention Basins and Ponds 
Detention/retention basins and ponds shall be landscaped. Such landscaping can include shade and ornamental trees, evergreens, shrubbery, turf, groundcover and/or other plant materials, or any combination as approved by the Plan Commission or the Zoning Administrator.  

G.	Water Conservation
Landscape design pursuant to the requirements of this Article must recognize the need to make every effort regarding water conservation. Irrigation systems, where required, may be installed at the discretion and responsibility of the property owner. All irrigation systems shall be designed to minimize the use of water. 

H.	Preservation of Existing Plant Material
Existing plant material should be incorporated into the landscape treatment of a site. Effort should be made to preserve and protect existing trees with trunk diameters in excess of ten (10) inches. Construction equipment and personnel should be kept away from such trees and their root systems by the installation of temporary fencing materials at the tree’s drip-line. Such temporary fencing materials should be maintained in place and in good condition during the entire construction period.

      4. The Plan Commission may grant Alternate Plan Approval for a landscape plan if the plan is consistent with the intent of the ordinance.  An alternate plan may include, but not be limited to locating plantings in alternate locations, substitute required species to improve the ability of plant materials to thrive, or reduce the amount of plantings only when the size of the site limits the ability of plantings to survive.  
00-15-153-15.6		Minimum Landscaping of Yards
All yards within the Town of Cumberland shall be landscaped primarily with turf or other plant materials. Pavement of yards other than for parking or loading purposes is prohibited.  For all new residential subdivisions, shade trees, a minimum trunk size of two and one half (2-1/2) inches in caliper, shall be provided for all lots at a rate of one (1) tree for every 3,500 square feet of lot area.

 00-15-153-15.7		Foundation Plantings
Landscaping shall be required at the base of all principal buildings to help achieve harmony between the buildings and the landscape in conformance with the requirements set forth below.

A.	Required Landscape Area 
A landscaped area a minimum of five (5) feet in width shall be provided around the perimeter of all principal buildings, exclusive of areas required for access to the buildings from the parking lot or sidewalks, as determined by the Plan Commission or the Zoning Administrator.



B.	Coverage 
Required foundation landscaping areas shall remain open and free of all paving except where sidewalks to buildings and other similar paving is required.

C.	Plant Material
Foundation landscaping shall consist of a combination of shrubbery, perennials and ground cover. Particular attention shall be given to screening mechanical equipment, softening large expanses of building walls, and accenting building entrances and architectural features.

D.	Other Building Foundation Areas 
Except where occupied by planting beds, the remaining foundation landscaping areas shall be planted with turf grasses, either with sod or seed, as determined appropriate by the Plan Commission or the Zoning Administrator. 

00-15-153-15.8		Parkway Landscaping
1.	Applicability
The following requirements shall apply to the ground areas within the street right-of-way which are not covered by pavement or sidewalks.

2.	General Landscape Requirements 
All parkways shall be landscaped in conformance with the provisions of this Section. This shall involve improving the ground surface of the parkway with turf or other plant material, including parkway trees, shrubs, or hard surface treatments where permitted. 

3.	Parkway Plant Materials
A.	Quantity and Spacing
Parkway trees shall be provided at the equivalent of one per forty (40) lineal feet apart in the right-of-way adjacent to the parcel. Where appropriate, parkway trees may be clustered in the right-of-way as determined by, as the case may be, the Plan Commission or the Zoning Administrator.  

B.	Species
Parkway tree species and placement shall conform to the requirements of this Section. A variety of compatible species should be included in the planting plan for a specific site or development. The selecting of tree species shall be reviewed and approved by the Zoning Administrator with particular regard for site-appropriate species and compatibility to the streetscape.

C.	Alternate Location 
Trees shall be planted adjacent to the right-of-way if adequate space is not available in the parkway.





	D.   Restrictions

No plant materials which obstruct sight lines within forty (40) feet of street intersections, with elevations between two and one half (2 ½) feet and eight (8) feet above the street, shall be placed or permitted in any parkway.         

4.	Parkway Ground Surface Treatment
A.	Parkway Standards 
The following standards apply to all properties that have street curbs and/or gutters. 

(a)	Turf may be permitted in all parkways and is recommended on slope grades up to fifty percent (50%) (2 horizontal: 1 vertical).  Turf is not recommended on slopes greater than fifty percent (50%).

(b)	Driveways and walkways may be permitted in all parkways.

(c)	Materials prohibited in parkways include brick-pavers, gravel, asphalt (except when used for an approved recreational trail), ground cover and shrubs exceeding eighteen (18) inches in height at maturity, and concrete except in conjunction with driveways and walkways.

(d) Vacant property owners may maintain native grasses to a maximum height of six 
      (6) inches; however, these properties shall not maintain rocks, gravel, bark, or 
      other similar materials within the public right-of-way.

00-15-153-15.9		Parking Lot Landscaping
1.	Applicability
All parking lots designed for ten (10) or more parking spaces shall provide                                       landscaping in accordance with the provisions of this Article. Parking lots designed for less than ten (10) parking spaces shall provide landscaping as may be deemed appropriate by the Zoning Administrator.
Parking lot landscape areas should be designed to consider connectivity to existing and 
proposed trails or trail systems, where applicable, or as determined by the Plan 
Commission or the Zoning Administrator.

2.	Interior Parking Lot Landscaping
A.	Area Required 
Not less than five percent (5%) of the interior of a parking lot shall be devoted to landscaping. Landscaping areas located along the perimeter of a parking lot beyond the curb or edge of pavement of the lot shall not be included toward satisfying this requirement. 

B.	Landscaped Areas 
The landscaped areas defined in Subsection A, above, shall be improved as follows:

(a)	Location.  Interior parking lot landscaping areas (planting islands at least six (6) inches above the surface of the parking lot) shall be dispersed throughout the parking lot in a design and configuration that aesthetically corresponds to the size and shape of the parking lot. Clustering of landscaping areas should be considered when possible. Landscape areas should also help to define vehicular traffic circulation and promote pedestrian safety.

(b)	Size. Interior parking lot landscaping areas shall be a minimum of one hundred (100) square feet in area and shall be a minimum of eight (8) feet in width, as measured from back of curb to back of curb.

(c)	Landscape Material. The plant material used to improve the landscape areas defined above shall conform to the following:

(1)	Type. The primary plant materials used in parking lots shall be shade tree species in conformance with applicable provisions of Sections 16-5[1][A] above. Ornamental trees, evergreens, shrubs, and other plant materials may be used to supplement the shade tree plantings, but shall not be the sole contribution to such landscaping.

(2)	Quantity.  One (1) shade tree shall be provided for every one hundred (100) square feet of landscaping area.

(3)	Groundcover.  A minimum of fifty percent (50%) of every interior parking lot landscaping area shall be planted with an approved groundcover to achieve complete cover within two years.

3.	Perimeter Parking Lot Landscaping.
A.	Purpose
Perimeter parking lot landscaping is to provide for the enhancement of parking lots by requiring a uniform scheme of landscaping along public streets. The perimeter landscaping shall require a greater amount and higher quality of landscaping for residential uses (principally multiple-family uses) than for non-residential uses.

B.	Landscape Area 
Where perimeter landscaping is required, it shall be provided at least five (5) feet in width as measured from the back of curb, or edge of pavement, and excluding any parking space overhang area.

C.	Required Improvements 
The perimeter landscape area shall provide the following landscape improvements in combination or individually.

(a)	Shade Trees, Ornamental Trees and Evergreens.  One (1) tree for every forty (40) lineal feet of length; however, trees may be clustered based on specific site requirements, or as determined by the Plan Commission or the Zoning Administrator.

(b)	Shrubs.  One (1) shrub, measuring a minimum of twenty-four (24) inches at planting, clustered or spaced linearly to form a continuous dense hedge. Plant spacing should be contingent on species. The landscape treatment shall run the full length of the lot when abutting a residential use and seventy-five percent (75%) of the lot when abutting a non-residential use.

(c)	Connectivity.   Perimeter landscape areas should be designed to consider connectivity to existing and proposed trails and trail systems, where applicable, or as determined by the Plan Commission or the Zoning Administrator. 

(d)	Groundcover.  Landscaped area outside of shrub masses shall be planted with approved perennials or other groundcover to achieve complete cover within two (2) years. Areas outside of the landscaped areas shall be planted with lawn and turf grasses.

00-15-153-15.10		Landscape Buffers
1.	Applicability
The regulations of this Section shall establish the standards, dimensions and improvement requirements of landscape buffers as required for transitions between differing uses.

2.	General Restrictions
Landscape buffers shall be reserved for the installation of plant material and the installation of mounds and fencing as required within this Section.  No parking, driveways, sidewalks, accessory buildings or other impervious surfaces shall be permitted, unless specifically authorized by, as the case may be, the Plan Commission or the Zoning Administrator. Landscape buffers may be located within required yards or required landscape yards as established in the applicable district regulations. Where both landscape buffers and parking lot landscaping is required, the more restrictive shall apply.

3.	Size and Improvement of Landscape Buffers
The size and improvement of landscape buffers for various situations shall be as follows:

A.	Multiple Family Developments
Where a multiple family development abuts a single-family development or use, or another multiple family development, a landscape buffer a minimum of ten (10) feet in width shall be provided. Within the required landscape buffer, the following improvements shall be provided individually or in combination.

(a)	Shade or ornamental trees, a minimum of two and one half (2-1/2) inches in caliper, shall be planted on an average of one (1) tree for every forty (40) feet of the yard length; however, shade or ornamental trees may be clustered based on specific site requirements, or as determined by the Plan Commission or the Zoning Administrator. Evergreens, a minimum of four (4) feet in height at planting, may be substituted for, or used in combination with, shade or ornamental trees, in some cases as determined by the Plan Commission or the Zoning Administrator.

(b)	Shrubs, a minimum of one (1) shrub, measuring a minimum of twenty-four (24) inches at planting, and clustered or spaced linearly to form a continuous dense hedge. Plant spacing should be contingent on species. Where shrubs are used in combination with other materials, the use of shrubs shall comprise fifty percent (50%) of the required yard. 

(c)	Mounding, with a minimum top width of at least two (2) feet and a maximum side slope for front and back sides of three (3) feet horizontal to one (1) foot vertical (3:1).  Such mounding shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height. Mounds shall not be located or positioned so as to create positive drainage onto adjoining properties.  

(d)	A solid opaque fence eight (8) feet in height erected along one hundred percent (100%) of the yard length.

(e)	Areas not planted with trees shall be maintained as lawn or turf grasses, or other approved groundcover as determined by the Plan Commission or the Zoning Administrator.

B.	Business Districts
Where a Business District abuts a residential district or use, a landscape buffer a minimum of thirty (30) feet in width shall be provided.  The arrangement of plantings in the buffer yard shall be effective in creating a solid, year round screen that screens to a height of eight (8) feet.  The use of mounding in combination with plantings is encouraged to ensure that the minimum height is reached within three (3) years of planting.  Where mounding is not used, either dense evergreens or a solid opaque fence shall be used to ensure the screening is continuous at all times of the year.  Within the required landscape buffer, the following improvements individually or in combination shall be provided.
(a)Evergreen trees shall be planted on an average of one (1) tree for every thirty  (30) feet of the yard length; however trees may be clustered only where site constraints would prohibit the even distribution of the trees.  Ornamental or shade trees may be substituted for evergreen trees according to the approved tree list, only when the result woudlbe sufficient to provide a solid, year round screen to the height of eight (8) feet. 
(b)Mounding, with a minimum top width of at least two (2) feet, a maximum side slope for front and back sides of three (3) feet horizontal to one (1) foot vertical (3:1).  Such mounding shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height. Mounds shall not be located or positioned so as to create positive drainage onto adjoining properties. 

(c)A solid opaque fence eight (8) feet in height erected along one hundred percent (100%) of the yard length, or an interrupted solid, opaque fence eight (8) feet in height and supplemented with landscaping in order to create a solid visual screen along the entire yard length.  Where a fence is proposed, the Plan Commission may approve a reduction in the height and width of a buffer yard.

(d)Areas not planted with trees shall be maintained as lawn or turf grasses, or other approved groundcover as determined by the Plan Commission or the Zoning Administrator.

C.	Industrial Districts
Where a lot in an Industrial District abuts a residential district or use, a landscape buffer fourty (40) feet in width shall be provided to create a solid eight (8) foot year round screen. Within the required landscape buffer, the following improvements, individually or in combination, shall be provided.

(a)	Shade or ornamental trees, a minimum of two and one half (2-1/2) inches in caliper, shall be planted on an average of one (1) tree for every twenty-five (25) feet of the yard length. Evergreens, a minimum of four (4) feet in height at planting, may be substituted for, or used in combination with, shade or ornamental trees, in some cases as determined by the Plan Commission or the Zoning Administrator.

(b)	Shrubs, a minimum of one (1) shrub measuring a minimum of twenty-four (24) inches at planting, and clustered or spaced linearly to form a continuous dense hedge. Plant spacing should be contingent on species. Where shrubs are used in combination with other materials, the use of shrubs shall comprise fifty percent (50%) of the required yard. 

(c)	Mounding, with a minimum top width of at least two (2) feet and a maximum side slope for front and back sides of three (3) feet horizontal to one (1) foot vertical (3:1). Such mounding shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height. Mounds shall not be located or positioned so as to create positive drainage onto adjoining properties.  

(d)	A solid opaque fence eight (8) feet in height erected along one hundred percent (100%) of the yard length.

(e)	Areas not planted with trees shall be maintained as lawn or turf grasses, or other approved groundcover as determined by the Plan Commission or the Zoning Administrator.

D.	Planned Unit Development Districts 
For all Planned Unit Development District a landscape yard a minimum of 10 feet in width shall be provided along the perimeter of the development. Within the required landscape buffer, the following improvements individually or in combination shall be provided.

(a)	Shade or ornamental trees, a minimum of two and one half (2-1/2) inches in caliper, shall be planted on an average of one (1) tree for every forty (40) feet of the yard length. Evergreens, a minimum of four (4) feet in height at planting, may be substituted for, or used in combination with, shade or ornamental trees, in some cases as determined by the Plan Commission or the Zoning Administrator.
 
(b)	Shrubs, a minimum of one (1) shrub, measuring a minimum of twenty-four (24) inches at planting, and clustered or spaced linearly to form a continuous dense hedge. Plant spacing should be contingent on species. Where shrubs are used in combination with other materials, the use of shrubs shall comprise fifty percent (50%) of the required yard. 

(c)	Mounding, a minimum top width of at least two (2) feet and a maximum side slope for front and back sides of three (3) feet horizontal to one (1) foot vertical (3:1). Such mounding shall not exceed eight feet (8) in height. Mounds shall not be located or positioned so as to create positive drainage onto adjoining properties.  

(d)	Areas not planted with trees shall be maintained as lawn or turf grasses, or other approved groundcover as determined by the Plan Commission or the Zoning Administrator.

00-15-153-15.11		Screening of Refuse Disposal Dumpsters and Loading Berths
1.	Refuse Disposal Dumpsters  
Refuse disposal dumpsters in all zoning districts shall be screened on all sides by a solid wood or masonry fence to a height of not less than six (6) feet but not more than eight (8) feet. 

 
2.	Loading Berths 
All loading berths shall be completely screened by a uniformly solid fence, wall, or densely planted, mature shrubbery or any combination thereof, not less than six (6) feet but not more than eight (8) feet in height.

 00-15-153-15.12		 Changes to Approved Landscape Plans
Any change or deviation to an approved landscape plan shall require the approval of the Zoning Administrator. Changes that do not conform to the provisions of this Article shall be subject to the procedures for a variance as established in Article 8 (Variances). Landscape improvements made to a lot that are not in conformance with an approved landscape plan shall be a violation of this Ordinance and subject to the procedures of Article 20 (Enforcement).


 
ARTICLE 16	TEMPORARY USE REQUIREMENTS

00-15-153-16.1		Temporary Use Permits
00-15-153-16.2	   General Requirements for Temporary Uses
00-15-153-16.3	   Temporary Uses Permitted
00-15-153-16.4   Appeals
____________________________________________

00-15-153-16.1	 Temporary Use Permits
The Zoning Administrator is authorized by this Ordinance to issue a temporary use permit for uses specifically authorized in particular zoning districts as temporary uses as set forth herein.

1.	Application
An application for a temporary use permit shall be filed in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 3 (Applications & Hearings). 

2.	Action of the Application
Within ten (10) business days following the receipt of a properly completed application for a temporary use permit, the Zoning Administrator shall inform the applicant in writing of his decision.  A temporary use permit will not be issued until the Zoning Administrator is satisfied that the use allowed by the temporary use permit will not adversely affect the public health, safety or general welfare of the Town of Cumberland or immediate neighborhood.

3.	Appeals
Appeals from the decision of the Zoning Administrator can be made to the Board of Zoning Appeals pursuant to Article 9 of this Ordinance.

4.	Conditions
The Zoning Administrator may require that certain conditions relating to the public health, safety or general welfare be complied with before the issuance of a temporary use permit.

00-15-153-16.2	 General Regulations for Temporary Uses
In addition to the specific regulations set forth in Section 4-16-3 and all other applicable regulations of the district in which a temporary use may be located, all temporary uses shall meet the following general requirements.

1.	General Regulations
A.	No temporary use shall be permitted in a district if it would have a significant negative impact, including aesthetic impact, on any adjacent property or on the area, as a whole, in which it is located.

B.	No temporary use shall be permitted that causes or threatens to cause an on-site or off-site threat to the public safety.

C.	No temporary use shall be permitted if the additional vehicular traffic reasonably expected to be generated by such temporary use would have undue detrimental effects on surrounding streets and uses.

D.	No temporary use shall be permitted if such use would conflict with another previously authorized temporary use.

E.	Signs shall be permitted only in accordance with the provisions of Article 18 (Signs).

F.	Except as expressly provided otherwise, every temporary use shall comply with the regulations applicable in the district in which such temporary use is located.

G.	Every temporary use shall comply with any such other conditions as may be imposed by the Zoning Administrator designed to be reasonably necessary to achieve the purposes of this Ordinance or to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare.

00-15-153-16.3	 Temporary Uses Permitted
Subject to the requirements of Section 4-16-1 and Section 4-16-2 above, and the specific requirements for the temporary uses set forth below, the following temporary uses may be allowed.

1.	Seasonal Sales or Display of Merchandise
Seasonal Sales of merchandise or the display of merchandise may be allowed in any commercial district, provided however, that:

A.	no front yard shall be used for the sale or display of merchandise, and 
B.	the sale or display of merchandise shall not encroach into areas of required parking.

2.	Christmas Tree Sales
Christmas tree sales may be allowed in any district other than a residential district subject to the following conditions.

A.	Such use shall be limited to a period not to exceed forty-five (45) days. 
B.	Trees remaining on hand after December 25th shall be removed from the premises no later than December 31st of the same year.
C.	Such use shall provide adequate customer parking, traffic access, and the absence of an adverse impact on other properties.

3.	Contractors’ Offices and Equipment Sheds
Contractors’ Offices and equipment sheds may be allowed in any district subject to the following conditions.

A.	The use shall be accessory to an active construction project.  
B.	The use shall contain no sleeping or cooking accommodations.
C.	Such use shall be limited to a period not to exceed the duration of the active construction phase of such project.


4.	Real Estate Offices
Real Estate offices, including model units, may be allowed in any district subject to the following conditions.

A.	The use shall be accessory to an active new development.  
B.	The use shall contain no sleeping or cooking accommodations unless located in a model dwelling unit.  However, a model dwelling unit may not be used as residence or sleeping quarters during the period of the active selling or leasing of units or space in such development.  
C.	Such use shall be limited to the period of the active selling or leasing of units or space in such development and to activities related to the development in which such office is located. 
D.	No such office shall be used as the general office or headquarters of any firm, corporation, partnership, or other business entity form.

5.	Indoor and Outdoor Art, Craft, and Plant Shows, Exhibits, and Sales
Indoor and outdoor art, craft, and plant shows, exhibits, and sales may be allowed in any district other than a residential district, subject to following conditions.

A.	Such use shall provide adequate customer parking, traffic access, and the absence of an adverse impact on other properties.
B.	Every such sale shall be limited to a period not to exceed three consecutive (3) days.

6.	Farm Product Sales
Farm Product Sales may be allowed in any non-residential district subject to the following conditions.

A.	Such farm product sale shall use no permanent structures.
B.	The sale of products or merchandise shall be limited to fresh (never having been frozen or packaged), dairy goods, fruits, vegetables, juices, flowers, plants, herbs, and spices produced or grown by the vendor; and baked goods made by the vendor.
C.	Not more than one (1) such farm product sale shall be conducted on the same premises in any seven (7) day period.  
D.	Every such sale shall be limited to a period not to exceed eight (8) consecutive hours.


7.	Civic and Religious Carnivals
Civic and religious carnivals may be allowed in any district, but only when sponsored by a not-for-profit religious, philanthropic, or civic group or organization and subject to the following conditions. 

A.	Such use shall provide adequate customer parking, traffic access, and the absence of an adverse impact on other properties.
B.	Such use shall be limited to a period not to exceed two (2) consecutive days when located within a Residential District or on any lot abutting a Residential District or ten (10) days when located within any other district.
C.	No such use shall be permitted to operate after 11:00 p.m. 
D.	The concessionaire responsible for the operation of any such use shall submit to the Zoning Administrator along with its application for a Temporary Use Permit the following:

(a)	a site layout displaying adequate ingress and egress routes for emergency vehicles with no dead-end aisles;
(b)	a plan for fire extinguishers or fire safety equipment showing the location and number of such equipment; 
(c)	a plan for refuse containers and service pickup showing the location and number of such equipment; and
(d)	a plan for site clean-up upon termination of the event.

8.	Sidewalk Sales
Sidewalk Sales may be allowed in any commercial district subject to the following conditions.

A.	Such sales shall be organized as an area-wide sidewalk sale with all merchants on all abutting lots zoned in the same district.
B.	No more than four (4) such sales shall be permitted in any twelve (12) month period. 
C.	No such sale shall be permitted for a period in excess of three (3) consecutive days.

9.	Tents
Tents may be permitted in any district when in connection with a permitted, accessory, temporary, or special event or use and subject to the following conditions.  

A.	All tents shall be constructed of fire-retardant material and erected securely. Guy wires, stakes, or other supports shall be clearly marked and secured.  
B.	No tent shall be allowed to remain for a period of more than two (2) days longer than the period during which the use with which it is associated is allowed to remain or, in the absence of any such period, ten (10) days.  
C.	Every tent shall comply with the bulk, yard, and space requirements applicable to district in which it is located.

10.	Portable Satellite Dish Antennas
Portable satellite dish antennas may be permitted in any district subject to the following conditions.

A.	The portable satellite dish antenna shall be designed and sold as a portable antenna, not intended for permanent installation.
B.	The portable satellite dish antenna’s diameter shall not exceed six (6) feet.
C.	The portable satellite dish antenna’s height shall not exceed twelve (12) feet.
D.	The portable satellite dish antenna shall not be located in any required yard setback or any front yard or front yard open space.
E.	No portable satellite dish antenna shall be permitted for longer than seven (7) days in a thirty (30) day period.

11.	Civic uses of public places
Civic uses of public places may be permitted in any district when authorized by the governmental entity owning or controlling such property, provided, however, that no such use or activity imposes an undue adverse effect on neighboring streets or property.

12.	Temporary Uses exempt from a permit
Decorative seasonal or holiday displays and lights customarily and commonly associated with any national, local or religious holiday are permitted but shall not be located in any public right-of-way.  These displays shall meet all setbacks for the lot on which they are located.



12.	Other similar temporary uses
Other similar temporary uses may be permitted in any district provided in the opinion of the Zoning Administrator the use is consistent with the purpose and intent of this Section and for the district for which it is proposed to be located. 
 
00-15-153-16.4	 Appeals
Every decision of the Zoning Administrator shall be subject to appeal to the Board of Zoning Appeals in conformance with Article 9.

 
ARTICLE 17	PERFORMANCE STANDARDS

00-15-153-17.1	Application of Performance Standards
00-15-153-17.2	Compliance with Performance Standards
00-15-153-17.3	Enforcement
00-15-153-17.4	Toxic Matter
00-15-153-17.5	Fire and Explosion Hazards
00-15-153-17.6	Glare or Heat
00-15-153-17.7	Odor
00-15-153-17.8	Noise
00-15-153-17.9	Vibration
00-15-153-17.10	Dust and Air Pollution
00-15-153-17.11	Nuisance
00-15-153-17.12	Electromagnetic Interference
00-15-153-17.13	Water Pollution
00-15-153-17.14	Outdoor Storage
00-15-153-17.15	Outdoor Lighting 
_____________________________________

00-15-153-17.1		Application of Performance Standards 
All uses shall comply with the performance standards established in this Article, unless any federal, state, county, or local ordinance, law or regulation establishes a more restrictive standard in which event the more restrictive standard shall apply.

00-15-153-17.2		Compliance with Performance Standards 
When tests by the Zoning Administrator indicate a possible violation of these performance standards, the Zoning Administrator shall require the property owner to obtain and bear the cost of the appropriate technical assistance to ascertain the exact amount of emissions of noxious effects at the lot lines of the property in question. The results of the test or tests shall be presented to the Plan Commission in writing.

00-15-153-17.3		Enforcement
Enforcement of the performance standards shall be the duty of the Zoning Administrator pursuant to Article 20 (Enforcement).

00-15-153-17.4		Toxic Matter
The storage, handling, or transport of toxic substances shall comply with all federal laws and regulations, all state laws and regulations, and all county and local ordinances, laws, and regulations regarding the storage, handling, or transport of toxic material.  No use shall discharge across the boundaries of its lot toxic matter so as to endanger the public health, safety, or general welfare, or cause injury or damage to an abutting or adjoining property.

00-15-153-17.5		Fire and Explosion Hazards
Materials that present potential fire and explosive hazards shall be transported, stored and used only in conformance with all applicable federal, state, and local ordinances and laws.

 
00-15-153-17.6		Glare or Heat
Any operation producing intense glare or heat shall be performed within a completely enclosed building or structure in such a manner as not to create a public nuisance or hazard along lot lines.  No objectionable or annoying glare or heat perceptible beyond the lot lines and resulting from plant operations shall be created.

00-15-153-17.7		Odor
Emission of noxious, objectionable or annoying odor in such quantities as to be detectable at any point along a lot boundary is prohibited.

00-15-153-17.8		Noise
Sound levels shall be measured with a sound level meter and associated octave band filter manufactured according to standards prescribed by the American Standards Association. Measurements shall be made using the flat network of the sound level meter. Impulsive type noises shall be subject to the performance standards hereinafter prescribed, provided that such noises shall be capable of being accurately measured with such equipment. Noises capable of being so measured, for the purpose of this Ordinance, shall be those noises which cause rapid fluctuations of the needle of the sound level meter, with a variation of no more than plus or minus two (2) decibels. Noises incapable of being so measured, such as those of an irregular and intermittent nature, shall be controlled so as not to become a nuisance to adjacent uses. At no point on the boundary of this district shall the sound intensity level of any individual operation or plant exceed the decibel levels in the designated octave bands.

Octave Band (Frequency Cycles per Second)	Maximum Permitted Along Residential District Boundaries	Sound Level (Decibels) Along Business District Boundaries
0 to 75	72	75
76 to 150	67	70
151 to 300	59	63
301 to 600	52	57
601 to 1200	46	52
1201 to 2400	40	45
2401 to 4800	34	40
Above 4800	32	38
		

00-15-153-17.9	Vibration
At any time, no use, operation, or activity shall cause ground-transmitted vibrations in excess of the limits set forth in the table below.
Vibration (the periodic displacement measured in inches of earth)
Maximum Permitted Frequency (Cycles per Second)	Displacement Along Manufacturing District Boundaries
0 to 10	.0008
11 to 20	.0005
21 to 30	.0002
31 to 40	.0001
40 and over	.00005
	

00-15-153-17.10	Dust and Air Pollution
1.	Dust and other types of air pollution borne by the wind from sources such as storage areas, yards, roads, conveying equipment and the like within lot boundaries shall be kept to a minimum by appropriate landscaping, screening, sheltering, paving, oiling, fencing, wetting, collecting or other acceptable means.

2.	No person shall cause or allow the emission of fugitive particulate matter across lot lines which is visible by an observer looking generally toward the zenith, beyond the property line. This requirement shall not apply when the wind speed is greater then 40.2 kilometers per hour (25 miles per hour).  Determinations of wind speed for the purposes of this rule shall be by a one (1) hour average or hourly recorded value at the nearest official station of the US Weather Bureau or by wind speed instruments operated on the site.
	
00-15-153-17.11		Nuisance
No use shall be operated or maintained which creates an environmental detriment or public nuisance, including but not limited to visual clutter created by excessive signage, lighting, or outdoor storage; noise or odors as defined herein; or other noise and odors such as those created by pets or garbage.

00-15-153-17.12		Electromagnetic Interference.
Electromagnetic interference from any operations of any use in any district shall not adversely affect the operation of any equipment located off the zoning lot on which such interference originates.

00-15-153-17.13		Water Pollution
All uses shall comply with the State of Indiana rules and regulations regarding prevention of water pollution.

00-15-153-17.14		Outdoor Storage
Outdoor storage of fuel, raw materials and flammable products within two hundred 200 feet of a residential district, shall be enclosed by a fence, wall or plant materials adequate to conceal such storage from adjacent properties and public right-of-way.  No outdoor storage of fuel, raw materials and flammable products shall be permitted within one hundred (100) feet of a residential district or use.

00-15-153-17.15		Outdoor Lighting 
All areas containing outdoor lighting, including but not limited to, floodlighting, security lighting, or parking lot lighting shall comply with the requirements of this Section.  

1.	General Requirements
A.	An outdoor fixture emitting more than 1200 lumens (except motion detector activated lighting) shall be full cutoff and fully shielded. Bulbs in outdoor light fixtures emitting from 600 to 1200 lumens may be installed in fixtures that are not full cutoff and may be visible from the property line, provided, however, such bulbs shall be frosted glass or covered by frosted glass or other similarly translucent covering.

B.	Spotlights or floodlights when used for motion detector security lighting purposes only, and less than 1800 lumens, need not be full cutoff or fully shielded if its center beam is aimed at a point not beyond any property line at no less than forty five (45) degrees below horizontal. All motion detector security lighting shall be programmed such that it cycles off within five minutes after the cessation of motion within its field of view. Motion detector security lighting shall be set so that normal business or resident activity does not trip or activate the system.

C.	Tower or antenna lighting shall not be permitted unless required by the Federal Aviation Administration, the Federal Communication Commission, or by the Town of Cumberland. 

2. 	Light Trespass
All areas containing outdoor lighting shall limit light spillage onto adjacent property, when measured at any point along a property line to the requirements set forth below. Compliance shall be achieved by utilizing fixture shielding, directional control designed into fixtures, fixture location, height, or aim, or a combination of these or other factors.
                        			
Adjoining Districts	Light Spillage Measured in Vertical Foot-candles
Conservation and Agricultural Districts	0.10
Residential Districts	0.10
Public right-of-way	0.10
Business Districts	0.25
Institutional Districts	0.50
	

3.	Building Illumination
When buildings or other structures are illuminated, the design for the illumination must be in accordance with the following requirements.

A.	The maximum illumination on any vertical surface or angular roof surface shall not exceed 1.0 foot-candles.
B.	Lighting fixtures shall be located, aimed, and shielded so that light is directed only onto the building surface.
C.	All fixtures used to illuminate buildings shall be full cutoff and fully shielded.
D.	For statues, monuments, fountains, or other objects for which it may not be possible to reliably and consistently illuminate with downward lighting, upward lighting may be used only in the form of spotlights which confine the illumination to the object of interest.
E.	The Town of Cumberland supports the tradition of lowering the U.S. flag at sunset.  However, if upward lighting is used to illuminate the U.S. flag or other flags, only spotlights shall be used; floodlights directed above the horizontal shall not be used to illuminate a flag.

4.	Landscaping 
Where landscaping for nonresidential structures is to be illuminated, the Cumberland Plan Commission shall approve such lighting in conjunction with the property’s landscape plan.   Such plan shall demonstrate the purpose of the lighting, show the location of all lighting fixtures, and designate what landscaping is to be illuminated. Landscape lighting shall not generate excessive light levels, cause glare, or direct any light beyond the landscaping into the night sky.

5.	Parking Lot Lighting
Parking lot lighting shall not exceed the minimum lighting necessary to ensure adequate vision in parking areas, and shall not cause glare or direct illumination onto adjacent properties or streets. All lighting fixtures serving parking lots shall be full cutoff fixtures. The minimum illumination level for a parking lot shall be no more than 0.4 foot-candles and the ratio of the average illumination to the minimum illumination shall not exceed 4:1.

6.	Lighting of Exterior Display or Open Sales Areas
Lighting levels on exterior display or open sales areas shall not exceed levels adequate to facilitate the activities taking place in such locations. Areas designated as exterior display or open sales areas shall be illuminated so that the average horizontal illumination at grade level does not exceed 4.0 foot-candles, and the ratio of average to minimum illumination shall not exceed 4:1. The average and minimum shall be computed for only that area designated as exterior display or open sales area. 

7.	Lighting of Walkways, Bikeways, Parks and Playgrounds
Where special lighting is to be provided for walkways, bikeways, or parks, the following requirements shall apply.

A.	The walkway, pathway, or ground area shall be illuminated to a level of no more than 0.5 average horizontal foot-candles.
B.	The vertical illumination levels at a height of five (5) feet above grade shall be no more than 0.5 average vertical foot-candles.
C.	Lighting fixtures shall be designed to direct light downward, and the initial output of light sources shall not exceed one thousand (1,000) lumens.

8.	Lighting of Aprons, Canopies and Bays
Lighting levels of store aprons, under canopies, and in drive-through bays shall not exceed levels adequate to facilitate the activities taking place in such locations. 

A.	The minimum horizontal illumination on store aprons and under canopies shall not exceed 5.0 foot-candles at grade level, and the ratio of average to minimum illumination shall not exceed 4:1. The average maintained horizontal and vertical illumination shall not exceed twelve (12) foot-candles.
B.	Areas on the apron used for parking or vehicle storage shall be illuminated in accordance with the requirements for Parking Lot Lighting.
C.	Light fixtures mounted on or under canopy ceilings shall be full cutoff and fully shielded.
D.	As an alternative to ceiling-mounted lights, indirect lighting may be used where light is directed upward and then reflected down from the ceiling of the canopy. In this case, light fixtures must be shielded so that direct illumination is focused exclusively on the ceiling of the canopy.
E.	Lights shall not be mounted on the top or sides of the canopy, and the sides of the canopy shall not be illuminated.
F.	Lighting for drive-through bays must be fully shielded as if located outside.

9. 	Outdoor Activity Facilities
A.	Outdoor activity facilities may have unique lighting needs pertaining to the performing or playing area. A design plan for such a facility shall detail the lighting requirements of the performing or playing area and how unwanted glare, illumination of surrounding streets and properties, and nighttime atmospheric light pollution will be minimized.

B.	Limits on light trespass appearing in Section 4-17-15[2] apply to such outdoor facilities. If floodlighting is used in place of full cutoff fixtures, the center beam shall be aimed below the horizontal plane at an angle not less than ½ the angular beam spread of the fixture. Glare shall be controlled by fixture design, location, and shielding, natural or positioned obstructions on the parcel where the facilities are located. Every such lighting system design and installation shall be certified by a registered engineer as conforming to all applicable restrictions of this Ordinance.

C.	Except for professional or amateur events covered by intrastate televised broadcast, thirty (30) foot-candle horizontal illumination of the playing field or performing area shall not be exceeded. Parking facilities, walkways, and other lighting applications associated with venues for the outdoor activities covered herein shall conform to the requirements specified in the sections of this ordinance applicable to those lighting applications.

10.	Street Lighting
Except as provided otherwise, all new, repaired or replaced street lighting fixtures, whether public or private shall be full cut off fixtures and the illumination levels contained in IESNA recommended practices shall not be exceeded. Where the design for an area suggests the use of street light fixtures of a particular period or architectural style as an alternative the maximum lumens generated by each fixture not designed or installed as full cutoff shall not exceed 2,000.

11.	Neon Lighting
Light sources consisting of glass tubes filled with neon, argon, krypton, or other similar gas (hereafter referred to as “neon lighting”) are excluded from shielding and line-of-sight requirements, however such lighting shall be included in the light trespass requirements of Section 4-17-15[2].   For the purposes of this ordinance, signs using neon lighting shall be considered internally illuminated signs and shall be subject to the requirements specified for internally illuminated signs set forth in Article 18.  Neon lighting shall not be considered as security lighting.

12.	Lighting Plan
Wherever a lighting plan is required by this Ordinance, such plan shall become an integral part of any development review application. No improvement location permit shall be issued without first obtaining approval of a required lighting plan. 



13.	Repair and Replacement of Outdoor Lighting
Upon the repair and or replacement of any light fixture, or component thereof, or the relocation of any light fixture, that fixture shall be brought in compliance with this Section 4-17-15.  At the time of repair and or replacement of any light fixture, or component thereof, or the relocation of any light fixture, the property owner, his agent or lessee shall provide the Zoning Administrator with an inventory of all existing outdoor lighting fixtures.  

14.	Enforcement
Failure to adhere to the requirements of this Section 4-17-15 or an approved lighting plan shall be deemed a violation of this Ordinance and subject to the procedures of Article 20 (Enforcement).

 
 

	



















	

























 
ARTICLE 19	NONCONFORMING LOTS, USES, AND STRUCTURES

00-15-153-19.1		Purpose
00-15-153-19.2	   General Standards
00-15-153-19.3   Nonconforming Lots
00-15-153-19.4   Nonconforming Uses
00-15-153-19.5   Nonconforming Structures
00-15-153-19.6   Nonconforming Signs
____________________________________________

00-15-153-19.1	  Purpose
The purpose of this Article is to provide for the regulation of legal nonconforming lots, uses, and structures and to specify those circumstances and conditions under which they may remain until they are removed. The zoning districts established by the Zoning Ordinance are designed to control the future use of land within the Town of Cumberland by encouraging the development and maintenance of desirable residential, business, office, and industrial areas, as well as to promote and protect the public health, safety, and general welfare. The continued existence of nonconforming lots, uses and structures is frequently inconsistent with the purposes for which the districts were established and thus the gradual elimination of such nonconforming lots, uses and structures has been determined by the Cumberland Town Council to be desirable.

00-15-153-19.2	  General Standards 
1.	Avoidance of Undue Hardship
Nothing in this Article shall be deemed to require a change in the plans, construction, or designated use of any building, structure, or development on which construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of this Ordinance and upon which construction has actually begun and has been diligently pursued. Where demolition or removal of an existing building has been substantially begun prior to rebuilding, such demolition or removal shall be deemed to be construction.

2.	Restoration of Structures to Safe Conditions 
Nothing in this Article shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any building or structure, or part thereof, declared to be unsafe by any official charged with protecting the public safety.  Such strengthening or restoration shall not however, be used to enlarge, expand or extend such nonconforming buildings or structures, nor be used as grounds for adding other structures or uses which are prohibited by the Zoning Ordinance.

3.	Illegal Uses 
Illegal uses existing at the time this Ordinance is enacted shall not be validated by virtue of its enactment.

4.	Variances Previously Granted for Uses and Structures  
Any use or structure that becomes nonconforming upon the effective date of this Ordinance and for which a variance was previously granted shall remain subject to any conditions or commitments that were imposed pursuant to the granting of such variance. 

 
5.	Special Exceptions Previously Granted for Uses and Structures 
Any use or structure that becomes nonconforming upon the effective date of this Ordinance and for which a special exception permit was previously granted, shall remain subject to any conditions or commitments that were imposed pursuant to the grant of such special exception permit. 
 
00-15-153-19.3	  Nonconforming Lots
1.	Single Nonconforming Lots of Record  
In any district in which single-family dwellings are permitted, a single-family dwelling and customary accessory buildings may be erected on any single lot of record after the effective date of this Ordinance, notwithstanding limitation imposed by other provisions of this Ordinance.  Such lot must be in separate ownership and not of continuous frontage with other lots in the same ownership. This provision shall apply even though such lots fail to meet the requirements for area or width, or both, that are generally applicable in the district provided that yard dimensions and requirements other than those applying to area or width, or both, of the lot shall conform to the regulations for the district in which such lot is located.

2.	Lots in Combination 
If two (2) or more lots or a combination of lots with continuous frontage in single ownership are of record at the effective date of this Ordinance, and if all or part of the lots with no buildings do not meet the requirements established for lot width and area, the lands involved shall be considered to be an undivided parcel for the purposes of this Ordinance and the Zoning Ordinance.  No portion of said parcel shall be used or sold in a manner which diminishes compliance with lot width and area requirements established by the Zoning Ordinance, nor shall any division of any parcel be made which creates a lot with width or area below the requirements stated in the Zoning Ordinance.

3.	Other Uses of Legal Nonconforming Lots  
In any commercial or manufacturing zoning district, a legal nonconforming lot of record may be used for any use permitted in the district. 

00-15-153-19.4 	Nonconforming Uses.
1.	Authority to Continue  
A lawfully existing nonconforming use may be continued, provided such use adheres to the limitations set forth herein, as well as the requirements of this Article and that such use remains otherwise lawful. 

2.	Ordinary Repair and Maintenance  
Normal maintenance and incidental repair or replacement, and installation or relocation of nonbearing walls, nonbearing partitions, fixtures, wiring or plumbing, may be performed on any structure devoted in whole or in part to a legal nonconforming use. However, this paragraph shall not be interpreted to authorize an unlawful alteration, enlargement, extension, or move of a structure.

 
3.	Structural Alteration
A structure devoted in whole or in part to a legal nonconforming use shall not be structurally altered unless the use thereof shall thereafter conform to the use regulations of the zoning district in which it is located.

4.	Enlargement of Structure 
A structure devoted in whole or in part to a legal nonconforming use shall not be enlarged or added to in any manner, unless the use of such structure shall thereafter conform to the use regulations of the district in which it is located.

5.	Extension of Use 
A legal nonconforming use shall not be extended, expanded, enlarged or increased in its intensity. However, a nonconforming use located in a structure manifestly designed or intended for such use may be extended throughout any interior part of such structure.  No such extension shall be permitted to occupy any land outside of such structure. 

6.	Moving 
A structure devoted in whole or in part to a legal nonconforming use shall not be moved in whole or in part, for any distance whatsoever, to any other location on the same or any other lot, unless the entire structure and its use shall thereafter be conforming to the regulations of the zoning district in which it is located.

7.	Change in Use  
A legal nonconforming use shall not be changed to any use other than a use permitted in the zoning district in which the use is located. When such a legal nonconforming use has been changed to a permitted use, it shall not thereafter be changed back to any nonconforming use.  

8.	Damage or Destruction 
A structure devoted in whole or in part to, or accessory to, a legal nonconforming use that is damaged or destroyed, by any means, to the extent of more than fifty percent (50%) of the cost of replacement of such structure new shall not be restored unless the use of such structure shall thereafter conform to the use regulations of the zoning district in which it is located. 

9.	Termination by Discontinuance or Abandonment 
A.	When a legal nonconforming use is discontinued for a period of twelve months it shall be considered abandoned, regardless of any intent to resume or not to abandon such use, and such use shall not thereafter be reestablished or resumed.  Any subsequent use or occupancy of such land or structure shall comply with the use regulations of the zoning district in which such land or structure is located.

B.	Where a period discontinuance is caused by government action, strikes, material shortages, or acts of God, and without any contributing fault of the owner, occupant or agents thereof, such period shall not be considered in calculating the length of discontinuance for purposes of this paragraph.

00-15-153-19.5 	Nonconforming Structures.
1.	Authority to Continue  
A lawfully existing nonconforming structure may be continued, provided such structure adheres to the limitations set forth herein, as well as the requirements of this Article and that such structure remains otherwise lawful. 

2.	Repair, Maintenance, Alterations, and Enlargement  
A legal nonconforming structure may be repaired, maintained, altered, or enlarged provided, however, that no such repair, maintenance, alteration, or enlargement shall either create any new nonconformity or increase the degree of the existing nonconformity of all or any part of such structure.  For the purposes of this regulation, the vertical or horizontal extension of a structure shall be considered to increase the degree of an existing nonconformity.

3.	Moving  
A legal nonconforming structure shall not be moved in whole or in part, for any distance whatsoever, to any other location on the same or any other lot unless the entire structure shall thereafter conform to the regulations of the zoning district in which it is located.

4.	Damage or Destruction 
A legal nonconforming structure that is damaged or destroyed to the extent of more than fifty percent (50%) of the cost of replacement of such structure new shall not be restored unless the structure shall thereafter conform to the regulations of the zoning district in which it is located. This regulation however, shall not be interpreted to authorize the creation of a new nonconformity or increase the degree of any nonconformity existing prior to such damage or destruction. 

00-15-153-19.6 	Nonconforming Signs.
1.	Authority to Continue
Any lawful sign located within the Town at the effective date of this Ordinance or which shall come to be located in Town as a result of annexation after effective date of this Ordinance, which does not conform to the provisions of this Article, may continue provided, the sign remains in conformance with the provisions of this Section.

2.	Conditions of Lawful Status 
For the purposes of this Article, legal nonconforming status shall be conferred only on signs authorized by a sign permit or variance of a preceding ordinance, title, code, or law; or if no sign permit was required under the applicable preceding laws, the sign was otherwise in compliance with the requirements of the preceding ordinance, code, or law. 

3.	Ordinary Maintenance and Repair  
Nothing in this Section shall relieve the owner or beneficial user of a legal nonconforming sign, or the owner of the property on which the legal nonconforming sign is located from the provisions of this Article regarding safety, maintenance, and repair.  Normal maintenance, including repainting, cleaning, or routine repair of a legal nonconforming sign shall not be deemed to be a condition which triggers a loss of lawful status described below, unless such maintenance increases, in fact, the nonconforming aspects of the sign.

4.	Repairs Pursuant to Public Order
Nothing in this Section shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoration to a safe condition of a legal nonconforming sign in accordance with a reasonable order of a public official who is charged with protecting the public safety and who declares such a sign to be unsafe and orders its restoration to a safe condition, provided however, such restoration is not otherwise in violation of the various provisions of this Section prohibiting the repair or restoration of partially damaged or destroyed signs.

5.	Loss of Lawful Status
A.	Legal nonconforming status shall terminate under the following conditions:
(a)	if the use of a sign is discontinued for a period of six months, it shall be deemed abandoned and shall not thereafter be reestablished; or
(b)	if a sign is structurally altered such that its nonconforming aspects increase; or
(c)	if a sign is relocated, replaced, or moved in any way; or the sign is damaged and the cost of repair is fifty percent (50%) of its replacement value.

B.	Compliance
Upon the happening of any of the aforementioned events, the sign shall be immediately brought into compliance with the Zoning Ordinance in conjunction with a new sign permit or the sign shall be removed.  For the purpose of this Subsection the changing of copy shall not be considered the replacement of an existing legal nonconforming sign.

 
ARTICLE 20	ENFORCEMENT

00-15-153-20.1		Authority 
00-15-153-20.2 	Complaints Regarding Violations
00-15-153-20.3 	Persons Liable
00-15-153-20.4 	Right of Entry
00-15-153-20.5 	Procedures upon Discovery of Violations
00-15-153-20.6 	Civil Zoning Violations
00-15-153-20.7 	Revocation of Development Review Approvals
00-15-153-20.8		Common Nuisance
00-15-153-20.9 	Appeals of Zoning Administrator Decisions
00-15-153-20.10 	Private Remedies Reserved
_______________________________________________

00-15-153-20.1	 Authority
The Zoning Administrator or his authorized designee is hereby designated to enforce the terms and provisions of this Ordinance.  For the purposes of this Ordinance, the term Zoning Administrator as used herein and throughout this Ordinance shall be inclusive of his authorized designee.

00-15-153-20.2	 Complaints Regarding Violations
Whenever the Zoning Administrator receives a complaint alleging a violation of this Ordinance or has reason to suspect that a violation is occurring, he shall investigate the complaint or suspicion and shall take whatever action is warranted in accordance with this Article.

00-15-153-20.3	 Persons Liable
The owner, tenant, or occupant of any building, structure, or land, or part thereof, and any architect, builder, contractor, agent, or other person who participates in, assists, directs, creates, or maintains any situation that is contrary to the requirements of this Ordinance may be held responsible for the violation, suffer the penalties, and be subject to the remedies provided herein and at law.  

00-15-153-20.4	 Right of Entry
The Zoning Administrator may enter upon any premises at any reasonable time to make inspections of all buildings, structures and premises located within the jurisdiction of this Ordinance to determine their compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance. All inspections shall be subject to the following standards and conditions.

1.	The Zoning Administrator shall furnish to the owner, tenant, or occupant of the building, structure, or premises sought to be inspected, sufficient identification and information to enable the owner, tenant, or occupant to determine that the person is a representative of the Town and the purpose of the inspection. 

2.	The Zoning Administrator may apply to any court of competent jurisdiction for a search warrant or other legal process for the purpose of securing entry to any premises if the owner, tenant, or occupant shall refuse to grant entry.


00-15-153-20.5	 Procedures upon Discovery of Violations
If the Zoning Administrator finds that any provision of this Ordinance is being violated, he shall provide written Notice to Correct to the persons responsible for such violation, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. The notice shall also state what other action is available to the Zoning Administrator and that an appeal of his decision may be taken to the Board of Zoning Appeals.  Additional written notices may be provided at the Zoning Administrator’s discretion.

1.	Enforcement without Prior Written Notice
In cases where delay would seriously threaten the effective enforcement of this Ordinance or pose a danger to the public health, safety, or welfare, the Zoning Administrator may seek enforcement without prior written notice by invoking any penalties or remedies authorized herein or by law.

2.	Stop Work Order
The Zoning Administrator is empowered to issue a Stop Work Order requiring the suspension of land improvement of any kind when any of the following circumstances exist.

A.	A site is being improved without an Improvement Location Permit or any other permit required by this Ordinance.

B.	A site is being improved in violation of:

(a)	the terms, conditions or provisions of this Ordinance;
(b)	the terms, provisions, conditions or commitments of a variance;
(c)	the terms, provisions, conditions or commitments of a special exception permit;
(d)	the terms, provisions, conditions or commitments of a Planned Unit Development or Development Plan; 
(e)	commitments made in connection with a petition for a zone map amendment; or
(f)	any other development approval granted under this Ordinance.

C.	The Stop Work Order shall be posted on the property in a conspicuous place, or personally delivered to the owner, tenant, or occupant, or person in charge and state the conditions under which construction or other activity may resume.  The Zoning Administrator shall meet with the recipient of a Stop Work Order upon request to explain the conditions under which construction or other activity may resume.

D.	The Zoning Administrator may bring a cause of action in a court of competent jurisdiction to enforce the provisions of the Stop Work Order or enjoin any activity in violation of this Ordinance.

3.	Civil Zoning Violations
The Zoning Administrator may issue a citation to a person who commits a civil zoning violation or allows a civil zoning violation to be committed on real estate in which the person has a possessory interest.  Each day a civil zoning violation remains uncorrected is a distinct and separate violation subject to an additional citation and fine.


A.	Service of the Citation
Service may be perfected through personal service, by certified mail, by First Class U.S. Mail, or by placing the citation in a conspicuous place on the subject property.  

(a)	Except as provided in paragraphs [1] and [2] above, a civil zoning violation citation shall not be issued until ten (10) days after the issuance of a Notice to Correct. 

(b)	Where a person who receives notice of a civil zoning violation elects to file a development review application or petition to correct such violations, the said person must indicate his intent to file such application or petition on the citation where provided and return a copy to the Zoning Administrator.  

(1)	A person shall have ten (10) days from the date of service in which to file said development review application or petition.  A person who timely files such application or petition shall be required to pursue such application or petition in a diligent manner.  
(2)	While such application or petition is pending, the issuance of additional citations or fines shall be stayed.
(3)	If the development review application or petition is withdrawn or denied and the civil zoning violation remains uncorrected, then the Zoning Administrator may pursue every legal and equitable remedy available by law.

B.	Fine
The monetary fine for a civil zoning violation shall be an escalating fine with the first violation being One Hundred Dollars ($100) per day.  The second violation within the same calendar year shall be Two Hundred and Fifty Dollars ($250) per day and the third and all subsequent violations within the same calendar year shall be Five Hundred Dollars ($500) per day.  Each day a civil zoning violation remains uncorrected shall be a distinct and separate violation subject to daily fines without additional notices of violation or citation.

C.	Payment and Adjudication  
A person who receives a citation for a civil zoning violation may elect to do the following.

(a)	Admit the violation and pay all fines due to the Clerk-Treasurer of the Town of Cumberland.

(b) Stand trial for the citation by indicating on the citation where provided, his intent to stand trial and returning the citation to the Cumberland Clerk-Treasurer.  

(1)	The returned copy of the citation shall serve as notice of the person’s intent to stand trial, and the issuance of additional citations and fines shall be stayed.
(2)	On receipt of notice of intention to stand trial, the Zoning Administrator shall commence such appropriate action to enforce this Ordinance in court.

(c)	Where a citation has not been paid within thirty (30) days of its issuance, the Zoning Administrator shall commence such appropriate action to enforce this Ordinance in court.

D.	Other Remedies Reserved
The seeking of a civil penalty as authorized in this Article does not preclude the Zoning Administrator, Plan Commission, or the Board of Zoning Appeals from seeking alternative and additional relief from a court of competent jurisdiction in the same action or from seeking any other relief provided by law in a separate action for the enforcement of this Ordinance.

(a)	Pursuant to 36-1-6-2, as amended, where a condition exists on real property in violation of this Ordinance, the Zoning Administrator may enter onto the subject property and take the appropriate action to bring the property into compliance.  However, before such compliance action shall be taken, the Zoning Administrator shall provide notice to all persons holding a substantial interest in the property of his intention and provide such persons a reasonable time to bring the property into compliance.  If the Zoning Administrator is required to take appropriate action under this Section, the Town’s expenses involved in such action shall be made to become a lien against the subject property.

E.	Other Remedies Reserved
In the event that a violation of this Ordinance is determined to exist by a court of competent jurisdiction, the respondent shall bear the costs of the enforcement action, including reasonable attorney fees.

00-15-153-20.6	 Civil Zoning Violations
For the purposes of this Article, each of the following shall be deemed a civil zoning violation that may be enforced by the Zoning Administrator in accordance with the provisions of this Article.

1.	The location, erection, or maintenance of any sign not specifically permitted by the terms and provision of this Ordinance.
2.	The failure to obtain an Improvement Location Permit when one is required by the terms and provisions of this Ordinance.
3.	The outdoor storage of junk, trash, or debris in any zoning district, the provisions of which do not specifically permit such a use.
4.	The repair or service of any kind to motor vehicles in any loading facility.
5.	The outdoor storage or display of merchandise or goods in any zoning district in direct violation of the district’s development standards or where the provisions of the district do not specifically permit such a use;
6.	The conduct of any activity in any zoning district that is not specified as a permitted or customary accessory use in that district, and which activity has not been previously granted a valid variance or special exception. This violation shall not include uses established as legal nonconforming uses pursuant to Article 6.
7.	The failure to comply with the provision of Article 13 (Specific Use Requirements), Article 14 (Off Street Parking and Loading), Article 15 (Landscaping Requirements), Article 16 (Temporary Uses), Article 17 (Performance Standards), Article 18 (Signs), Article 19 (Nonconforming Lots, Uses and Structures) or any development standard established within a zoning district.
8.	The failure to comply with the terms, provisions, conditions, or commitments of a variance, special exception, development plan, Planned Unit Development, or commitments made in connection with a zone map amendment or other approval authorized by this Ordinance.
9.	The violation of a Stop Work Order issued pursuant to this Article. 
10.	The failure to comply with the terms and provisions of the Cumberland Subdivision Control Ordinance. 
11.	The failure to comply with any other provision of this Ordinance.

00-15-153-20.7	 Revocation of Development Review Approvals
The Zoning Administrator may, in accordance with this Section, seek the revocation of a development review approval, including an Improvement Location Permit, certificate of occupancy, variance, special exception, or development plan, if the recipient of the approval fails to develop or maintain the property in accordance with the application and plans submitted, the requirements of this Ordinance, or any additional requirements lawfully imposed in connection with the issuance of the approval.  Before a development review approval can be revoked, the Zoning Administrator shall undertake the following procedures.

1.	Notice and Opportunity to Comment
The Zoning Administrator shall cause a written Notice of Intent to revoke the development review approval to be delivered to the holder of a development approval at least thirty (30) working days prior to the date of the proposed revocation hearing. The Notice of Intent to revoke the development approval shall inform the recipient of the alleged reasons for the revocation and of his right to obtain a hearing on the allegations. 

2.	Hearing
The Zoning Administrator shall set a date for a public hearing before the Board of Zoning Appeals or the Plan Commission depending on the type of development review approval. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall hear and decide revocation hearings for improvement location permit, certificate of occupancy, variance, and special exception.  The Plan Commission shall hear and decide revocation hearings for development plans. 

A.	Notice of the public hearing shall be in conformance with the requirement of 
Article 3.

(a)	For the purpose of revocation hearings, interested parties have been determined to be all persons with a legal interest in the property and all owners of real property within a distance of six hundred sixty (660) feet or a depth of two (2) ownerships, whichever is less. Such interested parties shall receive written notice by certified mail, at the applicant’s expense, at least ten (10) days before the date of the hearing. Proof of such notice by Affidavit shall be required. If however, the subject matter of the proposal abuts or includes a county line or a county line street, road, or body of water, then all owners of real property to a depth of two (2) ownerships or one-eighth (1/8) of a mile into the adjacent county, whichever is less, are interested parties who must receive notice.

3.	Decision 
At the close of the public hearing, the Board or Commission, as the case may be, shall, by written order, render its decision on the proposed revocation. The written order shall contain a statement of the specific reasons and findings of fact that support the decision.  The Board or Commission, as the case may be, shall cause the Zoning Administrator to send its decision to the approval holder and any other person(s) previously requesting notification.

 
4.	Result of Revocation
No person may continue to make use of land or buildings in the manner authorized by any development review approval after the approval has been revoked in accordance with the provisions of this Article.

5.	Records
A record of all written Notices of Intent to revoke a development review approval shall be kept on file in the office of the Zoning Administrator.   Every decision relating to a Notice of Intent to revoke a development review approval shall also be kept on file in the office of the Zoning Administrator.

6.	Review by Certiorari
Every decision by the Board of Zoning Appeals or the Plan Commission, as the case may be, shall be subject to review by certiorari. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals or the Plan Commission relating to this Section may present to the Hancock County Court, a petition duly verified setting forth that such decision is illegal in whole or in part and specifying the grounds of the illegality.  The petition shall be presented to the court within thirty (30) days after the entry of the decision or order of the Board of Zoning Appeals or Plan Commission.

00-15-153-20.8	 Common Nuisance
Pursuant to Indiana Code 36-7-4-1012, as amended, any structure, land, or premises found to be in violation of this Ordinance is hereby declared to be a common nuisance. Any owner or possessor of said structure, land, or premises shall be, in addition to any other fine or civil penalty, liable for maintaining a common nuisance.

00-15-153-20.9	 Appeals of Zoning Administrator Decisions
All decisions of the Zoning Administrator may be appealed to the Board of Zoning Appeals in accordance with the procedures and standards for appeals of administrative decisions set forth in Article 9 (Appeals). 

00-15-153-20.10	 Private Remedies Reserved
Nothing in this Article shall be interpreted to prevent any person entitled to relief in law or equity by reason of a violation of the provisions of this Ordinance from bringing an appropriate action to secure relief.

 
APPENDIX A


COMMITMENT EXHIBIT


This form is to be used when recording commitments made with respect to land in association with Planned Unit Developments, Development Plans, Variances, or Special Exceptions and amendments to the Zoning Ordinance Map.

COMMITMENTS CONCERNING THE USE OR DEVELOPMENT OF REAL PROPERTY MADE IN CONNECTION WITH A PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT OR AMENDMENT TO THE ZONING ORDINANCE

In accordance with Indiana Code 36-7-4-615, the Owner of real estate located in the Town of Cumberland, Hancock County, Indiana, which is described below, makes the following COMMITMENTS concerning the use and development of the following described parcel of real estate:

Legal Description






STATEMENT OF COMMITMENTS

1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

(List all commitments in numerical order or reference attachments)
 


The COMMITMENTS contained herein shall be effective upon approval of the (Planned Unit Development or Amendment to the Zoning Map), petition # (petition number and name of development) and shall continue in effect until modified or terminated in conformance with the requirements herein.

These COMMITMENTS shall be recorded and shall run with the land, and be binding on the Owner of the above-described real estate, subsequent owners of the above-described real estate and any person or entity acquiring an interest therein.  

These COMMITMENTS may be modified or terminated only with the approval of the owner or owners of the real estate subject to the COMMITMENTS, and the Town of Cumberland Plan Commission after a public hearing.  These COMMITMENTS will automatically terminate if after adoption of the petition:

a.	The Zoning Map applicable to the parcel is changed; or
b.	The parcel is re-designated as a Planned Unit Development.

These COMMITMENTS may be enforced, jointly or severally, by:
 
a.	The Town of Cumberland Plan Commission;
b.	The Zoning Administrator;
c.	Any owner or owners of the real estate subject to the COMMITMENTS; and 
d.	Any person who is aggrieved by a violation of the COMMITMENTS.

In the event it becomes necessary to enforce these COMMITMENTS in a court of competent jurisdiction, and the owner of the Real Estate is found to be in violation of these COMMITMENTS, the owner shall pay all reasonable cost in the enforcement of these COMMITMENTS, including attorney fees.
 

The undersigned hereby authorizes the Secretary of the Town of Cumberland Plan Commission to record this instrument in the Office of the Recorder of Hancock County, Indiana upon final approval of petition # (petition number and name of development).

	IN WITNESS WHEREOF, Owner has executed this instrument this _____ day of ___________ 200_.



Signature ______________________	Signature ______________________

Printed ________________________	Printed ________________________


(ORGANIZATION)


Name	 _______________________

By 	_______________________

Printed _______________________

Title	 ______________________

 


STATE OF INDIANA	)
				) SS:
COUNTY OF HANCOCK	)

	Before me, a Notary Public in and for said County and State, personally appeared ___________________________, Owners(s) of the real estate described above who acknowledged the execution of the foregoing instrument and who, having been duly sworn, stated that any representations therein contained are true.

	Witness my hand and Notarial Seal this ____ day of __________, 200_.

	Signature ______________________

Printed ________________________



