
Frankfort, IN Code of Ordinances


CITY OF FRANKFORT, INDIANA
CODE OF ORDINANCES



2018 S-7 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 17-20 passed 10-23-17
State legislation current through 2017 A.L.S. Pamphlet #5



 



Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com



MUNICIPAL OFFICIALS
OF
FRANKFORT, INDIANA



 




MUNICIPAL OFFICIALS



MAYOR
 
Chris McBarnes


CLERK-TREASURER
 
Judith E. Sheets


CITY JUDGE
 
Matthew Beardsley


CITY ATTORNEY
 
Lester N. Bergum




 





COUNCIL



COUNCILMEMBER
 
James E. Moyer


COUNCILMEMBER
 
Joseph H. Palmer


COUNCILMEMBER
 
Eric Woods


COUNCILMEMBER
 
Wanda Mitchell


COUNCILMEMBER
 
Lewis Wheeler


COUNCILMEMBER
 
Clarence Warthan


COUNCILMEMBER
 
Steven Beardsley




 



ADOPTING ORDINANCES



ORDINANCE NO. 83-15



   AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING A REVISION, CODIFICATION, AND RECODIFICATION OF
THE ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF FRANKFORT, INDIANA



   BE IT ORDAINED, by the Common Council of the City of Frankfort, Indiana
as follows:



   1.   The ordinances of the City of Frankfort of a permanent nature,
as revised, amended, restated, codified and recodified in the following Title
1 through Title 15, inclusive, which are hereby incorporated by reference and
two copies of which are on file with the City Clerk-Treasurer for public
inspection are hereby adopted as "THE MUNICIPAL CODE OF THE CITY OF
FRANKFORT, 1983".



   2.   THE MUNICIPAL CODE OF THE CITY OF FRANKFORT, 1983 is hereby
ordered to be published in book or pamphlet form pursuant to I.C.
36-4-6-14(c).  Publication shall be made by delivering copies of THE
MUNICIPAL CODE OF FRANKFORT, 1983 for public inspection and use at the
following locations:



                  The Frankfort Public Library



                  The Office of the City Engineer



                  The Office of the City Attorney



                  The Office of the City Clerk-Treasurer



                  The Office of the Mayor



                  The Library of the Clinton Circuit Court



                  The Frankfort Police Station



                  The Frankfort Fire Department



THE MUNICIPAL CODE OF FRANKFORT, 1983 or any portion thereof shall also be
made available to the general public upon payment of the City of Frankfort's
actual expense of providing said Code.



   3.   THE MUNICIPAL CODE OF THE CITY OF FRANKFORT, 1983 shall be in
full force and effect two weeks after its adoption and publication.



   Passed by the Common Council of the City of Frankfort, Indiana this 9th
day of January, 1984.



                                       �
�     Approved:



                                       �
�     Don E. Snyder           



                                       �
�     President, Common Council



   ATTEST:



   Deborah A. Neal



   Clerk-Treasurer



      Approved by me this 9th day of January, 1984.



                                 Don. E.
Snyder                       



                                 Mayor of
the City of Frankfort, Indiana



ORDINANCE NO. CO 89-7



   AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF
ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF FRANKFORT, INDIANA



   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio
completed the 1989 S-6 Supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of
Frankfort, which supplement contains all ordinances of a general nature
enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances of this
municipality; and



   WHEREAS, said American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the
revision or addition of certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are
based on or make references to sections of the Indiana Code; and



   WHEREAS, it is the intent of Council to accept these updated sections
in accordance with the changes of the law of the State of Indiana;



   NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the Common Council of the City of
Frankfort, State of Indiana;



   SECTION I:  That the 1989 S-6 Supplement to the Code of Ordinances of
the City of Frankfort as submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation
of Cincinnati, and as attached hereto, be and the same is hereby adopted by
reference as if set out in its entirety.



   SECTION II:  That this ordinance shall take effect and be in force
from and after its date of passage.



   ADOPTED this 26th day of June, 1989.



   Don E. Snyder /s/             



   President of the Common Council



ATTEST: Marilyn Chittick /s/   



        Secretary, Common Council



   Presented by me to the Mayor of the City of Frankfort, Indiana, for
approval and signature, this 26th day of June, 1989, at 8:10 p.m.



   Marilyn K. Chittick /s/



   City Clerk-Treasurer 



   Approved and signed by me, this 26th day of June, 1989, at 8:10 p.m.



   Don E. Snyder /s/               



   Mayor, City of Frankfort, Indiana



TITLE I:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



   Chapter



      10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



CHAPTER 10:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   10.01   Title of code



   10.02   Interpretation



   10.03   Definitions



   10.04   Rules of construction



   10.05   Captions



   10.06   Application to future ordinances



   10.07   References to other sections



   10.08   References to offices



   10.09   Offenses punishable under separate provisions



   10.10   Subjects covered under state law



   10.11   Recording and publication of ordinances



   10.12   Effective date of ordinances



   10.13   Repeal or modification of ordinance



   10.14   Ordinances repealed



   10.15   Ordinances unaffected



   10.16   Errors and omissions



   10.17   Severability



 



   10.99   General penalty



§ 10.01  TITLE OF CODE.



   This codification of ordinances by and for the City of Frankfort,
Indiana, shall be designated as the "Code of the City of Frankfort, Indiana,"
and may be so cited.



('75 Code, § 1.01)



§ 10.02  INTERPRETATION.



   (A)   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication
required, the same rules of construction, definition, and application shall
govern the interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation
of the Indiana  Code.



   (B)   Where a section of this code is followed by a reference to the
Indiana Code, the reference indicates the section is analogous or similar to
the cited sections in the Indiana Code.  Footnotes, cross references, and
other comments are by way of explanation only and should not be deemed a part
of the text of any section.



   (C)   All provisions of this code are limited in application to the
territorial boundaries of the municipal corporation although they may not be
so limited specifically.



§ 10.03  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this code the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AND or OR.  AND may be read OR and OR may be AND if the sense requires
it.



   CITY.  The City of Frankfort, Clinton County, Indiana.



   THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES.  The municipal code as modified
by amendment, revision, and adoption of new titles, chapters, or sections.



   COUNCIL.  The Common Council of Frankfort, Indiana.



   COUNTY.  Clinton County, Indiana.



   MAY.  The act referred to is permissive.



   MONTH.  A calendar month.



   OATH.  An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation
may be substituted for an oath, and in those cases the words  SWEAR and
SWORN shall be equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.



   OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION, or DEPARTMENT. An officer,
office, employee, commission, or department of the city unless the context
clearly requires otherwise.



   OWNER.  When applied to a building or land, OWNER shall include any
part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint
tenant, or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of the building
or land.



   OCCUPANT.  See TENANT or OCCUPANT.



   PERSON.  Includes a corporation, firm, partnership, association,
organization, trustee, or any other group acting as a unit, as well as a
natural person.



   PERSONAL PROPERTY.  Every species of property except real property.



   PRECEDING or FOLLOWING.  Next before or next after, respectively.



   PROPERTY.  Real and personal property.



   PUBLIC PLACE.  Any street or highway, sidewalk, park, cemetery, school
yard, or open space adjacent thereto and any lake or stream.



   REAL PROPERTY.  Lands, tenements, and hereditaments and all chattels
real.



   REASONABLE TIME.  In all cases where any provision shall require any
act to be done in a REASONABLE TIME or REASONABLE NOTICE is to be given to
any person, the reasonable time or notice shall be deemed to mean that time
only as may be necessary in the prompt execution of the duty, or compliance
with the notice.



   SHALL.  The act referred to is mandatory.



   SIDEWALK.  That portion of a street between the curb lines of the
lateral lines of a roadway and the adjacent property lines intended for the
use of pedestrians.



   SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION.  Includes a mark when the person cannot
write.



   STATE.  State of Indiana.



   STREET.  Streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, viaducts, and
all other public highways in the city.



   SUBCHAPTER.  A division of a chapter, designated in this code by an
underlined heading in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the
body of the chapter, setting apart a group of sections related by the subject
matter of the heading.  Not all chapters have subchapters.



   TENANT or OCCUPANT.  Applied to a building or land, shall include any
person holding a written or oral lease, or who occupies the whole or a part
of the building or land, either alone or with others.



   WRITTEN.  Any representation of words, letters, or figures, whether by
printing or otherwise.



   YEAR.  A calendar year.



('75 Code, § 1.04)



§ 10.04  RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.



   The construction of all ordinances of this city shall be by the
following rules, unless such a construction is plainly repugnant to the
intent of the legislative body or of the context of the ordinance.



   (A)   Acts by assistants.  When a statute requires an act to be
done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as the principal, such
a requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of the act by an
authorized agent or deputy.



   (B)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses.  Words denoting the
masculine gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders;
words in the singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall
include the singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include
the future, if applicable.



   (C)   General term.  A general term following  specific
enumeration of terms is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless
expressly so limited.



   (D)   Joint authority.  Words importing joint authority to three or
more persons shall be construed as authority to a majority of those persons,
unless otherwise declared in the law giving the authority.



   (E)   Computation of time.  The time within which an act is to be
done, as herein provided, shall be computed by excluding the first day and
including the last.  If the last day is Sunday, it shall be excluded.



('75 Code, § 1.04)



§ 10.05  CAPTIONS.



   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter,
and section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.



('75 Code, § 1.03)



§ 10.06  APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.



   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation, shall
apply to ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code
unless otherwise specifically provided.



§ 10.07  REFERENCES TO OTHER SECTIONS.



   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof,
the reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as
subsequently amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered unless the subject
matter is changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.



§ 10.08  REFERENCES TO OFFICES.



   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer, or employee of the municipality exercising the powers,
duties, or functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any
transfer of functions or change in the official title of the functionary.



§ 10.09  OFFENSES PUNISHABLE UNDER SEPARATE PROVISIONS.



   In all cases where the same offenses may be made punishable or may be
created by different clauses or sections of this code, the prosecuting
officer may elect under which to proceed.  However, not more than one
recovery shall be had against the same person for the same offense, except
where continuing acts are designated in the code as separate offenses.



('75 Code, § 1.05)



§ 10.10  SUBJECTS COVERED UNDER STATE LAW.



   All other matters concerning municipal government not specifically
mentioned in this code shall be governed by the relevant provisions of state
law applicable to municipal government.



('75 Code, § 1.06)



§ 10.11  RECORDING AND PUBLICATION OF ORDINANCES.



   All ordinances passed by the Common Council shall be recorded by the
Clerk-Treasurer in a book of ordinances.  The due proof of publication of
all ordinances requiring publication by affidavit of the printer or publisher
shall be procured by the Clerk-Treasurer and maintained in the office of the
Clerk-Treasurer.



('75 Code, § 1.09)



Statutory reference:



   Publication of ordinances, see I.C. 36-4-6-14



   Recording ordinances, see I.C. 36-4-6-17



§ 10.12  EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.



   All ordinances passed by the Common Council requiring publication shall
take effect from and after the due publication thereof, unless otherwise
expressly provided.  Ordinances not requiring publication shall take effect
from their passage, and upon being signed and attested to, unless otherwise
expressly provided.



('75 Code, § 1.10)



§ 10.13  REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.



   (A)   Any ordinance or part of an ordinance repealed or modified by
a subsequent ordinance shall continue in force until the publication of the
subsequent ordinance, when publication is required to give effect thereto. 
When publication is not required, the repealing or modifying ordinance shall
take effect immediately upon passage, unless expressly provided otherwise.



   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture, or penalty
instituted, created, given, secured, or accrued under any ordinance previous
to its repeal shall in anywise be affected, released, or discharged, but may
be prosecuted, enjoyed, and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had
continued in force unless it is otherwise expressly provided.



('75 Code, § 1.11)



   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause, or
provision shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to
revive the former ordinance, clause, or provision, unless it is expressly
provided.  ('75 Code, § 1.12)



§ 10.14  ORDINANCES REPEALED.



   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated
and embraced.  All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by
this code shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this
code.



('75 Code, § 1.02)



§ 10.15  ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.



   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other
ordinances pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in
full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary
implication.



('75 Code, § 1.02)



§ 10.16  ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.



   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention
of the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning
can be attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was
clearly intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and
the word or words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with the
manifest intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though
the correct words were contained in the text as originally published.  No
alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the
nature or extent of any error.



§ 10.17  SEVERABILITY.



   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its
application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity
does not affect other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid
provision or application.



('75 Code, § 1.07)



§ 10.99  GENERAL PENALTY.



   Wherever in this code or in any ordinances of the city, or rule or
regulation promulgated by an officer or agency thereof, under authority
vested by law or ordinance, any act is prohibited or is made or declared to
be unlawful or an offense, or the doing of any act is required, or the
failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty
is provided therefor, the violation of those provisions of this code,
ordinance, rule, or regulation, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding
$500. Every day any violation of this code or any ordinance, rule, or
regulation shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.



('75 Code, § 1.08)



TITLE III:  ADMINISTRATION



   Chapter



      30.   EXECUTIVE BRANCH



      31.   LEGISLATIVE BRANCH



      32.   FISCAL BRANCH



      33.   JUDICIAL BRANCH



      34.   STATUTORY BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS



      35.   EMPLOYMENT POLICIES



      36.   CITY FINANCE



CHAPTER 30:  EXECUTIVE BRANCH



Section



   30.01   General city government organization



   30.02   Mayor as head of executive branch



   30.03   Board of Public Works and Safety; control of certain
executive departments



   30.04   Department of Law



   30.05   Department of Planning and Zoning Appeals and Economic
Development



   30.06   Department of Utilities



   30.07   Appointment of various city employees, department heads



   30.08   Authority to hire employees; appropriation powers of city
departments



§ 30.01  GENERAL CITY GOVERNMENT ORGANIZATION.



   The government of the city shall consist of five branches, those being:



   (A)   Executive branch   (I.C. 36-4-5-1 et seq.).



   (B)   Legislative branch   (I.C. 36-4-6-1 et seq.).



   (C)   Fiscal branch      (I.C. 36-4-10-1 et seq.).



   (D)   Judicial branch.



   (E)   Statutory boards and commissions.



(Ord. CO-82-14, passed 8-30-82)



§ 30.02  MAYOR AS HEAD OF EXECUTIVE BRANCH.



   The Mayor is the City Executive and head of the executive branch.  He
or she shall faithfully perform the duties and responsibilities contained in
I.C. 36-4-5-1 et seq. and other statutes of the state.



(Ord. CO-82-14, passed 8-30-82)



§ 30.03  BOARD OF PUBLIC WORKS AND SAFETY; CONTROL OF CERTAIN EXECUTIVE
DEPARTMENTS.



   (A)   There is hereby established a Board of Public Works and Safety
within the executive branch.



   (B)   The Board shall be the chief administrative body of the city
and shall have control of the day-to- day operations of the following
executive departments which are hereby established:



      (1)   Police Department.



      (2)   Fire Department.



      (3)   Street and Sanitation Department.



      (4)   Park and Recreation Department.



      (5)   Civil Defense Department.



      (6)   Engineer and Building Inspector Department.



(Ord. CO-82-14, passed 8-30-82)



§ 30.04  DEPARTMENT OF LAW.



   There is hereby established a Department of Law pursuant to I.C.
36-4-9-12.



(Ord. CO-82-14, passed 8-30-82)



§ 30.05  DEPARTMENT OF PLANNING AND ZONING APPEALS AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT.



   (A)   There is hereby established a Department of Planning and
Zoning Appeals and Economic Development.



   (B)   The Department shall consist of two divisions:



      (1)   Planning and Zone Appeals organized under I.C. 36-7.



      (2)   Economic Development Commission organized under I.C.
36-7.



(Ord. CO-82-14, passed 8-30-82)



§ 30.06  DEPARTMENT OF UTILITIES.



   There is hereby established a Department of Utilities organized under
I.C. 8-1.5.



(Ord. CO-82-14, passed 8-30-82)



§ 30.07  APPOINTMENT OF VARIOUS CITY EMPLOYEES, DEPARTMENT HEADS.



   (A)   The members of the Board of Public Works and Safety are the
Mayor and other members who shall be chosen by the Mayor and who shall serve
at his or her pleasure.  The Chiefs of the Police and Fire Departments are
appointed by the Mayor and shall serve at his or her pleasure, in accordance
with I.C. 36- 4-9.



   (B)   Pursuant to I.C. 36-4-9-2, the Mayor shall appoint the other
heads of the departments, including the Municipal Utilities, with the
approval of the statutory board or commission operating the department if
such exist.  The statutory boards and commissions, including the Utility
Service Board, shall give notice to the Mayor and the appropriate
councilmanic committee of all meetings or hearings, whether or not conducted
in executive session, which concern any merit rating, job performance
evaluation, salary review, disciplinary proceeding, or termination proceeding
and which relate to any department head.  The Mayor and the appropriate
councilmanic committee shall be entitled to attend any such meeting or
hearing whether or not conducted in executive session and address the
statutory board or commission.



   (C)   All appointed heads of the city departments, including the
Chief of the City Police Department and the Chief of the City Fire
Department, shall be residents of Clinton County, Indiana.



   (D)   All future appointees of the Park and Street Departments shall
be residents of the city.



(Ord. CO-82-14, passed 8-30-82; Am. Ord. CO-82-19, passed 1l-22-82; Am. Ord.
17-20, passed 10-23-17)



§ 30.08  AUTHORITY TO HIRE EMPLOYEES; APPROPRIATION POWERS OF CITY
DEPARTMENTS.



   (A)   Subject to the appropriation power of the Common Council, the
foregoing Departments discussed in §§  30.01 through 30.07, except the
Utilities Department, shall have the ability to hire any employees, and
purchase or contract for those materials or services, as the Board of Works
and Safety or other governing board or commission deems necessary to perform
their public functions.



   (B)   The Utilities Department shall be subject to the jurisdiction
and appropriation powers of the City Utility Service Board as set out in I.C.
8-1.5-3.



(Ord. CO-82-14, passed 8-30-82)



CHAPTER 31:  LEGISLATIVE BRANCH



Section



Organization



   31.01   Common Council as city legislative branch



   31.02   Election, number of Council members



   31.03   Clerk-Treasurer as Clerk of Council



   31.04   Regular and special meetings



   31.05   Presiding Officer; President Pro Tempore



   31.06   Quorum



Rules of Procedure



   31.15   Authority of President of Council



   31.16   Voting; tie votes and roll-call votes



   31.17   Reconsideration of vote



   31.18   Motions, resolutions, and ordinances



   31.19   Member called to order



   31.20   Addressing Council



   31.21   Committees



   31.22   Robert's Rules of Order



   31.23   Amending rules of procedure



Council Districts



   31.30   Boundaries



   31.31   Redistricting



Cross-reference:



   City government, general organization of, see §  30.01



ORGANIZATION



§ 31.01  COMMON COUNCIL AS CITY LEGISLATIVE BRANCH.



   The legislative branch of the city is the Common Council.  The Council
shall have exclusive authority to adopt ordinances and appropriate tax monies
received by the city, and to perform other necessary and desirable
legislative functions.



(Ord. CO-82-14, passed 8-30-82)



Statutory reference:



   City legislative bodies, see I.C. 36-4-6-1 et seq.



§ 31.02  ELECTION, NUMBER OF COUNCIL MEMBERS.



   The Common Council shall be composed of seven members, five of whom are
elected from districts and two of whom are elected at large.



(Ord. CO-82-14, passed 8-30-82)



§ 31.03  CLERK-TREASURER AS CLERK OF COUNCIL.



   The Clerk-Treasurer shall be the Clerk of the Council and shall perform
the duties prescribed by I.C. 36-4-6-9 and such others as the Council may
direct.



(Ord. CO-82-14, passed 8-30-82)



§ 31.04  REGULAR AND SPECIAL MEETINGS.



   (A)   The regular meeting date, time and place for the Common
Council shall be 7:00 p.m. (EST) on the second Monday of each month, in the
Council Chambers located in the City Building, 301 E. Clinton Street
Frankfort, Indiana.



   (B)   Special meetings shall be held on the call of the Mayor or
upon the written request of four members of the Council.  Such special
meetings shall be held on the 4th Monday of each month.  EXCEPT in the case
of an EMERGENCY the Mayor may set the meeting for any weekday after giving
proper notice.



(Ord. CO-82-14, passed 8-30-82; Am. Ord. CO-95-1, passed 4-3-95)



§ 31.05  PRESIDING OFFICER; PRESIDENT PRO TEMPORE.



   (A)   The Mayor of the city shall be the Presiding Officer of the
Common Council.  The Mayor shall be designated as the President of the
Common Council.



   (B)   In the absence of the Mayor, a President Pro-Tempore shall be
the Presiding Officer of the Common Council, and except as otherwise provided
herein, he or she shall have the same powers and duties while presiding as
the President.  The President Pro-Tempore shall be chosen from the members
of the Common Council; at the first meeting, or anytime thereafter, of each
year, the Council shall elect one of its members for this position, and he or
she shall hold the position of President Pro-Tempore through December 31 of
that year.  Until a President Pro-Tempore is chosen as set out above, at any
meeting from which the Mayor is absent, the Council shall choose one of its
members to preside as President Pro- Tempore at that meeting only.  At a
meeting from which both the President and President Pro-Tempore are absent,
the Council shall choose one of its members to preside as President
Pro-Tempore at that meeting only.



(Ord. CO-82-14, passed 8-30-82)



§ 31.06  QUORUM.



   A majority of all the members-elect shall constitute a quorum, and it
shall require a majority vote of all the members-elect to pass an ordinance.



(Ord. CO-82-14, passed 8-30-82)



RULES OF PROCEDURE



§ 31.15  AUTHORITY OF PRESIDENT OF COUNCIL.



   (A)   The President shall chair the meeting of the Council and shall
promptly call the members to order at 7:00 p.m. (EST).



   (B)   He or she shall preserve strict order and decorum in the
Council.



   (C)   He or she shall appoint all committees.



   (D)   He or she shall not vote on any question except in case of a
tie vote.



   (E)   He or she shall pronounce the decision of the Council on all
subjects, and decide questions of order without debate, subject to an appeal
to the Council by any two members.  When so demanded, the President shall
put the question of appeal to the Council in the following general form: 
"Shall the decision of the chair stand as the decision of the Council?",
whereupon the City Clerk-Treasurer shall call the roll of the members for a
vote.  If a majority vote "aye", the decision of the chair shall stand;
otherwise, the appeal shall be sustained.  Anything herein to the contrary
notwithstanding, the President Pro-Tempore shall have the right to vote on
all matters, the same as any other member, but the President Pro-Tempore
shall not have the right to cast an extra vote in the case of a tie vote.



   (F)   The Mayor (i.e. the President of Council) shall have the right
to offer recommendations to the Council, and he or she shall have the right
without relinquishing the chair, to speak on any question and to take part in
any debate.  While participating in any debate, he or she shall be subject
to the rules governing the Council.



(Ord. CO-82-14, passed 8-30-82; Am. Ord. CO-95-1, passed 4-3-95)



§ 31.16  VOTING; TIE VOTES AND ROLL-CALL VOTES.



   Except as otherwise provided in these rules, the President shall state
all questions fully and distinctly to the Council, and shall decide whether
the questions are carried by an affirmative or negative vote.  However, if
the vote is a tie or if a decision is called for by any member of the
Council, the Council shall decide by a roll-call vote, and the City
Clerk-Treasurer shall make the count.



(Ord. CO-82-14, passed 8-30-82)



Cross-reference:



   Voting by President of Council, or by President Pro Tempore of Council,
see §  31.15



§ 31.17  RECONSIDERATION OF VOTE.



   Any member of the Council who voted with the majority may call for a
reconsideration of any vote at the same meeting of the Council at which it
passed, and if sustained by a majority of the votes, the reconsideration
shall be carried.



(Ord. CO-82-14, passed 8-30-82)



§ 31.18  MOTIONS, RESOLUTIONS, AND ORDINANCES.



   (A)   No motion shall be subject to debate until it has been
seconded and stated by the President.  It shall be reduced to writing upon
the demand of the President or any member.  After a motion has been stated
by the President, it shall be deemed to be in possession of the Council, and
it may be withdrawn by the mover at any time before the decision or
amendment, with the permission of the Council member who seconded the motion.



   (B)   It shall not be necessary to have more than one reading of a
resolution or other motion, except an ordinance.  After the resolution or
other motion has been read or made and before a vote has been taken thereon,
the President may refer the same to a standing Council committee for its
study and recommendation, unless a majority of the Council present determines
that action by the Council shall be taken at that meeting.  If such a
determination is made, then the Council may act upon the resolution or other
motion in any manner that it can otherwise act, including but not limited to
passing, rejecting, amending, or committing the resolution or other motion. 
The motion that the Council take action on the resolution or other motion at
that meeting is not debatable or referable to committee and must be put to a
vote immediately.



   (C)   Every proposed ordinance shall receive three readings in open
Council, each reading being on a different day, unless upon motion the
Council determines by unanimous vote, with not less than a majority of the
members-elect present and voting, that the rules be suspended for the purpose
of taking action on two or three readings at the same meeting.



      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in these rules, upon the
first reading of an ordinance no motion shall be in order except a motion to
pass the ordinance on first reading or to reject the ordinance.  If the
ordinance is passed upon first reading, the President may refer the proposed
ordinance to a standing Council committee for its study and recommendation. 
If the President does not assign the proposed ordinance to a committee, a
majority of the Council present may require the President to make such an
assignment.



      (2)   Upon the second reading of any ordinance, the ordinance
shall be read by title only, unless a reading in full is requested by a
member of the Council.  The only motions in order upon a second reading are
as follows.



         (a)   To commit.



         (b)   To amend.



         (c)   To lay on the table.



         (d)   To postpone to a certain time.



         (e)   To postpone indefinitely (should an ordinance be
postponed indefinitely, it shall not be again taken up prior to the next
regular Council meeting).



         (f)   To pass on second reading.



      (3)   Except as otherwise provided herein, upon the third
reading of any ordinance, it shall be read in full.  By a unanimous vote of
the members present at a meeting of the Council, an ordinance upon first or
third reading may be read by title only, and the reading shall be considered
to be a full and complete reading of the ordinance.  The vote on the third
reading of an ordinance shall be by calling the roll and recording the "aye"
and "no" votes.  Any member or the President may demand a roll call vote be
taken on any other question or motion, and when so taken the question or
motion shall be so put on the record.



   (D)   Further action by the Council on any proposed ordinance,
resolution, or other matter referred to a committee shall not be taken until
the committee reports back to the Council at a regular or special meeting;
however, a majority of the Council present may cause the postponed ordinance,
resolution, or other matter to be taken from the committee and placed before
the Council for its consideration.



(Ord. CO-82-14, passed 8-30-82; Am. Ord. CO-88-2, passed 2-22-88)



§ 31.19  MEMBER CALLED TO ORDER.



   If a member of the Council shall, while speaking, be called to order by
the President, he/she shall cease speaking and take his/her seat until the
question of order is determined and permission is given to speak.



(Ord. CO-82-14, passed 8-30-82)



§ 31.20  ADDRESSING COUNCIL.



   No one who is not a member of the Council shall be permitted to address
Council except by request or consent of the President.



(Ord. CO-82-14, passed 8-30-82)



§ 31.21  COMMITTEES.



   (A)   The members of the Council's committees shall be selected from
the members of the Council, and shall consist of not less than three members
each.  The committees shall be appointed annually and shall hold such
positions through the end of the particular calendar year.



   (B)   The standing committees shall be as follows:



      (1)   Committee on Utilities.



      (2)   Committee on Police.



      (3)   Committee on Fire.



      (4)   Committee on Streets, Alleys and Sewers.



      (5)   Committee on Parks.



      (6)   Committee on Finance.



(Ord. CO-82-14, passed 8-30-82; Am. Ord. CO-95-1, passed 4-3-95)



§ 31.22  ROBERT'S RULES OF ORDER.



   Except when in conflict with permission of these rules, Robert's Rules
of Order, Newly Revised, shall govern all proceedings of the Council.



(Ord. CO-82-14, passed 8-30-82)



§ 31.23  AMENDING RULES OF PROCEDURE.



   These rules shall be suspended, amended, rescinded, or otherwise
changed only by the adoption of an ordinance for that purpose.



(Ord. CO-82-14, passed 8-30-82)



COUNCIL DISTRICTS



§ 31.30  BOUNDARIES.



   (A)   The Common Council of the City of Frankfort, Indiana, shall be
composed of seven members, five of whom shall be elected, one from each
district, and two of whom shall be elected at large.  The legislative body
districts shall be comprised as follows:



      (1)   Councilmatic District 1: Beginning at the intersection
of Barner Street and N. Main Street proceed north along the centerline of N.
Main Street to the point at the premises of Northwest Ind. Methodist Home,
Inc. where N. Main Street meets Main Drive; thence along the centerline of
Main Drive as it proceeds in a northeasterly direction until it becomes the
Service Drive running along the north side of the building located at 1555 N.
Main Street commonly known as the main building of Wesley Manor; thence
westerly along said Service Drive to its intersection with State Road 75;
thence in a southerly direction along the centerline of State Road 75 to its
intersection with N. Union Road thence, northwest along the centerline of
Union Road to the centerline of the right-of-way of the Conrail Railroad
also, being the corporation line; thence south along the corporate boundary
line to the northern boundary line of property conveyed to Werner & Son, Inc.
by Corporate Warranty Deed recorded April 22, 1993, as Instrument No.
93-1551, the same being the city’s corporation line; thence west along such
line established by Instrument No. 93-1551 to the centerline of the
right-of-way of the former Seaboard System railroad; thence north along such
centerline of such railroad right-of-way to the northern boundary line of
real estate conveyed to Julius Baum, et al by Warranty Deed recorded
September 3, 1993, as Instrument No. 93-3870; thence west along such boundary
line, also being the city’s corporate boundary line to the northwest corner
of such property conveyed by said deed recorded as Instrument No. 93-3870;
thence south along the west property line of said tract conveyed by said
Instrument No. 93-3870 to the north boundary line of a parcel of real estate
identified in the Clinton County tax records as Parcel No.
12-10-04-277-001.000-021; thence west along the north boundary of said
parcel, the same being the city’s corporate boundary line to the center of
Rossville Avenue; thence northwesterly along the centerline of Rossville
Avenue to a point in such centerline being due north of the northernmost
point of a parcel of real estate conveyed to the State of Indiana by deed
recorded July 2, 2008, as Instrument No. 2008-3014; thence south along the
western boundary of said parcel and continuing south along the western
boundary of a parcel of real estate conveyed to Larrell J. Neal, et al by
warranty deed recorded July 20, 2009, as Instrument No. 2009-3215 to the
centerline of the George Blinn Ditch; thence southeasterly along the
centerline of George Blinn Ditch to the north boundary line of a parcel of
real estate conveyed to Mudd’s Mobile Homes, Inc. by Corporate Warranty
Deed recorded August 20, 2001, as Instrument No. 2001-5077; thence west along
said boundary line and continuing along the north boundary line of the
Meadows Addition to the City of Frankfort to the northwest corner of Lot 31
of said Meadows Addition; thence south along the west boundary line of said
Meadows Addition and Morris Street to the centerline of Barner Street; thence
east along the centerline of Barner Street to the point of beginning.



      (2)   Councilmatic District 2: Beginning at the intersection
of Morris Street with W. Barner Street, proceed south to the south end of
Morris Street; thence proceed in a meandering but generally southeasterly
direction along the city’s corporate boundary line to a point where said
corporate line turns from east to south, which point is just southeast of the
intersection of Hill Street with West Morrison Street; thence proceed south
along the corporate boundary line across the Norfolk and Southern Railroad as
said corporate line parallels Prairie Street approximately 600 feet to the
west of Prairie Street; proceeding south along said corporate boundary line
to the center of State Road 28; thence southwesterly along the centerline of
State Road 28 to its intersection with the center of McKinley Avenue extended
west; thence east and northeasterly long the centerline of McKinley Avenue to
the centerline of State Road 28; thence east on the centerline of State Road
28 to its intersection with Sixth Street; thence south along the centerline
of Sixth Street to its intersection with Seventh Street; thence in a
southwesterly direction along the centerline of Seventh Street to its
intersection with W. Wabash Street; thence east along the centerline of W.
Wabash Street to its intersection with S. Main Street; thence south on Main
Street to its intersection with South Street; thence east along the
centerline of South Street to its intersection with S. East Street; thence
north on the centerline of S. East Street to the centerline of East Clinton
Street; thence east on E. Clinton Street to its intersection with Hoke
Avenue; thence north along the centerline of Hoke Avenue to the center of the
Norfolk and Southern Railroad right-of-way; thence west along the centerline
of said railroad right-of-way to its intersection with N. Clay Street; thence
north on N. Clay Street to its intersection with East Morrison Street; thence
west along the centerline of E. Morrison Street to its intersection with N.
Main Street; thence north along the centerline of N. Main Street to its
intersection with Barner Street; thence west along the centerline of Barner
Street to the point of beginning.



      (3)   Councilmatic District 3: All areas within the corporate
boundaries of the City of Frankfort lying west of the centerline of Prairie
Avenue except for that north-south strip of real estate lying adjacent to the
west side of Prairie Street and Prairie Avenue which lies within District 2
as described above.



         District 3 shall also include all that area within the
corporate boundaries of the City of Frankfort lying east of the centerline of
Prairie Avenue and south and west of a north and east district boundary line
described as follows:  from the intersection of Prairie Avenue and McKinley
Avenue proceed northwesterly along the centerline of McKinley Avenue to the
centerline of State Road 28; thence east on the centerline of State Road 28
to its intersection with Sixth Street; thence south along the centerline of
Sixth Street to its intersection with Seventh Street; thence in a
southwesterly direction along the centerline of Seventh Street to its
intersection with W. Wabash Street; thence east along the centerline of W.
Wabash Street to its intersection with S. Main Street; thence south on S.
Main Street to its intersection with South Street; thence east along the
centerline of South Street to Prairie Creek; thence following Prairie Creek
in a meandering south and south-easterly direction to S. Williams Road;
thence south along the centerline of S. Williams Road to its intersection
with Kelley Road; thence west along the centerline of Kelley Road to Prairie
Creek; thence in a southerly direction along Prairie Creek to the northeast
corner of a 1.3418 acre parcel of real estate conveyed to Eric and Tara Woods
by Warranty Deed recorded April 2, 2002, as Instrument No. 2002-2537; thence
southeasterly and then southwesterly around the perimeter of said parcel to
Alhambra Avenue; but excepting from said area that portion of a 2.58 acre
parcel owned by Mary F. Matz, which parcel is described as TRACT B in a
survey appearing in County Survey Record Book 14, page 489, which portion
lies west of Prairie Creek.



      (4)   Councilmatic District 4: Beginning at the intersection
of Prairie Creek and E. South Street; thence south and meandering
southeasterly along Prairie Creek to S. Williams Road; thence South along the
centerline of South Williams Road to its intersection with Kelley Road;
thence west along the centerline of Kelley Road to Prairie Creek; thence
south along Prairie Creek to the north boundary line of a 2.58 acre parcel
owned by Mary F. Matz, which parcel is described as TRACT B in a survey
appearing in County Survey Record Book 14, page 489; thence west along the
north boundary line of said Matz parcel to the northwest corner thereof;
thence in a southerly direction along the west boundary of said Matz parcel
to the southwest corner thereof; thence east along the south boundary of said
Matz parcel to the southeast corner of said parcel; thence north along the
east boundary of said parcel to the southeast corner of Lot 26 in Brookside
Estates 5th Section; thence north along the east boundary lines of Lots 26,
25, 24 and 23 of said Brookside Estates 5th Section to the northeast corner
thereof; thence east along the south boundary line of Lots 1 through 14 of
Sections 1, 2 and 4 of Brookside Estates, the same being the city’s
corporate boundary line, to the southeast corner of said Lot 1; thence north
along the east boundary line of said Lot 1 in Brookside Estates to the
centerline of Kelley Road; thence east along the centerline of Kelley Road to
the northwest corner of Lot in Turkey Trot Addition; thence south along the
west boundary line of Turkey Trot Addition to the southwest corner of said
Lot 1; thence east along the south boundary line of Turkey Trot Addition to
said addition’s east boundary; thence north along the east boundary line of
Lots 14 and 15 in Turkey Trot Addition to the centerline of Kelley Road;
thence east along the centerline of Kelley Road to the west line of a .505
acre parcel of real estate conveyed to Larry L. and Julia J. Crabtree by
Warranty Deed recorded November 2, 2009, as Instrument No. 2009-4599; thence
south along the west boundary line of said parcel to the southwest corner
thereof; thence east along the south boundary of said parcel to the southwest
corner of Lot 1 in Green Acres Subdivision; thence east along the south
boundary line of said Green Acres Subdivision to the southeast corner of Lot
10 of Green Acres Subdivision; thence north along the east boundary line of
Lot 10 of said subdivision to the centerline of Kelley Road; thence east on
Kelley Road to the east boundary line of a 10 acre parcel of real estate
lying in the northeast quadrant of the intersection of Kelley Road and S.
Maish Road, which parcel was conveyed to Thomas Scott Glover by deed recorded
December 29, 2010, as Instrument No. 2010-4835; thence north along the east
boundary of said parcel to the north boundary thereof; thence east along the
south boundary line to the southeast corner of a 26.65 acre parcel conveyed
to Gary B. and Lisa M. Crum by Warranty Deed recorded January 30, 2006, as
Instrument No. 2006-0441; thence north along the east boundary line of said
26.65 acre parcel to the northeast corner thereof; thence continue north
along the east boundary line to the northeast corner of a 29.66 acre parcel
conveyed to Gene Crum, LLC by Trustees Deed recorded January 2, 2013, as
Instrument No. 2013-0052, said northeast corner being the same as the
southeast corner of Risse’s Addition, Fourth Section; thence east on the
south boundary line to the southeast corner of a parcel conveyed to the Board
of Commissioners of Clinton County by Certification of Payment of
Court-appointed Appraisers’ Award and Request for Transfer recorded
September 17, 2010, as Instrument No. 2010-3342; thence continue east along
the south boundary line to the southeast corner of a 25.00 acre parcel
conveyed to Crider & Crider, Inc. by Warranty Deed recorded April 27, 2012,
as Instrument No. 2012-1635; thence north along the east boundary line of
said 25.00 acre parcel extended to the southwest corner of a parcel conveyed
to Christian Life Church of Frankfort, Inc. by Warranty Deed recorded
November 3, 2011, as Instrument No. 2011-4071; thence east on the south
boundary line of said parcel to the southeast corner thereof; thence north
along the east boundary line of said parcel to the center line of State Road
28; thence west along the centerline of State Road 28 to the center of Maish
Road; thence north on Maish Road to its intersection with N. Crescent Drive;
thence west on N. Crescent Drive to its intersection with Outer Drive; thence
south on Outer Drive to its intersection with Center Drive; thence west and
south along the centerline of Center Drive to its intersection with Clinton
Drive; thence west along the centerline of Clinton Drive and Clinton Street
to its intersection with East Street; thence south along the centerline of
East Street to E. South Street; thence west along the centerline of E. South
Street to Prairie Creek, the same being the beginning point of District 4.



      (5)   Councilmatic District 5: Beginning at the intersection
of Hoke Avenue with the right-of-way of the Norfolk and Southern Railroad
running just along the north side of Ohio Street and proceeding west along
the centerline of said railroad right-of-way to its intersection with N. Clay
Street, thence north on Clay Street to its intersection with East Morrison
Street; thence west on Morrison Street to its intersection with N. Main
Street; thence north along the centerline of N. Main Street to a point at the
premises of Northwest Indiana Methodist Home, Inc. where N. Main Street meets
Main Drive; thence along the centerline of Main Drive as it proceeds in a
northeasterly direction until it becomes the Service Drive running along the
north side of the building located at 1555 N. Main Street commonly known as
the main building of Wesley Manor; thence westerly along said Service Drive
to a point in the center of said Service Drive on the line extended south
from the southeast corner of a 30.62 acre parcel of real estate conveyed to
Wesley Manor, Inc. by Warranty Deed recorded August 10, 1995, as Instrument
No. 95-3799; thence from said point on said extended line north along the
east boundary of said 30.62 acre parcel to the centerline of County Road 100
N.; thence east along the centerline of County Road 100 N. to a point that
marks the eastern end of the corporate boundary line along County Road 100
N.; thence south along the east corporate boundary line until said corporate
line turns east; thence east along said corporate boundary line until it
reaches Burlington Avenue; thence south on the centerline of Burlington
Avenue to a point where the corporate boundary line again turns east; thence
east along the city’s corporate boundary line to a point where the city’s
corporate boundary line again turns south; thence easterly along said
corporate boundary line to the centerline of the Norfolk and Southern
Railroad right-of-way; thence northeast along the centerline of said railroad
right-of-way to the centerline of Maish Road; thence south along the
centerline of Maish Road to the centerline of Washington Avenue, also known
as Michigantown Blacktop; thence northeast along the centerline of Washington
Avenue to the southwest corner of Lot 1 of Arrowhead Addition; thence north
along the west boundary line of said Lot 1 to its northwest corner; thence
northeast along the northwest boundary line of Arrowhead Addition to the
northeast corner of Lot 3E of said addition; thence south along the east
boundary line of said lot 3E to the centerline of Washington Avenue; thence
northeast along the centerline of Washington Avenue to the west boundary line
of a parcel of real estate conveyed to Karen Sue Jenkins by Trustee Deed
recorded October 30, 2003, as Instrument No. 2003-8800; thence south along
said west boundary line of said parcel to the center of the right-of-way of
the Norfolk and Southern Railroad; thence east along the centerline of said
railroad right-of-way to the northeast corner of a 71.83 acre parcel of real
estate conveyed to Lori L. Hillis, by Warranty Deed recorded January 11,
2010, as Instrument No. 2010-0107; thence south along the east boundary of
said 71.83 acre parcel to the center of State Road 28; thence west along the
centerline of State Road 28 to Maish Road; thence north on Maish Road to N.
Crescent Drive; thence west on N. Crescent Drive to its intersection with
Outer Drive; thence south on Outer Drive to its intersection with Center
Drive; thence west and south along the centerline of Center Drive to its
intersection with Clinton Drive; thence east along the center line of Clinton
Drive and Clinton Street to its intersection with N. Hoke Avenue; thence
north along the centerline of N. Hoke Avenue to the point of beginning.



   (B)   The legislative body districts herein established shall
supersede and redefine the districts heretofore established in Ordinance
02-15, which ordinance is shown recodified as § 31.30 of the Municipal Code
of the City of Frankfort; that said legislative body districts as established
and herein shall also supersede and redefine those provisions of any previous
annexation ordinances that assigned annexed territories to legislative
districts other than those established herein.



(Ord. CO-82-14, passed 8-30-82; Am. Ord. CO-82-23, passed 12-29-82; Am. Ord.
CO-92-20, passed 12-14-92, Am. Ord. CO-95-1, passed 4-3-95; Am. Ord. 02-15,
passed 7-22-02; Am. Ord. 12-11, passed  12-27-12; Am. Ord. 13-15, passed
10-28-13)



§ 31.31  REDISTRICTING.



   City Ordinance (82-14) provides that redistricting shall be made every
ten years as provided by the State Code reported in I.C. 36-4-6-4 and I.C.
36-4-6-5.



(Ord. CO-82-14, passed 8-30-82; Am. Ord. CO-95-1, passed 4-3-95; Am. Ord.
02-15, passed 7-22-02)



CHAPTER 32:  FISCAL BRANCH



Section



   32.01   Clerk-Treasurer as head of fiscal branch



   32.02   Deputy Clerk-Treasurers



   32.03   Utility clerks



Cross-reference:



   City government, general organization of, see §  30.01



§ 32.01  CLERK-TREASURER AS HEAD OF FISCAL BRANCH.



   The Clerk-Treasurer is the fiscal officer of the city and the head of
the fiscal branch.  He or she shall perform the duties assigned by I.C.
36-4-10-1 et seq. and such other duties as the Common Council may, by
ordinance, require.



(Ord. CO-82-14, passed 8-30-82)



§ 32.02  DEPUTY CLERK-TREASURERS.



   The Clerk-Treasurer is hereby authorized, pursuant to I.C. 36-4-11-4,
to appoint two Deputy Clerk- Treasurers, one to be paid solely from funds
appropriated for the office of Clerk-Treasurer, and one to be paid from funds
appropriated for the office of Clerk-Treasurer and other funds for whom the
Clerk-Treasurer provides services.  The Deputies shall work under the
exclusive direction of the Clerk-Treasurer, and serve at the pleasure of the
Clerk-Treasurer.



(Ord. CO-82-14, passed 8-30-82)



§ 32.03  UTILITY CLERKS.



   The various utility clerks needed to manage the bookkeeping and
administrative requirements of the utilities shall be appointed and
compensated by the board having control of the utility the clerk serves. 
The utility clerks serve at the pleasures of the board which appointed
them.  The Clerk-Treasurer and the Mayor shall be compensated for services
he or she renders to the city's utilities.



(Ord. CO-82-14, passed 8-30-82)



CHAPTER 33:  JUDICIAL BRANCH



Section



   33.01   Establishment of city court; City Judge



Cross-reference:



   City government, general organization of, see §  30.01



§ 33.01  ESTABLISHMENT OF CITY COURT; CITY JUDGE.



   There is hereby established, effective January 1, 1984, a city court,
to be headed and operated by a City Judge elected and seated pursuant to I.C.
33-35-1.



(Ord. CO-82-14, passed 8-30-82)



CHAPTER 34:  STATUTORY BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS



Section



   34.01   Police Pension Board of Trustees



   34.02   Firefighters' Pension Board of Trustees



   34.03   Utility Service Board



   34.04   Aviation Authority Board



   34.05   Redevelopment Commission



   34.06   Ordinance Violations Bureau



Cross-reference:



   City government, general organization of, see §  30.01



§ 34.01  POLICE PENSION BOARD OF TRUSTEES.



   There shall be a Police Pension Board of Trustees to perform certain
duties prescribed by I.C. 36-8-6 (1925 Fund) and I.C. 36-8-8 (1977 Fund)
concerning the statutory pensions of city police.



(Ord. CO-82-14, passed 8-30-82)



§ 34.02  FIREFIGHTERS' PENSION BOARD OF TRUSTEES.



   There shall be a Firefighters' Pension Board of Trustees to perform
certain duties prescribed by I.C. 36-8-7 (1937 Fund) and I.C. 36-8-8 (1977
Fund) concerning the statutory pensions of city firefighters.



(Ord. CO-82-14, passed 8-30-82)



§ 34.03  UTILITY SERVICE BOARD.



   (A)   There is a Utility Service Board to perform the duties
prescribed by I.C. 8-1.5-3 concerning the statutory responsibilities of
operating the electric utility, water utility, and the wastewater treatment
plant and collection systems of the city.



   (B)   The Board shall be composed of five members, not more than a
majority of whom shall be members of the same political party. Each member
appointed shall be a resident of Clinton County, Indiana, and shall also
reside within the area served by any of the utility services which are under
the control of the Utility Service Board. No member of the Board shall be an
employee or officer of any public utility and no member shall hold any other
elected public office while serving as a member of the Board. Each member
shall take and subscribe an oath of office upon such member’s appointment
to the Board.



   (C)   All powers and duties associated with the construction,
improvement, operation, maintenance and management of the city's storm sewer
system is hereby transferred to the Utility Service Board of the city;
provided that all rates, fees or regulations established by the Board with
regard to such storm sewers must receive approval by the Common Council.



(Ord. CO-82-14, passed 8-30-82; Am. Ord. CO-05-10, passed 10-24-05; Am. Ord.
12-03A, passed 3-12-12)



§ 34.04  AVIATION AUTHORITY BOARD.



   There is an Aviation Authority Board to perform the duties prescribed
by I.C. 8-22-3 concerning the statutory responsibilities of operating the
airport of the city.



(Ord. CO-82-14, passed 8-30-82)



§ 34.05  REDEVELOPMENT COMMISSION.



   (A)   Pursuant to I.C. 36-7-14-3, the Council hereby establishes the
City of Frankfort Department of Redevelopment (the “Department”), for the
purposes and to exercise the powers set forth in I.C. 36-7-14 and I.C.
36-7-25 (collectively, the “Act”) or otherwise granted by law. The
Department will be controlled by, and the Common Council hereby
reestablishes, a board of five members to be known as the City of Frankfort
Redevelopment Commission (the “Redevelopment Commission”), two of whom
shall be appointed by the Council and three of whom shall be appointed by the
Mayor of the city. Each member of the Redevelopment Commission must be at
least 18 years of age, and must be a resident of the city.



   (B)   Pursuant to I.C. 36-7-14-6.1, the Mayor of the city shall
appoint an individual to serve as a nonvoting advisor to the Redevelopment
Commission who must be a member of the school board of a school corporation
that includes all or a part of the territory served by the Redevelopment
Commission.



(Ord. 12-02, passed 2-13-12)



§ 34.06  ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS BUREAU.



   (A)   There is hereby created an Ordinance Violations Bureau for the
city and the Clerk-Treasurer shall serve as Administrator and Violations
Clerk of the Bureau.



   (B)   The Violations Clerk may accept written appearances, waivers
of trial, admissions of violations, and payment of civil penalties of not
more than $250 in ordinance violation cases.



   (C)   Notwithstanding other provisions as to civil penalties that
exist throughout the Municipal Code of the City of Frankfort, the offender
may, prior to the initial hearing, admit said violation before the Violations
Clerk and pay civil penalty according to the following schedule.



 

City Code Section
 
Violation
 
Civil Penalty Amount




Chapters 71 and 78
 
Traffic Rules and Regulations
 
$30    (first offense)


Mopeds
 
$60   (second offense within 12 months of first offense)


$90   (third or subsequent offense within 12 months of first offense)


Chapters 72 and 73
 
Parking
 
$20


Chapter 90
 
All other violations of Chapter 90 except for §§  90.03 and 90.25
 
$25    (first offense)


$50   (second offense within 12 months of first offense)


$100   (third or subsequent offense within 12 months of first offense)


90.03(B)
 
Animal At Large
 
$50   (first offense)


$75   (second offense within 12 months of first offense)


$100   (third or subsequent offense within 12 months of first offense)


Chapter 91
 
Civil Emergencies
 
$30   (first offense)


$60   (second offense within 12 months of first offense)


$90   (third or subsequent offense within 12 months of first offense)


Chapter 95
 
Noise Control
 
$30   (first offense)


$60   (second offense within 12 months of first offense)


$90   (third or subsequent offense within 12 months of first offense)


Chapter 96
 
Nuisance (provided all cited violations have been abated and excepting
violations of the Property Maintenance Code)
 
$25   (first offense)


$50   (second offense within 12 months of first offense)


$75   (third or subsequent offense within 12 months of first offense)


$100   (fourth of subsequent offense within 12 months of first offense)


Chapter 98
 
Trash
 
$25   (first offense)


$50   (second offense within 12 months of first offense)


$75   (third or subsequent offense within 12 months of first offense)




 



   (D)   Where a subsequent violation is charged, it must be
specifically stated on the written citation for the enhanced penalty to be
applied through the Violations Bureau.



   (E)   All payments to the Violations Clerk in satisfaction of the
penalties stated above must be by bank treasurer's check, cashier's check,
money order or certified check.



   (F)   If any person charged with a code violation does not admit the
civil violation(s), as charged, before the Violations Clerk and pay the
proscribed civil penalty within 30 days of receipt of the citation and prior
to the date noticed for hearing, then such person must appear before the
Frankfort City Court as noticed.



   (G)   The opportunity to appear before the Violations Clerk and to
admit the violation and to pay a civil penalty to the Violations Bureau,
shall only apply to citations pending before the Frankfort City Court and
shall, specifically, not be available where civil complaints for ordinance
violations are filed in Clinton Circuit Court or Clinton Superior Court.



   (H)   (1)   All civil penalty amounts collected through the
Violations Bureau, with the exception of penalties collected under Chapter
96, Chapter 98, and penalties collected under Chapter 90 for citations
written by employees of the Humane Society of Clinton County, Inc., shall be
deposited into the following city funds in the respective portions shown:



         (a)   One-fourth to city General Fund;



         (b)   One-fourth to the Clerk-Treasurer Administrative
Fund; and



         (c)   One-half to the Police Equipment and Training Fund.



      (2)   Civil penalties collected through the Violations Bureau
for Chapter 96 and Chapter 98 violations shall be deposited into the
following city funds in the respective portions shows:



         (a)   One-fourth to city General Fund;



         (b)   One-fourth to the Clerk-Treasurer Administrative
Fund; and



         (c)   One-half to the City Engineer's Equipment,
Training and Supply Fund.



      (3)   Civil penalties collected through the Violations Bureau
for citations written by employees of the Humane Society of Clinton County,
Inc. shall be deposited into the following city funds in the respective
portions shown:



         (a)   One-half to the Clerk-Treasurer Administrative
Fund; and



         (b)   One-half to a city fund hereby created and
identified as the Humane Society Enforcement Fund, which fund shall be
utilized and administered by the Board of Public Works and Safety, to
compensate Clinton County, Indiana, through its Board of Commissioners, for
Clinton County’s financial support of the Humane Society of Clinton County,
Inc.



(Ord. CO-88-18, passed 1-23-89; Am. Ord. CO-90-11, passed 12-10-90; Am. Ord.
CO-18-16C, passed 3-9-09; Am. Ord. 11-02A, passed 4-11-11; Am. Ord. 11-07,
passed 5-23-11; Am. Ord. 17-08, passed 8-14-17)



Statutory reference:



   Authority to establish Ordinance Violations Bureau, see I.C. 33-36-2-1



CHAPTER 35:  EMPLOYMENT POLICIES



Section



General Provisions



   35.01   Travel expenses



   35.02   Bonds, salaries of city officials



Pension Funds



   35.05   Firefighters' Pension Fund



   35.06   Police Pension Fund



   35.07   Old-Age and Survivor's Insurance for utility employees



Utility Employees Retirement Fund



   35.10   Adoption



   35.11   Board of Trustees



   35.12   Officers of Board of Trustees



   35.13   Compensation



   35.14   Procedures



   35.15   Meetings



   35.16   Duties of Clerk-Treasurer and Secretary; books and reports



   35.17   Payment for expenses



   35.18   The Trust Fund



   35.19   Incorporation by reference



   35.20   Investment of the Trust Fund



   35.21   Powers and duties



   35.22   Payment of benefits from the Trust Fund



   35.23   Indemnification of the Trustee



   35.24   Resignation or removal of Trustee



   35.25   Nondiversion and exclusive benefit



   35.26   Amendments



   35.27   Termination



   35.28   Necessary parties



   35.29   Counterparts



   35.30   Internal Revenue Service approval



   35.31   Interpretation



   35.32   Responsibility for assets



Personnel Administration



   35.35   Non-discriminatory policy



   35.36   Merit system for civil defense employees



   35.37   Equal employment opportunity



   35.38   Americans with Disabilities Act



   35.39   Sexual harassment



   35.40   Complaint procedures for all above policies



   35.41   Nepotism



   35.42   Contracting with relatives of elected officials



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 35.01  TRAVEL EXPENSES.



   The city shall reimburse a city employee for each mile that an
employee's own vehicle is used in connection with duties performed on behalf
of the City of Frankfort at the standard business mileage rate then in effect
as proscribed by and recognized from time to time under Sec. 1.274-5 of the
Income Tax Regulations of the Internal Revenue Service.



(Ord. CO-75-2, passed 3-5-75; Am. Res. 03-16, passed 7-28-03; Am. Ord. 08-03,
passed 4-28-08)



§ 35.02  BONDS, SALARIES OF CITY OFFICIALS.



   (A)   Bonds and salaries for city officials shall be those amounts
specified by state statute or by ordinance of the Common Council. ('75 Code,
§ 4.01)



   (B)   Surety bonds.



      (1)   Notwithstanding division (A) above, the amount of the
surety bond for individuals who must file and maintain a surety bond pursuant
to I.C. 5-4-1-18(a)(7) is set at $5,000.



      (2)   The purchase of a blanket bond, a schedule bond (by name
or position) and/or a crime insurance policy that are endorsed to cover
faithful performance and include aggregate coverage sufficient to cover all
officers, employees, commission members, and persons acting on behalf of the
local government unit required to be bonded, including officers, employees,
and contractors described in I.C. 5-4-1-18, is hereby authorized and approved.



   (C)   The annual salaries of the Mayor, Clerk-Treasurer, and the
City Judge, shall be paid in 26 equal installments, payable bi-weekly on
Friday, for services rendered to such dates.  In the event the due date
falls on a legal holiday, payment shall be made on the working day preceding.



   (D)   The annual salaries of the members of the Common Council and
compensation for Firemen's Pension, Police Pension, and Utility Retirement,
shall be paid in 12 equal monthly installments, payable on the first day of
each month.  In the event the due date falls on a legal holiday, Saturday,
or Sunday, payment shall be made on the working day preceding.



   (E)   The salaries of each and all appointive officers and employees
of the city shall be paid to the officers and employees bi-weekly, on
Friday.  In the event the due date falls on a legal holiday, payment shall
be made on the working day preceding.



   (F)   All employees of city working by the hour or whose annual
salary is not fixed shall be paid bi-weekly on Friday, after the employee's
supervisor has filed with the Clerk-Treasurer a signed payroll voucher.  In
the event the due date falls on a legal holiday, payment shall be made on the
working day preceding.



   (G)   All warrants drawn by the Clerk-Treasurer for the payment of
the salaries, wages, or compensation of officers or employees of the city
shall be approved by the Board of Public Works and Safety, Utility Services
Board, or proper Pension Board.



(Ord. CO-76-27, passed 12-l-76; Am. Ord. 15-14, passed 12-29-15)



PENSION FUNDS



§ 35.05  FIREFIGHTERS' PENSION FUND.



   There is hereby established a Firefighters' Pension Fund and a Board of
Trustees of the Firefighters' Pension Fund.  The operation, maintenance, and
financing of the Firefighters' Pension Fund shall be governed in accordance
with §  34.02.



('75 Code, §  4.02)  (Ord. 3-395, passed 9-26-40)



§ 35.06  POLICE PENSION FUND.



   There is hereby established a Police Pension Fund and a Board of
Trustees of the Police Pension Fund.  The fund shall be governed by, possess
those powers, and exercise those rights and duties prescribed by §  34.01.



('75 Code, §  4.04)  (Ord. 30324, passed 4-25-35)



§ 35.07  OLD-AGE AND SURVIVOR'S INSURANCE FOR UTILITY EMPLOYEES.



   The governing body of the city hereby elects coverage for the light and
water utility employees only, under the Old-Age and Survivors' Insurance
provided by I.C. 5-10.1-2-1 et seq. and all acts amendatory and supplementary
thereto.



('75 Code, §  4.03)  (Res. 72-14, passed 10-4-72)



Cross-reference:



   Utility Employees Retirement Fund, see §§  35.10 through 35.24



UTILITY EMPLOYEES RETIREMENT FUND



§ 35.10  ADOPTION.



   The Frankfort Common Council has adopted a retirement plan known as the
Municipal Electric and Water Utilities Employees’ Retirement Fund, herein
called “Plan,” effective January 1, 2001, the Plan is to be a
continuation and complete restatement of the Plan created by City Ordinance
known as the same, which was originally effective January 1, 1947.  In
accordance with the provisions of the Plan, the funds of the Plan are to
continue to be held in trust under a Trust Agreement.



('75 Code, §§  4.05, 9.01)  (Ord. 3-    , passed 2-13-47; Am. Ord.
CO-82-12, passed 8-23-82; Am. Ord. CO- 01-17, passed 8-27-01)



Cross-reference:



   Old age and survivor's insurance for utility employees, see §  35.07



Statutory reference:



   Municipal utility employees pension funds, see I.C. 8-1.5-3-7



§ 35.11  BOARD OF TRUSTEES.



   The Municipal Electric and Water Utilities Employees Retirement Board
of Trustees shall consist of the Mayor, the City Clerk-Treasurer, the
respective superintendents of the electric and water utilities, the Utility
Billing Office Manager (the Superintendents and Office Manager shall be
ex-officio members of the Board of Trustees), and five employees of the
utilities,  one of which shall be an employee of the city Water Works, one
of which shall be an employee of the Utility Billing Office (may include the
auditor), and two of which shall be elected at large, (one of which may be a
retiree), to be elected at a meeting of the employees of the utilities to be
held at the Council chambers of the city, or any other designated location,
on January 15 of each year, to hold office for four years on a staggered
basis, so that an election of at least one trustee is required each year. 
The trustees shall hold their office until successors have been duly elected
and qualified.  In the event of a vacancy of any one of the five trustees
selected by the employees as aforesaid, by death, resignation or dismissal
from such employment, or by amendment of the Trust Agreement to increase the
number of the selected trustees, the employees shall within ten days
thereafter, upon call of the Mayor, hold a special meeting and elect a
trustee for the remainder of the term of such member vacancy.



('75 Code, §  9.02)  (Ord. CO-01-17, passed 8-27-01; Am. Ord. CO-05-03,
passed 5-23-05)



§ 35.12  OFFICERS OF BOARD OF TRUSTEES.



   The Mayor of the city shall be the President of the Board of Trustees,
and the City Clerk-Treasurer shall be its Treasurer.  The Board may elect or
appoint its Secretary.  It shall be the duty of the President to preside
over the meetings of the Board and call special meetings of the employees of
the utilities, and to preside over the annual as well as the called meetings
of the same held with relation to the Trust Fund.  ('75 Code, §  9.03) 
(Ord. CO-01-17, passed 8-27-01)



§ 35.13  COMPENSATION.



   The trustees shall receive no pay for their services as trustees;
however, the Secretary of the Board shall receive such compensation out of
the Fund for his or her services as Secretary as may be fixed by the Plan
Administrator. 



('75 Code, §  9.04)  (Ord. CO-01-17, passed 8-27-01)



§ 35.14  PROCEDURES.



   (A)   A majority of the members of the Board of Trustees shall at
all meetings constitute a quorum for the transaction of business pertaining
to the Trust Fund or for any other purpose.  For the passage of any motion,
resolution, or measure involving the expenditures of money, five affirmative
votes shall be necessary, and the votes shall be taken and recorded in the
minutes by the Secretary of the Board.



   (B)   The Board shall have the power to make all necessary by-laws
for meetings of the Trustees, the manner of members’ election, the
collection of all monies, and other property due or belonging to the Fund,
and all matters connected with the care, preservation, investment and
disbursement of the Fund, and all other matters connected with the proper
execution of the purposes and provisions of the law relating to the Trust
Fund.



('75 Code, §  9.05)  (Ord. CO-01-17, passed 8-27-01)



§ 35.15  MEETINGS.



   All meetings of the Board of Trustees shall be held at the Council
chambers of the city, or at any place designated by the President. Notice of
meetings and the time thereof may be given in writing as the President may
decide.



(‘75 Code, §  9.05)  (Ord. CO-01-17, passed 8-27-01)



§ 35.16  DUTIES OF CLERK-TREASURER AND SECRETARY; BOOKS AND REPORTS.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Clerk-Treasurer to collect and
retain all monies belonging to the Fund; to have custody of all its notes,
bonds, and other securities or evidence of indebtedness; and to collect the
principal and interest on those items.  He or she shall be liable on his or
her bond as Clerk-Treasurer for the faithful accounting of all monies and
securities which may come into his or her hands belonging to the Fund.  The
Clerk-Treasurer of the Board shall keep a separate account, which shall show
at all times the true and accurate condition of the Fund. The Clerk-Treasurer
shall, upon the expiration of his or her term of office, account to the Board
of Trustees for all monies, notes, and other securities belonging to the Fund
and coming into his or her hands and the proceeds of the same, and shall turn
over to his or her successor in office all monies, notes, property, or other
securities belonging to the Fund remaining in his or her hands.



   (B)   The Clerk-Treasurer shall execute a surety bond to be approved
by the Board of Trustees in an amount as may be fixed by the Board,
conditioned for the faithful discharge of the duties of his or her trust, the
premium of the bond to be paid out of the Fund.



   (C)   It shall be the duty of the Secretary to keep a true account
of the proceedings of the Board of Trustees and to keep a correct statement
of the account of each employee with the Trust Fund.  He or she shall render
to the Board of Trustees a monthly account of his or her acts and services as
Secretary and turn over to his or her successor all books, papers, property,
or other articles pertaining to his or her office or the Trust Fund. 



   (D)   The Secretary and Clerk-Treasurer of the Board of Trustees
shall make full, true, and accurate reports of the respective trusts to the
Board at each annual meeting, and a copy of these shall be filed by the
Secretary and Clerk-Treasurer of the Board as part of the minutes of the
annual meetings.  The books of the Secretary and Treasurer of the Board of
Trustees shall at all times be open to examination by Plan Administrator.



('75 Code, §§  9.06, 9.07, 9.08)  (Ord. 3-  , passed 2-13-47; Am. Ord.
CO-82-12, passed 8-23-82; Am. Ord. CO-01-17, passed 8-27-01)



§ 35.17  PAYMENT FOR EXPENSES.



   Expenses for administering the Plan, including but not limited to, any
fees charged by the Board, Plan consultant, the actuary, legal counsel or
other service providers in connection with the administration of the Plan
shall be paid by the Plan Administrator; provided, however, that the Plan
Administrator may, in its discretion, determine that all or part thereof,
excluding, however, any premiums for individual fiduciary liability insurance
on the persons of the Board, shall be payable out of the Trust Fund, in which
case the Plan Administrator shall so direct the Board.



(Ord. CO-01-17, passed 8-27-01)



§ 35.18  THE TRUST FUND.



   The Common Council and Plan Administrator hereby declare and establish
with the Board of Trustees hereunder a Trust.  All contributions under the
Plan paid from time to time to the Board of Trustees, all investments thereof
and all earnings, profits, increments, additions and appreciation thereto and
thereon accruing from time to time, shall be held by the Board of Trustees
under the Trust as a trust fund, herein called “Trust Fund,” or
“Fund,” in accordance with the provisions of the Plan and this Trust
Agreement.  The Board shall have the power to inquire into the correctness
of any contributions or to enforce the payment thereof.



(Ord. CO-01-17, passed 8-27-01)



§ 35.19  INCORPORATION BY REFERENCE.



   The Plan is hereby incorporated by reference into and adopted as a part
of this Trust Agreement and the Trust.



(Ord. CO-01-17, passed 8-27-01)



§ 35.20  INVESTMENT OF THE TRUST FUND.



   The Board of Trustees shall invest and reinvest the principal and
income of the Trust and keep the same invested without distinction between
principal and income.  The Board shall have the authority to select, retain
and dispose of any investments as permitted under state law for cities and
municipalities.



(Ord. CO-01-17, passed 8-27-01)



§ 35.21  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   (A)   The Board of Trustees shall have full and exclusive charge and
control of the Trust Fund.



   (B)   The Board shall be authorized and empowered to take by gift,
grant, devise, or bequest under and by the style of the Board of Trustees of
the Municipal Electric and Water Utilities Employees’ Retirement Fund of
the city, any money, real and personal property, and interest in real or
personal property and shall hold the same, or assign, transfer, encumber,
pledge, or sell the same whenever necessary under and by that name.



   (C)   The Board shall be authorized and is hereby authorized and
empowered to sue and be sued in the name of the Board of Trustees of the
Municipal Electric and Water Utilities Employees’ Retirement Fund, and
service of process may be had upon any member of the Board of Trustees.



   (D)   With respect to the Plan and this Trust, the Board of Trustees
shall be charged with the duty of acting solely in the interest of the
participants and their beneficiaries for the exclusive purposes of providing
benefits to participants and their beneficiaries and defraying reasonable
expenses of administering the Plan.  The Board shall act with the care,
skill, prudence and diligence under the circumstances then prevailing that
prudent persons would act in a like capacity and familiar with the matters
would use in the conduct of an enterprise of like character and with like
aims.



   (E)   The Board of Trustees shall diversify the investments of the
Plan so as to minimize the risk of large losses, unless under the
circumstances it is clearly prudent not to do so.  The Board shall act in
accordance with the documents and instruments governing the Plan.  To the
extent permitted by law, the Board shall not be liable for any act of
commission or omission by any other fiduciary if responsibility with respect
to the act as has been allocated to another fiduciary under the Plan or the
Trust.



('75 Code, §  9.09)  (Ord. 3-  , passed 2-13-47; Am. Ord. CO-82-12,
passed 8-23-82; Am. Ord. CO-89-17, passed 12-11-89; Am. Ord. CO-01-17, passed
8-27-01)



§ 35.22  PAYMENT OF BENEFITS FROM THE TRUST FUND.



   The Board of Trustees shall make payments from the Fund to persons
entitled to benefits under the Plan.



(Ord. CO-01-17, passed 8-27-01)



§ 35.23  INDEMNIFICATION OF THE TRUSTEE.



   The Board of Trustees shall not be required to undertake of defend any
litigation arising in connection with the Plan, the Trust Agreement or the
Fund, unless the Board is first indemnified by the Frankfort Common Council,
the Plan Administrator or by the Fund against any prospective costs, expenses
and liability in connection therewith, except where the litigation is
occasioned by or involves a question of the failure of the Board of Trustees
to discharge their duty in accordance with §  35.21.



(Ord. CO-01-17, passed 8-27-01)



§ 35.24  RESIGNATION OR REMOVAL OF TRUSTEE.



   A Trustee shall have the right to resign as Trustee upon 30 days’
prior written notice to the Frankfort Common Council (unless the requirement
of such notice is waived by the Frankfort Common council).  The Frankfort
Common Council may at any time remove a Trustee upon 30 days’ prior written
notice to the Board of Trustees (unless the requirement of such notice is
waived by the Board).  In the event of the resignation or removal of a
Trustee, a successor Trustee shall be elected by the participants at a
special called election.  The former Trustee shall deliver all Trust Fund
assets to the successor Trustee or Trustees.  Any such successor Trustee,
without any further act, deed or conveyance, shall become vested with all
rights, powers, duties and obligations with respect to the Trust Fund assets
and the Trust hereunder with like effect as if originally named as Trustee
herein.



(Ord. CO-01-17, passed 8-27-01)



§ 35.25  NONDIVERSION AND EXCLUSIVE BENEFIT.



   Except as permitted by law and specifically provided in §  8.01 of
the Plan, no part of the Trust Fund shall be used for, or diverted to, any
purpose not for the exclusive benefit of Participants and their Beneficiaries
at any time prior to the satisfaction of all rights and liabilities with
respect to Participants or their Beneficiaries under the Plan, either by the
operation of the Plan or this Trust Agreement or by the amendment, revocation
or termination thereof.



(Ord. CO-01-17, passed 8-27-01)



§ 35.26  AMENDMENTS.



   The Trust Agreement may be amended at any time and from time to time,
to any extent not contrary to law, by a written instrument executed by the
Frankfort Common Council, the Plan Administrator or the Board of Trustees.



(Ord. CO-01-17, passed 8-27-01)



§ 35.27  TERMINATION.



   The Frankfort Common Council may terminate the Trust Agreement and
Trust at any time by resolution.  The Trust shall be terminated as of the
date of termination specified in such resolution.  Upon such termination,
the assets of the Trust Fund shall be applied or distributed in accordance
with the provisions of the Plan which are applicable upon termination of the
Plan.  If the Trust is terminated, the Board may reserve from the Trust Fund
such reasonable amount as deemed necessary to provide for any sums properly
chargeable against the Trust Fund.  From and after the date of the
termination of the Trust and until the final distribution of the Fund, the
Board shall continue to have all such powers provided under the Plan and
Trust Agreement as are necessary and expedient for the orderly liquidation
and distribution of the Fund.



(Ord. CO-01-17, passed 8-27-01)



§ 35.28  NECESSARY PARTIES.



   The Board shall have authority to enforce this agreement on behalf of
any and all persons having or claiming any interest in the Trust Fund or
under this agreement or the plan. In any action or proceeding affecting the
Trust Fund or any property constituting part or all thereof, the Frankfort
Common Council, Plan Administrator and Board of Trustees shall be the only
necessary parties and any notice or process served upon the Frankfort Common
Council and the Plan Administrator shall be deemed to be served upon any
employee, participant, beneficiary or other person having or claiming to have
an interest in the Fund or under the plan and any judgment that may be
entered in such action or proceeding shall be binding and conclusive on all
persons having or claiming to have any interest in the Fund or under the plan.



(Ord. CO-01-17, passed 8-27-01)



§ 35.29  COUNTERPARTS.



   This Trust Agreement may be executed in any number of counterparts,
each of which shall be considered an original and no other counterpart need
be produced in evidence hereof.



(Ord. CO-01-17, passed 8-27-01)



§ 35.30  INTERNAL REVENUE SERVICE APPROVAL.



   Notwithstanding any other provision hereof, this trust agreement is
established and entered into on the condition precedent that the plan and
trust contemplated hereby shall be approved and ruled to be qualified under
the Internal Revenue Code and regulations issued thereunder with respect to
employee benefit trusts. It is expressly agreed that in the event the plan
and trust, as contemplated hereby, are not so approved and ruled to be
qualified by the Internal Revenue Service, all contributions of the utilities
or participants to the trust made prior to the initial determination by the
Internal Revenue Service shall be returned to the utilities or participants
as may reflect their respective interests.



(Ord. CO-01-17, passed 8-27-01)



§ 35.31  INTERPRETATION.



   This instrument and the trust existing under its terms are to be
construed according to the laws of the state.



(Ord. CO-01-17, passed 8-27-01)



§ 35.32  RESPONSIBILITY FOR ASSETS.



   (A)   The Board of Trustees shall have exclusive authority and
discretion to manage and control the assets of the plan subject to the
remaining parts of this section.



   (B)   The Plan Administrator may appoint an Investment Manager to
direct the investment and reinvestment of any portion or portions of the
Trust Fund. In such case, the Plan Administrator shall by written notice
direct the segregation of such portion or portions of the Trust Fund in a
separate investment account or investment accounts to be invested at the
direction of such Investment Manager.



   (C)   Any such Investment Manager shall either be registered as an
investment adviser under the Investment Advisers Act of 1940; be a bank, as
defined in that Act; or be an insurance company qualified to perform
investment management services under the laws of more than one state. If
investment of the Trust Fund is to be directed in whole or in part by an
Investment Manager, the Plan Administrator shall deliver to the participants
a copy of the instruments appointing the Investment Manager and evidencing
the Investment Manager' s acceptance of such appointment, an acknowledgment
by the Investment Manager that it is a fiduciary of the plan, and a
certificate evidencing the Investment Manager' s current registration under
said Act.



   (D)   The Trustees shall follow the directions of the Investment
Manager regarding the investment and reinvestment of the Trust Fund, or such
portion thereof as shall be under management by the Investment Manager and
shall exercise its powers hereunder as directed by the Investment Manager.
The Trustees shall be under no duty or obligation to review any investment to
be acquired, held or disposed of pursuant to such directions nor to make any
recommendations with respect to the disposition or continued retention of any
such investment or the exercise or nonexercise of the powers hereunder. The
Trustees shall have no liability or responsibility for acting pursuant to the
direction of, or failing to act in the absence of any direction from the
Investment Manager, unless the Trustees know that by such action or failure
to act the Trustees would be committing or participating in a breach of
fiduciary duty by the Investment Manager.



   (E)   The Investment Manager at any time and from time to time may
issue orders for the purchase or sale of securities directly to a broker; and
in order to facilitate such transaction, the Trustees upon request shall
execute and deliver appropriate trading authorizations. Written notification
of the issuance of each such order shall be given promptly to the Trustees by
the Investment Manager, and the execution of each such order shall be
confirmed by written advice to the Investment Manager by the broker. Such
notification shall be authority for the Trustees to pay for securities
purchased against receipt thereof and to deliver securities sold against
payment therefor, as the case may be.



   (F)   In the event that an Investment Manager should resign or be
removed by the Plan Administrator, the Trustees shall manage the investment
of the Trust Fund pursuant to the provisions hereunder unless and until
another Investment Manager shall be appointed with respect thereto as
provided in this section.



   (G)   The accounts, books and records of the Trustees shall reflect
the segregation, pursuant to the provisions of this section, of any portion
or portions of the Trust Fund in a separate investment account or accounts



(Ord. CO-01-17, passed 8-27-01)



PERSONNEL ADMINISTRATION



§ 35.35  NON-DISCRIMINATORY HIRING POLICY.



   It is the policy of the city that no discrimination on the basis of
race, religion, color, sex, national origin, or ancestry be condoned or
permitted against any person or persons in recruitment or hiring of
employees, in any personnel transactions, in the provision of government
services, in the accessibility of programs and facilities, in the
solicitation of bids or the awards of public contracts.



('75 Code, §  4.06)  (Ord. CO-96-1, passed 4-8-96)



§ 35.36  MERIT SYSTEM FOR CIVIL DEFENSE EMPLOYEES.



   (A)   There is hereby established a merit system of personnel
administration for all employees of the Civil Defense Agency of the city, to
be serviced by the State Personnel Department.



   (B)   The merit program shall be serviced by the State Personnel
Department pursuant to state law, and shall meet the merit system standards
established by the federal government pursuant to Section 205 of the Federal
Defense Act of 1950, as amended, including the exemption of any positions
from the merit program as recognized in these same federal standards.  For
the purpose of administering the merit program for all employees of the Civil
Defense Agency, the County Civil Defense Director is hereby empowered and
designated as the appointing officer.  The County Civil Defense Director is
hereby authorized and directed to enter into any arrangements and agreements
with the State Department of Civil Defense and the State Personnel Department
as may be necessary to provide for a continuing merit program of personnel
administration for all County Civil Defense employees.



('75 Code, §  4.07)  (Ord. 4-270, passed 11-20-62)



Statutory reference:



   County, local, and interjurisdictional civil defense organizations, see
I.C. 10-4-1-10



   Civil defense and disaster regulations, see I.C. 10-4-1-1 et seq.



§ 35.37  EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY.



   (A)   The city is an Equal Opportunity Employer.  All employees
shall be recruited, evaluated, hired, promoted, transferred, demoted, laid
off, suspended, terminated or otherwise dealt with based solely on merit,
fitness for duty and such other bona fide occupational qualifications as each
individual might possess.  No personnel decisions concerning any term or
condition of employment shall be based upon race, color, religion, sex,
national origin, age or disability except which such criteria constitutes a
bona fide occupational requirement.



   (B)   The Board of Works is the Employer's EEO Coordinator.  The
EEO Coordinator is responsible for providing information regarding
Anti-discrimination laws to employees and others, and for reviewing and
resolving complaints involving alleged discrimination.



(Ord. CO-96-1, passed 4-8-96)



§ 35.38  AMERICANS WITH DISABILITIES ACT.



   (A)   The city supports the intent and purposes of the Americans
with Disabilities (ADA) and will not discriminate against qualified
individuals with disabilities because of the disability of such individual in
regard to job application procedures, hiring, advancement, discharge,
compensation, job training and other terms, conditions and privileges of
employment.



   (B)   The Board of Works is responsible for providing information
about ADA to employees and others, and for reviewing and resolving complaints
involving alleged discrimination against the disabled.



(Ord. CO-96-1, passed 4-8-96)



§ 35.39  SEXUAL HARASSMENT.



   (A)   The city strictly prohibits sexual harassment of employees in
the workplace by an person in any form.  It is both illegal and against the
policy of the city for any person, male or female, to sexually harass an
employee.  The employer has identified three situations in which unwelcome
sexual advances, requests for sexual favors, and other verbal or physical
conduct of a sexual nature constitutes sexual harassment:



      (1)   When an employee must submit to such conduct as a
condition of employment;



      (2)   When decisions about an employee's job such as
promotion, demotion, benefits and wages are based on submission to or
rejection of such conduct; and



      (3)   When such conduct "unreasonably interferes" with job
performance and creates an "intimidating, hostile or offensive" working
environment.



   (B)   The first two categories are commonly referred to as "quid pro
quo" sexual harassment, in which acquiescence to sexual advances or some type
of sexual consideration is required in exchange for a tangible job benefit. 
The third category prohibits sexual harassment based on a "hostile or
offensive" work environment, even where there has been no conditioning of
employment benefits for sexual favors.  Such harassment typically involves
workplace conduct such as lewd or explicit sexual remarks, innuendos, jokes,
gestures, touching, discussions of sexual activity, or the display of obscene
or suggestive pictures or cartoons.



   (C)   The Board of Works is responsible for providing information
regarding sexual harassment to employees and others and for
reviewing/resolving complaints involving alleged sexual harassment.



(Ord. CO-96-1, passed 4-8-96)



§ 35.40  COMPLAINT PROCEDURES FOR ALL ABOVE POLICIES.



   (A)   Any person may file a complaint if they believe that another
person has illegally discriminated against them under any local, state or
federal anti-discrimination law, including a violation of the ADA or conduct
involving sexual harassment.



   (B)   Procedure:



      (1)   All complaints alleging illegal discrimination shall be
filed on the appropriate Complaint Form.  This Form shall be filed as soon
as possible, and no later than ten working days after the date the alleged
discrimination occurred.  "Working days" are scheduled work days for
employees, business days for non-employees.  Complaints filed after the
deadline may be processed.



      (2)   Complaints shall generally be filed with the Board of
Public Works, in the alternative may be filed with the Mayor.  The Board of
Works or Mayor shall investigate all complaints and respond to the
complainant within ten working days of the filing.



      (3)   When reviewing complaints alleging a violation of the
ADA, the Board of Public Works or the Mayor, will determine whether the
complainant is a "qualified person with a disability", whether the employer
may have discriminated against the complainant, and if so, whether the
employer can "reasonably accommodate" the complainant or otherwise resolve
their complaint.



      (4)   An employee who has been found by the employer, after
appropriate investigation, to have committed an act of illegal discrimination
against another employee, job applicant, or other person shall be subject to
appropriate disciplinary action.



      (5)   Non-employees found to have committed an act of illegal
discrimination against an employee will be dealt with appropriately as
allowed by law.



(Ord. CO-96-1, passed 4-8-96)



§ 35.41  NEPOTISM.



   (A)   This policy applies to the Common Council, the Board of Public
Works and Safety, the Mayor’s office, Utility Service Board, all city
departments, all other city boards and commissions and any other bodies
formed or operating under the authority of the city.



   (B)   An individual who is employed by the city of July 1, 2012, is
not subject to this policy unless the individual has a break in employment
with the city. The following are not considered a break in employment with
the city:



      (1)   The individual who is absent from the workplace while on
paid or unpaid leave, including vacation, sick, or family medical leave, or
worker’s compensation.



      (2)   The individual’s employment with the city is
terminated followed by immediate reemployment by the city without loss of
payroll time.



   (C)   For purposes of this policy, the performance of the duties of:



      (1)   A precinct election officer (as defined in I.C.
3-5-2-40.1) that are imposed by I.C. 3; or



      (2)   A volunteer firefighter;



is not considered employment by the city.



   (D)   Definitions. For the purposes of this policy, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      DIRECT LINE OF SUPERVISION. An elected officer or employee who is
in a position to affect the terms and conditions of another individual’s
employment, including making decisions about work assignments, compensation,
grievances, advancement, or performance evaluation. The term does not include
the responsibilities of the Mayor or the Common Council, as provided by law,
to make decisions regarding salary ordinances, budgets, or personnel policies
of the city.



      EMPLOYEE. An individual who is employed by the city on a
full-time, part-time, temporary, intermittent, or hourly basis. The tem does
not include an individual who holds only an elected office. The term includes
an individual who is a party to an employment contract with the city.



      MEMBER OF THE FIRE DEPARTMENT. The Fire Chief or a firefighter
appointed to the Department.



      MEMBER OF THE POLICE DEPARTMENT. The Police Chief or a police
officer appointed to the Department.



      RELATIVE.



         (a)   Any of the following:



            1.   A spouse.



            2.   A parent or stepparent.



            3.   A child or stepchild.



            4.   A brother, sister, stepbrother, or stepsister.



            5.   A niece or nephew.



            6.   An aunt or uncle.



            7.   A daughter-in-law or son-in-law.



         (b)   For purposes of this definition, an adopted child
of an individual is treated as a natural child of the individual.



         (c)   For purposes of this definition, BROTHER and
SISTER include a brother or sister by the half blood.



   (E)   This policy establishes minimum requirements regarding
employment of relatives.



   (F)   Individuals who are relatives may not be employed by the city
in a position that results in one relative being in the direct line of
supervision of the other relative.



   (G)   (1)   This section applies to an individual who:



         (a)   Is employed by the city on the date the
individual’s relative begins serving a term of an elected office of the
city; and



         (b)   Is not exempt from the application of this policy
under division (B) above.



      (2)   An individual meeting the criteria of division (G)(1)(a)
and (b) above may remain employed by the city and maintain the individual’s
position or rank even if the individual’s employment would otherwise
violate division (F) above.



      (3)   An individual described in division (G)(2) above,
however, may not:



         (a)   Be promoted to a position; or



         (b)   Be promoted to a position that is not within the
merit ranks, in the case of an individual who is a member of a merit Police
Department or merit Fire Department;



if the new position would violate division (F) above.



   (H)   This policy does not abrogate or affect an employment contract
with the city that:



      (1)   An individual is a party to; and



      (2)   Is in effect on the date the individual’s relative
begins serving a term of an elected office of the city.



   (I)   Each elected officer of the city shall annually certify in
writing, subject to penalties of perjury, that the officer has not violated
this policy or the provisions of I.C. 36-1-20.2. An officer shall submit the
certification to the Mayor not later than December 31 of each year.



   (J)   The annual report filed by the city with the State Board of
Accounts under I.C. 5-11-13-1 shall include a statement by the Mayor stating
whether the city has implemented a policy under I.C. 36-14-20.2.



(Res. 12-02, passed 6-25-12)



§ 35.42  CONTRACTING WITH RELATIVES OF ELECTED OFFICIALS.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purposes of this policy, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      ELECTED OFFICIAL.



         (a)   The Mayor;



         (b)   A member of the Board of Public Works and Safety;



         (c)   A member of the Common Council;



         (d)   The Clerk-Treasurer of the city;



         (e)   A member of the Franklin Utility Service Board.



      RELATIVE.



         (a)   Any of the following:



            1.   A spouse.



            2.   A parent or stepparent.



            3.   A child or stepchild.



            4.   A brother, sister, stepbrother, or stepsister.



            5.   A niece or nephew.



            6.   An aunt or uncle.



            7.   A daughter-in-law or son-in-law.



         (b)   For purposes of this definition, an adopted child
of an individual is treated as a natural child of the individual.



         (c)   For purposes of this definition, BROTHER and
SISTER include a brother or sister by the half blood.



   (B)   (1)   The city may enter into a contract or renew a
contract for the procurement of goods and services or a contract for public
works with:



         (a)   An individual who is a relative of an elected
official; or



         (b)   A business entity that is wholly or partially
owned by a relative of an elected official;



only if the requirements of this division (B) are satisfied and the elected
official does not violate I.C. 36-1-21.



      (2)   The city may enter into a contract or renew a contract
with an individual or business entity described in division (B)(1) if:



         (a)   The elected official files with the
Clerk-Treasurer a full disclosure, which must:



            1.   Be in writing;



            2.   Describe the contract or purchase to be made
by the city;



            3.   Describe the business relationship that the
elected official has to the individual or business entity that contracts or
purchases;



            4.   Be affirmed under penalty of perjury;



            5.   Be submitted to the Common Council and be
accepted by the Common Council in a public meeting of the Common Council
prior to final action on the contract or purchase; and



            6.   Be filed, not later than 15 days after final
action on the contract or purchase, with:



               A.   The State Board of Accounts; and



               B.   The Clerk of the Clinton Circuit Court;



         (b)   The Board of Public Works and Safety of the city:



            1.   Makes a certified statement that the contract
amount or purchase price was the lowest amount or price bid or offered; or



            2.   Makes a certified statement of the reasons
why the vendor or contractor was selected; and



         (c)   The city satisfies any other requirements under
I.C. 5-22 or I.C. 36-1-12.



      (3)   An elected official shall also comply with the
disclosure provisions of I.C. 36-1- 21-5, if applicable.



      (4)   This division (B) does not affect the initial term of a
contract in existence at the time the term of office of the elected official
of the city begins.



   (C)   Each elected officer of the city shall annually certify in
writing, subject to penalties of perjury, that the officer is in compliance
with this policy and the provisions of I.C. 36-1-21. An officer shall submit
the certification to the Mayor not later than December 31 of each year.



   (D)   The annual report filed by the city with the State Board of
Accounts under I.C. 5-11-13-1 shall include a statement by the Mayor stating
whether the city has implemented a policy under I.C. 36-1-21.



(Res. 12-03, passed 6-25-12)



CHAPTER 36:  CITY FINANCE



Section



General Provisions



   36.01   Borrowing funds from city utilities



   36.02   Appropriations to promote business



   36.03   Appropriations to provide for payment of dues to
organizations



   36.04   Payment of invoices or bills before board meetings



   36.05   Credit or procurement cards



   36.06   Authorizing use of buy money by Police Department



   36.07   Internal control standards



   36.08   Materiality thresholds for reporting irregular variances,
losses, shortages, and thefts



Funds



   36.10   Cumulative Capital Improvement Fund



   36.11   Cumulative Firefighting Equipment Fund



   36.12   Community Development Block Grant Fund



   36.13   Motor Vehicle Inspection Fund



   36.14   Infraction Deferral Program Fund



   36.15   Pretrial Diversion Program Fund



   36.16   Cumulative Capital Development Fund



   36.17   Promotion of Business Fund



Fees



   36.20   Fees charged by city officials



   36.21   Disposition of civil penalties and civil fines collected for
municipal ordinance violations



   36.22   Fee for various property applications



Purchasing Administration



   36.25   Purchasing agencies



   36.26   Authorization



   36.27   Designation of purchasing agent



   36.28   Designation by title



   36.29   Designation of deputy purchasing agents



   36.30   List of agents



   36.31   Approval requirements



   36.32   Purchasing regulations



Residential Tax Abatements



   36.40   Deductions



   36.41   Council findings



   36.42   Fee



Cross-reference:



   Thoroughfare Fund, see §  154.12



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 36.01  BORROWING FUNDS FROM CITY UTILITIES.



   The city may borrow funds from any utility owned by it subject to the
provisions governing such borrowing as found in I.C. 8-1.5-3-12.



('75 Code, § 2.09)



§ 36.02  APPROPRIATIONS TO PROMOTE BUSINESS.



   The City Council is authorized to budget and appropriate funds from the
General Fund to provide a "promotion of business appropriation", which has as
its purpose the betterment and improvement of the city.



(Ord., passed  -  -83)



§ 36.03  APPROPRIATIONS TO PROVIDE FOR PAYMENT OF DUES TO ORGANIZATIONS.



   (A)   The City Council is authorized to budget and appropriate funds
from the General Fund or from other funds to provide membership for the city,
elected and appointed officials and members of the city's boards, Council,
departments, or agencies in local, regional, state, and national associations
of a civic, educational or governmental nature, which have as their purpose
the betterment and improvement of municipal operations.



   (B)   The City Council is also authorized to budget and appropriate
funds to pay the expenses of duly- authorized representatives to attend the
meetings and functions of organizations to which the city belongs.



(Ord., passed  -  -83)



§ 36.04  PAYMENT OF INVOICES OR BILLS BEFORE BOARD MEETINGS.



   (A)   Be it ordained by the Common Council that the Clerk-Treasurer
is allowed to make claim payments in advance of board allowance for the
followings kinds of expenses:



      (1)   Property or services purchased or leased by the United
States government, its agencies, or its political subdivisions.



      (2)   License or permit fees.



      (3)   Insurance premiums.



      (4)   Utility payments or utility connection charges.



      (5)   General grant programs where advance funding is not
prohibited and the contracting party posts sufficient security to cover the
amount advanced.



      (6)   Grants of state funds authorized by statute.



      (7)   Maintenance and service agreements.



      (8)   Leases or rental agreements.



      (9)   Bond and coupon payments.



      (10)   Payroll.



      (11)   State, federal, or county taxes.



      (12)   Expenses that mut be paid because of emergency
circumstances.



      (13)   Claims with finance charge which will be due before
meeting.



      (14)   A product or service for which the city legislative
body has accepted a bid.



      (15)   Refunds.



      (16)   Claims with discounts available is paid before meeting.



   (B)   Each payment of expenses must be supported by a fully itemized
invoice or bill and certification by the Clerk-Treasurer.  The claim shall
be reviewed and will be allowed at the next regular or special meeting
following the preapproved payment of the expense.



(Ord. CO-96-2, passed 2-12-96)



§ 36.05  CREDIT OR PROCUREMENT CARDS.



   (A)   This section is adopted in compliance with the State Board of
Accounts Accounting and Uniform Compliance Guidelines Manual For Cities and
Towns, Chapter 7, authorizing a city to use credit cards for purchases.



   (B)   City employees and officials may use city credit cards and
purchasing cards for purchases related to the performance of city duties when
such use is in the best interest of the city.



   (C)   The Clerk-Treasurer is authorized to obtain credit cards and
purchasing cards titled for city departments on the request of the department
head.



   (D)   The department head, or their designee, shall be responsible
for safekeeping of the credit cards and purchasing cards.



   (E)   (1)   City credit cards and purchasing cards shall be used
only with the approval of the department head, or their designee.



      (2)   The department head shall maintain a usage log for each
card identified by card account number, with entries certified by signature
of the department head, or their designee.  The log shall include the
following information:



         (a)   The name and position of the individual using the
city’s card;



         (b)   Upon issuance: the date the card is issued to the
individual, the estimated amounts to be charged, the type of expenses (such
as airline tickets or office supplies), and the appropriation account numbers
to be expended; and



         (c)   Upon return: the date the card is returned and the
amount charged to the card.



   (F)   City credit cards and purchasing cards shall be used for
purchases relating to the performance of city business only.  No personal
use of a city credit card or purchasing card is allowed, even if an employee
offers to reimburse the city for the employee’s personal use of a city
credit card or purchasing card.  When the purpose for which the card has
been issued has been accomplished, the card should be returned to the custody
of the department head.



   (G)   Payment of credit card and purchasing card bills shall be
subject to the audit requirements of accounts payable vouchers in conformity
with I.C. 5-11-10 and I.C. 36-4-8 and the regulations of the State Board of
Accounts.  Itemized receipts are required for all credit card and purchasing
card purchases, including restaurant charges.  Payment will not be made on
the basis of a credit card or purchasing card statement.  Signed charge
slips showing a total charge only, with no itemization of items purchased,
are not acceptable.  It is the responsibility of the employee authorizing
the charge to obtain proper itemized receipts.  If payment is denied for
lack of proper or timely supporting documentation, the officer or employee
incurring the charge shall be personally responsible for its payment.



   (H)   Credit card and purchasing card charges that do not meet audit
requirements, including charges that include the imposition of sales taxes
for which the city is otherwise exempt, are the responsibility of the
employee authorizing the charge. The city will take all necessary steps to
obtain reimbursement for charges which do not meet audit requirements from
the employee authorizing the charge, including, but not limited to, the
garnishment of the charging employee’s city wages.



   (I)   Any interest or penalty incurred due to late filing with the
Clerk-Treasurer of an accounts payable voucher for payment of a credit card
or purchasing card bill, or incurred due to delay in furnishing of
documentation required for audit by an officer or employee, shall be the
responsibility of that officer or employee.



   (J)   The Clerk-Treasurer shall be notified immediately if a credit
card or purchasing card is lost or stolen. If a credit card or purchasing
card is lost due to negligence on the part of a city employee, the employee
shall be responsible for any and all expenses incurred on the lost credit
card or purchasing card.



   (K)   The Clerk-Treasurer is authorized to revoke credit cards or
purchasing cards that have been used in violation of city policy.



   (L)   If properly authorized, an annual fee may be paid for issuance
of the credit or purchasing card.



(Ord. 13-16, passed 12-2-13)



§ 36.06  AUTHORIZING USE OF BUY MONEY BY POLICE DEPARTMENT.



   (A)   The Police Department is authorized to have in place and to
administer a program to obtain appropriations and make expenditures for buy
money or payments to informants in drug investigation cases.



   (B)   Appropriations for such purpose must be obtained in the manner
authorized by the laws of the State of Indiana.



   (C)   Petty cash fund procedures are to be followed as authorized by
I.C. 36-1-8-3.



   (D)   A minimum documentation procedure must be followed, similar to
either:



      (1)   Guidelines for the Expenditure of Confidential Funds,
published by the U.S. Department of Criminal Justice;



      (2)   Guidelines for Obtaining and Accounting for Confidential
Funds Used in Support of Criminal Investigations (Revised S.O.P. PR-INV-009),
by the Indiana State Police Department.



(Ord. 08-14, passed 12-22-08)



§ 36.07  INTERNAL CONTROL STANDARDS.



   (A)   Internal control policy pursuant to I.C. 5-11-1-27; purpose.
The purpose of this policy is to communicate the Common Council’s internal
control objectives to all employees and elected officials of the city and to
firmly commit the city to the 17 key principles of internal controls as
established by the Indiana State Board of Accounts.



   (B)   Principles.



      (1)   Component One: Control Environment.



         (a)   Principle 1: The oversight body and management
demonstrate a commitment to integrity and ethical values.



            1.   The city has the responsibility  to
establish and maintain an adequate system of internal control and to furnish
to the Frankfort Common Council, various boards and commissions, governmental
agencies, creditors and others reliable financial information on a timely
basis. An adequate system of internal control is necessary for the city to
discharge these responsibilities.



            2.   Controls help ensure that assets are not
exposed to unauthorized access and use, transactions are properly recorded in
the financial records, and the resultant financial information is reliable.
External organizations and stakeholders of the city rely on financial
information to make decisions toward appropriations, loans and other debt,
grants, and other contractual relationships. City resources are dependent
upon the system of internal control. Auditors are required annually to report
upon the adequacy of the city's systems for control over financial reporting
and compliance per I.C. 5-11-1-27(e). The safeguarding of city assets and the
reliability which the city and others can place upon its financial records is
dependent upon the effectiveness of the internal control process.



            3.   As the fiscal body, the Common Council
expects the city administration to effect an internal control environment
with policies and procedures necessary to provide reasonable assurance that
practices cause effective and efficient operations, reliable financial
reporting, and assures compliance with applicable laws and regulations.



            4.   The system of internal control is meant to
keep the city on course toward its mission and to minimize surprises. The
system promotes efficiency, minimizes risks of asset loss, helps ensure the
reliability of financial information, and compliance with applicable laws,
rules, and regulations.



            5.   Internal control is a process; a means to an
end, and not an end unto itself. The control environment is the foundation
upon which all components of internal control are based. It sets the tone for
city operations. Internal control is about people, operations,
communications, and the work environment. It is not about policies and forms
though it takes shape through the implementation of relevant policies,
procedures, and practices. Internal control can provide reasonable assurance,
but no system of control can provide absolute assurance to the Common Council
and other users of financial information.



            6.   The Board of Public Works and Safety shall be
charged with:



               A.   Conveying periodic messages of the
city's internal control philosophy and expectations to all employees;



               B.   Evaluating the city's internal control
system for weaknesses on a periodic (but no less frequently than annual)
basis, providing solutions to any discovered weaknesses, and inform employees
of necessary changes in procedure;



               C.   Working as the Human Resources
Department to establish a confidential reporting system for individuals to
report suspected fraud and abuse of internal control policies; and



               D.   Working as the Human Resources
Department to institute procedures to address violations of policies and
consequences for violations.



         (b)   Principle 2: The oversight body oversees the
entity’s internal control system. As the fiscal body for the city, the
Common Council is responsible for setting the institutional expectations for
internal control, ensuring management is aware of the those expectations,
requiring the upward communications channels are open through all levels of
management, and evaluating management's effectiveness toward monitoring the
control environment and implementing sound control policies and procedures.
As the city's Chief Fiscal Officer, the Clerk-Treasurer will be the Common
Council's chief agent in implementing and managing the internal control
policies and procedures.



         (c)   Principle 3: Management establishes an
organizational structure, assigns responsibility, and delegates authority to
achieve the entity's objectives.



            1.   Individuals with delegated approval
authority, e.g. elected officials, Board of Works and Safety appointees, and
department heads are responsible for establishing, maintaining, and
supporting a system of internal controls within their areas of responsibility
and for creating the control environment that encourages compliance with city
policies and procedures.



            2.   Adequate supervision is necessary to monitor
that internal controls are operating as intended, and to help ensure the
reliability of accounting and operational controls by pointing out errors,
omissions, exceptions, and inconsistencies in procedures. Staff in leadership
roles are responsible for the application of this policy and the design,
development, implementation, and maintenance of systems of internal controls
focusing on the effectiveness of operations and the safeguarding of assets
within their respective areas of responsibility. All levels of management and
supervision are responsible for strengthening internal controls when
weaknesses are detected. Department managers should periodically review
departmental procedures to ensure that the general principles of internal
control are being followed.



            3.   The Board of Public Works and Safety has the
primary responsibility for internal control over financial reporting and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations. The Clerk-Treasurer
is the city's chief source for information and assistance to staff and
department heads on this topic and will make resources available to assist in
administering this policy.



            4.   The department heads and Board of Public
Works and Safety are responsible for internal controls over employee
recruitment, hiring, separation, promotion, job classification, employee
rights, and salary administration.



            5.   The Clerk-Treasurer and Corporation Counsel
are the city sources for information and assistance on this topic and will
make resources available to assist in administering this policy.



            6.   All levels of internal control are subject to
examination by external auditors who are required to report on the adequacy
of internal controls over finance and compliance. Department heads are
responsible for prompt corrective action on all internal control findings and
recommendations made by internal and external auditors. The audit process is
completed only after department heads receive the audit results and take
action to correct internal control weaknesses, improve systems, or
demonstrate that management action is not warranted. Department heads have
the responsibility to ensure that those who report to them have adequate
knowledge, skills, and abilities to function within, and contribute to, an
effective internal control environment. This includes providing access to
appropriate training on topics relevant to their job responsibilities.



         (d)   Principle 4: Management demonstrates a commitment
to recruit, develop, and retain competent individuals.



            1.   The City Employee Handbook provides a roadmap
for recruiting and maintaining quality employees. Prior to employment
individuals may be subject to pre-employment background screening and/or a
credit history check. While employed full time city employees are entitled to
a benefits package including health insurance and certain other
post-employment benefits. The city will continue to assess the best
recruitment pools and tools for the different skill sets of skills necessary
to adequately implement and maintain quality internal controls.



            2.   Job descriptions will be updated where
necessary to reflect internal control responsibilities and duties. Employees
will be regularly trained in internal control methods and all training will
be documented in employees' personnel files. Employees will be regularly
evaluated by their supervisors on internal control duties and receive
feedback on possible improvements.



         (e)   Principle 5: Management evaluates performance and
holds individuals accountable for their internal control responsibilities.
Individuals are held accountable for their internal control responsibilities
through a recognized structure which includes relevant job descriptions,
operating procedures, periodic reviews, regular feedback, and a progressive
disciplinary policy. Additionally, the city administration seeks to address
issues in specific departments and positions through regular one-on-ones with
department heads.



      (2)   Component Two: Risk Assessment.



         (a)   Principle 6: Management defines objectives clearly
to enable the identification of risks and risk tolerances.



            1.   Through the creation of standard operating
procedures and accurate organizational reporting charts management conveys
and identifies objectives, missions, policies, and risk tolerances to
employees. The Board of Public Works and Safety will lead a risk analysis of
three major areas:



               A.   The effectiveness and efficiency of
operations.



               B.   The reliability of reporting for
internal and external use.



               C.   Compliance with applicable laws and
regulations.



            2.   For each category, the Board of Public Works
and Safety will define objectives in specific measurable terms in order to
enable the design of internal control for related risk, increase
understanding at all levels, assess performance, identify what is to be
achieved, who is to achieve it, how it will be achieved when it will be
achieved and incorporate external requirements.



         (b)   Principle 7: Management identifies, analyzes, and
responds to risks related to achieving the defined objectives. The Board of
Public Works and Safety will identify, analyze and respond to the risks
identified in Principle 6 by determining:



            1.   How likely is the risk to occur?



            2.   How will it impact the objective?



            3.   Is the risk based on complex or unusual
transactions?



            4.   Is the risk based on fraud?



Once each risk has been identified and analyzed, the Board of Public Works
and Safety will work with department heads to determine how to respond to
each risk with a specific solution and action.



         (c)   Principle 8: Management considers the potential
for fraud when identifying, analyzing, and responding to risks. Management is
committed to fraud prevention by utilizing a "trust but verify" approach. The
potential for fraud, misappropriation, and outright theft are contemplated as
controls are designed for various city divisions. Fraud responses will
include statutorily required responses to fraud, including, but not limited
to I.C. 5-11-1-27(l) relating to the Report of Misappropriation of Funds to
State Board of Accounts and Prosecuting Attorney and I.C. 5-11-1-27(j)
relating to the Report of Material Variances, Losses, Shortages or Thefts to
the State Board of Accounts. The city shall utilize a materiality threshold
of $1,000.



         (d)   Principle 9: Management identifies, analyzes, and
responds to significant changes that could impact the internal control
system. The Board of Public Works and Safety, in coordination with department
heads, will regularly evaluate and adjust internal control policies in order
to accommodate for the impact of future changes, including but not limited
to, personnel changes, newly elected officials, new programs, new technology,
new laws and regulations, and financial fluctuations.



      (2)   Component Three: Control Activities.



         (a)   Principle 10: Management designs control
activities to achieve objectives and respond to risks.



            1.   The Board of Public Works and Safety will
establish and maintain a system of internal controls that satisfies the
city's objectives in the following categories:



               A.   Risks are identified and effectively
managed;



               B.   Safeguarding of city assets;



               C.   Reliability and integrity of financial
information;



               D.   Compliance with city policy, plans,
procedures, laws and regulations;



               E.   Economical and efficient use of city
resources;



               F.   Meeting established objectives and
goals for city operations and programs.



            2.   General internal control principles for
Departments are:



               A.   Separation of duties.



                  (i)   Duties are separated so that one
person's work routinely serves as a check on another's work.



                  (ii)   No one person has complete
control over more than one key function or activity (e.g., authorizing,
approving, certifying, disbursing, receiving, or reconciling).



               B.   Authorization and approval.



                  (i)   Proposed transactions are
authorized when proper and consistent with city policy and the department's
plans.



                  (ii)   Transactions are approved by
the person who has delegated approval authority, which is usually delegated
on the basis of special competency or knowledge.



               C.   Custodial and security arrangements.



                  (i)   Responsibility for physical
security/custody of city assets is separated from recordkeeping/accounting
for those assets.



                  (ii)   Unauthorized access to city
assets and institutional data is prevented.



               D.   Timely and accurate review and
reconciliation.



                  (i)   Departmental accounting records
and documents are examined by employees who have sufficient understanding of
the city accounting and financial systems to verify that recorded
transactions actually took place and were made in accordance with city
policies and procedures.



                  (ii)   Departmental accounting records
and documentation are compared with city accounting system reports and
financial statements to verify their reasonableness, accuracy, and
completeness.



               E.   The general internal control principles
should be applied to all departmental operations, especially accounting
records and reports, payroll, purchasing/receiving/disbursement approval,
equipment and supply inventories, cash receipts, petty cash and change funds,
billing and accounts receivable.



            3.   All city systems, processes, operations,
functions, and activities are subject to evaluations of internal control
systems. The results of these evaluations provide information regarding the
city's overall system of control.



            4.   Information and communication. Information
must be timely and communicated in a mamier that enables people to carry out
their responsibilities.



               A.   All covered employees must be trained
on internal controls according to I.C. 5-11-1-27(g).



               B.   All personnel must receive a clear
message from the city's administration that control responsibilities are to
be taken seriously. Failure to comply with established practices will subject
individuals to the terms of disciplinary action or dismissal.



               C.   Employees must understand their own
roles in the internal control system, as well as how individual activities
relate to the work of others. To this end, whenever a new budgetary unit,
financial activity, etc. is set up, the Clerk-Treasurer will provide
notification to the appropriate parties of the responsibilities incumbent on
them for good business practices and sound financial management, including
reference to the principles within this policy.



               D.   Employees must have a means of
communicating significant information to the city's administration.



               E.   The city must communicate effectively
with external parties, such as auditors, creditors, contractors, suppliers,
regulators and other stakeholders.



            5.   A.   Internal control is meant to keep the
city focused on achieving its mission while avoiding surprises. There is a
balance between effective controls and mission accomplishment. Costs
associated with internal controls should not exceed their benefit, nor should
controls be allowed to stifle mission effectiveness and timely action. All
levels of management must assess the costs, benefits, and risks when
designing controls to develop a positive control environment and compensate
for the risks of non-compliance, loss of assets, or unreliable reporting
while accomplishing the city mission.



               B.   The following specific internal control
policies are adopted for use by city departments:



                  (i)   Payroll activities.



                     a.   Salaries and wage rates are
verified by the Human Resources Department approved by the Common Council,
and approved by the Board of Public Works and Safety if a change in pay is
required.



                     b.   Salaries and wage rates are
verified by the Human Resources Department approved by the Common Council,
and approved by the Board of Public Works and Safety if a change in pay is
required.



                     c.   Salaries and wage rates are
verified by the Human Resources Department approved by the Common Council,
and approved by the Board of Public Works and Safety if a change in pay is
required, shall verify adequate funds are available for preparing payroll
transactions or inputting data.



                     d.   The responsibilities for
approving time sheets are segregated from those for preparing payroll
transactions or inputting data.



                     e.   Payroll adjustment reports
are submitted by someone outside of the payroll process.



                     f.   Employees' time and
attendance records are approved by their supervisors.



                     g.   Corrections to recorded
time and attendance records are approved by the employee and employee's
supervisor.



                     h.   Procedures are in place to
ensure that changes in employment status are promptly reported to the payroll
processing unit.



                     i.   Payroll disbursements are
reviewed and approved by an authorized individual prior to payment.



                     j.   Access to payroll
applications is appropriately controlled by user logins and passwords.



                     k.   Changes to a payroll
disbursement are approved by an individual other than the ones authorized to
process the changes.



                     l.   Payroll checks are
accounted for in numerical order and reconciled to the payroll check register.



                     m.   Access to the signature
stamp used to sign payroll checks is adequately controlled.



                     n.   Payroll checks are mailed
or distributed by someone outside the normal payroll distribution function.



                     o.   Unclaimed payroll checks
are returned to Board of Public Works and Safety via the department head.



                     p.   Employees are cross-trained
on the payroll process; those assigned to payroll take regular vacations.



                  (ii)   Disbursement activities.



                     a.   The responsibility for
approving claims is segregated from those preparing the claims.



                     b.   Checks are written by an
individual other than the one approving the claim.



                     c.   Checks are signed by an
individual other than the one preparing them.



                     d.   Claims for payment are
reviewed and approved by Board of Public Works and Safety prior to payment.



                     e.   A reconcilement is
completed between the claims for payment approved by the board and the actual
disbursements posted to the ledger.



                     f.   The responsibility for
acknowledging the receipt of goods or services is segregated from those
preparing claims and writing check.



                     g.   Vendor checks are accounted
for in numerical order and reconciled to the disbursement ledger.



                     h.   Invoices or other receipts
are attached to each claim to support the disbursement.



                     i.   A review is completed by an
individual outside the disbursement process in which the claim amount is
compared to the supporting documentation attached to the claim and the amount
of the check.



                     j.   Access to disbursement
applications is appropriately controlled by user logins and passwords.



                  (iii)   Receipting activities.



                     a.   The responsibility for
collecting money and issuing receipts is segregated from those preparing the
bank deposit.



                     b.   The responsibility for
making bank deposits is segregated from those preparing the monthly bank
reconcilement.



                     c.   Pre-numbered receipts are
issued for all money collected and the receipt is retained with supporting
documentation.



                     d.   Receipts are reconciled to
the cash receipts ledger by an individual other than the one collecting money
and issuing receipts.



                     e.   Posting of receipts to the
ledger is completed by an individual other than the one who collects money
and makes the deposit.



                     f.   Receipts indicate the type
of payment received (cash, check, etc.) and this is reconciled to the make-up
of the bank deposit.



                     g.   Accounts receivable records
are maintained by an individual other than the one(s) involved in the billing
process.



                     h.   The billing process is
completed by an individual other than the one who collects cash payments from
customers.



                     i.   Adjustments to customer
accounts above our managerial threshold are approved by the governing body
only after review.



                  (iv)   Cash activities.



                     a.   A reconcilement between the
recorded cash balance and the bank balance is completed monthly by an
individual separate from the receipting and disbursing processes.



                     b.   A reconcilement between the
receipts ledger and the credits to the bank account is completed periodically
by an individual separate of the receipting process.



                     c.   A reconcilement between the
disbursement ledger and the debits to the bank account is completed
periodically by an individual separate of the disbursement process.



                     d.   The monthly reconcilement
between the cash balance and the bank balance is thoroughly reviewed and
approved by the governing body.



                     e.   Disbursements from and
reimbursements to petty cash funds are periodically reviewed by an individual
other than the one responsible for maintaining the petty cash fund.



                     f.   Petty cash shall be audited
by the Clerk Treasurer as often as he/she deems necessary and whenever a
department head is replaced.



                  (v)   Credit card transactions. The
use of credit or procurement cards drawn on the City of Frankfort by any
employee is strictly prohibited unless such use has been authorized by such
employee's department head for a purpose permitted by law and a written
agreement for use of such card, as approved by the Board of Public Works and
Safety, has been executed as required by Ordinance No. 09-01.



         (b)   Principle 11: Management designs the political
subdivision's information system and related control activities to achieve
objectives and respond to risks. The Board of Public Works and Safety and
department heads will work with information technology professionals and
contractors to ensure that information technology is used as an integral part
of the internal control system. This may include, but not be limited to:



            1.   Setting permission such that only certain
users may perform certain tasks.



            2.   Using technology to accomplish segregation of
duties by forcing duties to be completed by different users.



            3.   Automating certain processes and calculations.



            4.   Limiting the authority to access different
components of various soft wares to employees with duties specifically
related to that component.



            5.   Prohibiting user ID and password sharing
among employees.



            6.   Restricting the authority to correct or make
adjustments to records to key employees.



            7.   Requiring the use of prescribed forms or the
approval of alternative forms.



         (c)   Principle 12: Management implements control
activities through policies. The city has an employee handbook that is
regularly updated to communicate policies to employees. Additionally, the
Board of Public Works and Safety regularly works with departments and
employees who handle financial transactions to recommend and ensure best
practices. All procedures are in writing and communicated frequently to all
relevant employees. Policies are available both electronically and in hard
copy form.



      (3)   Component Four: Information and Communication.



         (a)   Principle 13: Management uses quality information
to achieve the political subdivision's objectives. The city strives to lead
in the areas of financial transparency and accountability. By adopting
standards and investing in systems that exceed state mandated minimums, city
management provides employees and stakeholders with high quality information
and informatics systems.



         (b)   Principle 14: Management internally communicates
the necessary quality information to achieve the political subdivision's
objectives. Internal communications on internal controls are communicated
through adoption of formal policies by relevant boards and commissions and/or
the legislative body or documented through memos from the finance, legal or
relevant department head. Internal memos and reports are maintained to
document communication.



         (c)   Principle 15: Management externally communicates
the necessary quality information to achieve the entity's objectives.
Communications with the State Board of Accounts, other state agencies,
grantor agencies, and regulatory agencies are documented by email, memos,
letters, and other forms of written correspondence. Logs are kept for
information provided verbally. All documents are maintained in accordance
with the city and state's record retention policies. Reports and policies are
cross checked for accuracy, relevancy, and timeliness of information.



      (4)   Component Five: Monitoring Activities.



         (a)   Principle 16: Management establishes and operates
monitoring activities to monitor the internal control system and evaluate the
results.



            1.   City administration monitors and evaluates
compliance with internal control policies via multiple vectors. Separation of
duties, redundancy polices, layered approval systems, monthly reports, and
physical controls such as video monitoring allow management to both review
and evaluate control systems.



            2.   The Board of Public Works and Safety shall
implement a system of monitoring that includes:



               A.   Periodic checks to determine if
controls are in place and working effectively.



               B.   Reviewing control activities to
determine if the actual activities are in compliance with established
procedures.



               C.   Documenting deficiencies in the
internal control processes and remediating them quickly. Monitoring
activities will be documented by signatures, initials, or other appropriate
methods.



         (b)   Principle 17: Management remediates identified
internal control deficiencies on a timely basis. Breaches of internal
controls are subject to significant levels of internal scrutiny. If informed
of a material breach of internal controls, the Board of Public Works and
Safety and Mayor's Office actively investigate and address said breach and
adjust policies and procedures to prevent such breaches in the fixture. Once
breaches are identified and investigated, a formal or informal corrective
action plan will be developed.



(Ord. 16-10, passed 6-27-16)



§ 36.08  MATERIALITY THRESHOLDS FOR REPORTING IRREGULAR VARIANCES, LOSSES,
SHORTAGES, AND THEFTS.



   (A)   The materiality threshold at and above which the city shall
report incidents of material variances, losses, shortages, or thefts to the
State Board of Accounts is:



      (1)   A one-time cash loss of at least $1,000; or



      (2)   A recurring cash loss of at least $1,000 average per
month; or



      (3)   A value of property valued in an amount of at least
$1,000 for a simple incident; or



      (4)   A creation of additional liabilities of at least $1,000.



   (B)   When an incident involving any variance, loss, shortage or
suspected theft of funds or property has been discovered by or brought to the
attention of an employee of the city by any means or by any other person,
such incident shall be reported to the employee’s department head who
shall, in turn, report the incident to the Clerk-Treasurer and to the Mayor.
All documentation relevant to the incident shall be maintained on file by the
Clerk-Treasurer for the period required by statute for record retention,
regardless of whether or not the incident is determined to be material.



   (C)   If either the Clerk-Treasurer or the Mayor determines that an
incident involving a variance, loss, shortage or suspected theft of any city
funds or property is material and meets a threshold standard as defined
above, the Clerk-Treasurer shall immediately report the material incident to
the State Board of Accounts.



   (D)   Any public officer of the city who has actual knowledge of or
reasonable cause to believe that there has been a misappropriation of public
funds or assets of the city, including:



      (1)   Information obtained as a result of a police report;



      (2)   An internal audit finding; or



      (3)   Another source indicating that a misappropriation has
occurred;



shall immediately send written notice of the misappropriation to the State
Board of Accounts and to the Prosecutor of Clinton County, Indiana.



(Ord. 16-02, passed 3-28-16)



FUNDS



§ 36.10  CUMULATIVE CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT FUND.



   (A)   For the purpose of this section the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS.  The construction or improvement of any property
owned by the city, including but not limited to thoroughfares, streets, and
sewers; the retirement of general obligation bonds of the city issued; and
the proceeds from the bonds used for the purpose of constructing capital
improvements.  The term CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT shall not include salaries of
any public officials or employees except those which are directly chargeable
to a capital improvement.  ('75 Code, §  2.07)



   (B)   In accordance with the requirements of I.C. 6-7-1-31.1, there
is hereby created a special fund to be known as the Cumulative Capital
Improvement Fund, into which the cigarette taxes allotted to the city, by
reason of I.C. 6-7-1-30.1, shall be deposited.  The fund shall be a
cumulative fund and all of the monies deposited into the fund shall be
appropriated and used solely for capital improvements as herein defined. 
None of the monies shall revert to the general fund or be used for any
purpose other than capital improvements.



('75 Code, § 2.06)



(Ord. 4-332, passed 11-2-65)



§ 36.11  CUMULATIVE FIREFIGHTING EQUIPMENT FUND.



   (A)   There is hereby reestablished the Frankfort Cumulative
Firefighting Equipment Fund.



   (B)   An ad valorem property tax levy shall be imposed and the
revenues from the levy shall be retained in the Frankfort Cumulative
Firefighting Fund.



   (C)   The maximum rate of levy under division (B) will not exceed
.0500 per $100 Assessed Valuation for 2005.



   (D)   The Frankfort Cumulative Firefighting Equipment Fund is
established until such time as the fund is rescinded or revised.



   (E)   The funds accumulated in the Frankfort Cumulative Firefighting
Equipment Fund may be used for the following purposes:



      (1)   The purchase of firefighting equipment for the use of
the fire department, including the required payments under a lease rental
with option to purchase agreement made to acquire the equipment.



      (2)   The purchase, construction, renovation or addition to
buildings or purchase of land used by the fire department serving the unit.



   (F)   Notwithstanding the limitations of division (E), with prior
approval from the Common Council, funds accumulated in the Frankfort
Firefighting Equipment Fund may be spent for purposes other than those stated
in division (E) if the purpose is to protect the public health, welfare or
safety in an emergency situation and immediate action is required.



   (G)   This fund takes effect upon approval of the Department of
Local Government Finance.



('75 Code, §  2.08)  (Ord. CO-04-14, passed 7-26-04)



§ 36.12  COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT BLOCK GRANT FUND.



   The Common Council approves of the following actions which are
necessary to move the community development programs into implementation.



   (A)   The Common Council authorizes the establishment of a new city
fund and designates this fund as the Community Development Block Grant Fund.



   (B)   The Common Council authorizes an initial cash balance of
$20,000 be loaned annually by the city from the General Fund to the Community
Development Block Grant Fund, to enable standard federal reimbursement
procedures to begin.  This initial cash loan shall return to the General
Fund annually.



(Ord. CO-75-17, passed 12-17-75)



§ 36.13  MOTOR VEHICLE INSPECTION FUND.



   (A)   Fees imposed. A fee of $5 shall be imposed for each motor
vehicle inspected. The revenue from the inspection fees shall be receipted in
a special motor vehicle inspection fund.



   (B)   Creation of Special Motor Vehicle Inspection Fund.  Pursuant
to I.C. 9-17-2-12 the city hereby creates a Special Motor Vehicle Inspection
Fund. Upon the completion of an inspection of a motor vehicle and upon
remittance of a fee for such inspection, the police officer administering
such inspection shall issue an official receipt, to the owner of the motor
vehicle. The information from the inspection shall be recorded on an
application form prepared by the Bureau of Motor Vehicles. The fees collected
shall be remitted to the Clerk-Treasurer on a daily basis.



   (C)   Appropriation of revenue.  The revenue collected for such
motor vehicle inspection shall be appropriated only for law enforcement
purposes. All expenditures shall be processed, appropriated, claimed and
allowed in the same manner as other claims of the city.



(Ord. CO-92-7, passed 6-22-92)



§ 36.14  INFRACTION DEFERRAL PROGRAM FUND.



   (A)   There is hereby established a non-reverting city user fund
under the name of Infraction Deferral Program Fund, pursuant to I.C.
33-37-8-3.  All fees collected by the Clerk of the Frankfort City Court
under the prosecuting attorney's infraction deferral program and transferred
to the City Treasurer shall be deposited in said fund.



   (B)   The Infraction Deferral Program Fund shall be administered by
the Treasurer pursuant to I.C. 33- 37-8-3.



   (C)   Expenditures from said fund shall be subject to the provisions
and conditions contained in I.C. 33-37-8-3 and 33-37-8-4 and to all other
applicable statutes of Indiana pertaining to the appropriation and use of
public funds.



   (D)   All monies remaining in the fund at the end of each fiscal
year shall not revert to the general fund, but shall be carried forward in
the Infraction Deferral Program Fund.



   (E)   All references herein to provisions of the Indiana Code shall
be deemed to mean and refer to said provisions, including all amendments
thereto and all replacements thereof.



(Ord. 07-06, passed 7-23-07)



§ 36.15  PRETRIAL DIVERSION PROGRAM FUND.



   (A)   There is hereby established pursuant to I.C. 33-37-8-3 a
non-reverting fund under the name of Pretrial Diversion Program Fund.  All
pretrial diversion program fees collected by the Clerk of the Frankfort City
Court and transferred by the Clerk to the City Treasurer shall be deposited
in said fund.



   (B)   The Pretrial Diversion Program Fund shall be administered by
the Treasurer pursuant to I.C. 33- 37-8-3.



   (C)   Expenditures from said fund shall be subject to the provisions
and conditions contained in I.C. 33-37-8-3 and 33-37-8-4 and to all other
applicable statutes of Indiana pertaining to the appropriation and use of
public funds.



   (D)   All monies remaining in the fund at the end of each fiscal
year shall not revert to the general fund, but shall be carried forward in
the Pretrial Diversion Program Fund.



   (E)   All references herein to provisions of the Indiana Code shall
be deemed to mean and refer to said provisions, including all amendments
thereto and all replacements thereof.



(Ord. 07-07, passed 7-23-07)



§ 36.16  CUMULATIVE CAPITAL DEVELOPMENT FUND.



   (A)   The Cumulative Capital Development Fund, as initially
established by Ordinance No. 09-05, is hereby re-established and shall be
funded by levy of a tax at the rate of $0.0500 per $100 of assessed valuation
pursuant to I.C. 36-9-15.5-6. The tax rate shall be levied beginning with
taxes assessed for 2014, payable in 2015.



   (B)   The Cumulative Capital Development Fund shall be held in a
special fund as provided in I.C. 36-9-15.5-8(a) and shall be used in
accordance with the provisions of I.C. 36-9-15.5 and all other applicable and
related provisions of the Indiana Code.



   (C)   A certified copy of this section shall be submitted to the
Department of Local Government Finance of the State of Indiana as provided by
law. The Cumulative Capital Development Fund re-established hereby is subject
to approval by the Department of Local Government Finance.



(Ord 09-15, passed 7-27-09; Am. Ord. 14-07, passed 6-23-14)



§ 36.17  PROMOTION OF BUSINESS FUND.



   (A)   A fund is hereby recognized and established to promote
economic development and tourism titled the “Frankfort Promotion of
Business Fund.”



   (B)   (1)   Funds appropriated by the Council to the Fund shall
be used to pay the expenses of or to reimburse city officials and volunteers
acting on behalf of the city, as the case may be, for expenses incurred in
promoting economic development and tourism in the city.  Such expenses may
include, but are not limited to, rental of meeting places, meals, mileage,
decorations, memorabilia, awards, expenses incurred in promoting industrial,
commercial, and residential development, expenses incurred in developing
relations with other units of government and any other expenses of a civic or
governmental nature deemed by the Mayor and/or the Board of Public Works and
Safety to be in the best interest of the city.  More specifically, in
addition to the general promotional purposes set forth above, the funds may
be used for, but shall not be limited to, the following:



         (a)   VFW (flags);



         (b)   Friends of Scouting;



         (c)   Reimbursement of out-of-pocket expenses of
volunteers performing services for the benefit of and at the request of the
city;



         (d)   Newspaper, radio, and television advertising;



         (e)   Frankfort Hot Dog Festival;



         (f)   Awards and keys to the city;



         (g)   Community link;



         (h)   Summers Edge (flags and signs);



         (i)   Jaycees (fireworks and events);



         (j)   Bottled water and refreshments;



         (k)   Purchase of city promotional items such as pens,
pencils, note pads for distribution containing the logo and name of the city
distributed for advertising and promotional purposes.



      (2)   It shall be appropriate and proper for the Mayor of the
city and for the Board of Public Works and Safety to utilize funds for the
purposes set forth hereinabove to promote the economic development and
tourism of the city.  Any expenses to be reimbursed to city officials or to
volunteers acting on behalf of the city shall be verified by claim submitted
to and approved by the Board of Public Works and Safety.



(Ord. 14-14, passed 10-27-14)



FEES



§ 36.20  FEES CHARGED BY CITY OFFICIALS.



   The following fees shall be charged by city officials when requested to
furnish copies of reports and data:



   (A)   Traffic and fire reports:



      Local residents and insurance agents   $5.00



      Non-residents, insurance agents and adjusters   $15.00



   (B)   Photographs:



      Local residents and insurance agents   $5.00 per photo



      Non-residents, insurance agents and adjusters   $25.00 per
photo



   (C)   Hand gun transfers   $5.00



   (D)   Criminal histories   $7.00



   (E)   Motor vehicle inspections   $5.00 per vehicle



   (F)   Copying documents   $.10 per page for not color copies



               $.25 per page for color copies



   (G)   Certification of document   $5.00 per document certified



   (I)   All offices and departments within the city are authorized to
require prepayment or deposit for copying and certification charges imposed
under this section.



(Ord. 92-8, passed 6-22-92; Am. Ord. 09-14, passed 8-10-09)



§ 36.21  DISPOSITION OF CIVIL PENALTIES AND CIVIL FINES FOR MUNICIPAL
ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   Any and all civil penalties and civil fines collected as a
result of judgments for ordinance violations entered by Frankfort City Court,
Clinton Circuit Court and Clinton Superior Court, except for civil fines and
penalties collected as a result of ordinance violations under Chapters 96 and
98 of this Code, shall be distributed as follows:



      (1)   One-half to the Police Equipment Fund No. 326;



      (2)   One-fourth to the city General Fund; and



      (3)   One-fourth to the Clerk-Treasurer's Administrative Fund
No. 327.



   (B)   Any and all civil penalties and civil fines collected as a
result of judgments entered by any of the foregoing courts for violations of
Chapters 96 and 98 of this Code shall be distributed as follows:



      (1)   One-half to the City Engineer's Equipment, Training and
Supply Fund No. 328;



      (2)   One-fourth to the city General Fund; and



      (3)   One-fourth to the Clerk-Treasurer's Administrative Fund
No. 327.



(Ord. 09-03, passed 3-9-09)



§ 36.22  FEE FOR VARIOUS PROPERTY APPLICATIONS.



   (A)   A fee of $250 shall hereafter by charged to an applicant for
each application filed with the city for determination of an economic
revitalization area and/or application for property tax abatement.



   (B)   Such fee shall be paid to the Clerk-Treasurer for deposit into
the city’s General Fund.



(Ord. 15-04, passed 8-10-15)



PURCHASING ADMINISTRATION



§ 36.25  PURCHASING AGENCIES.



   (A)   The Board of Public Works and Safety is designated as the
Purchasing Agency for all Executive Branch departments, commissions, agencies
and other establishments of the city, except for the Common Council, Utility
Service Board, Auditor, Billing Office, Water Works, Wastewater Treatment
Plant, Sewer Maintenance, and City Light and Power.



   (B)   The Common Council is designated as the Purchasing Agency for
the Common Council.



   (C)   The Clerk-Treasurer is designated as the Purchasing Agency for
all Fiscal Branch Departments and establishments within his or her control
and authority.



   (D)   The Frankfort Utility Service Board and all Utility department
heads are designated as the Purchasing Agency for all activities and
establishments within its control and authority.



(Res. 04-01, passed 3-8-04)



§ 36.26  AUTHORIZATION.



   Each Purchasing Agency shall have all the powers and duties authorized
a Purchasing Agency under I.C. 5-22.



(Res. 04-01, passed 3-8-04)



§ 36.27  DESIGNATION OF PURCHASING AGENT.



   Each Purchasing Agency may designate, in writing, department heads and
other appropriate officials as purchasing agents.



(Res. 04-01, passed 3-8-04)



§ 36.28  DESIGNATION BY TITLE.



   Purchasing agents shall be designated by job title and not by
individual name.



(Res. 04-01, passed 3-8-04)



§ 36.29  DESIGNATION OF DEPUTY PURCHASING AGENTS.



   Each Purchasing Agency may grant its purchasing agents the authority to
designate an appropriate number of deputy purchasing agents for their
respective or functional units.



(Res. 04-01, passed 3-8-04)



§ 36.30  LIST OF AGENTS.



   A list of all purchasing agents and deputy purchasing agents for each
department or functional unit shall be maintained and updated as needed by
each Purchasing Agency and a copy of each such list shall be provided to and
maintained in the Clerk-Treasurer’s Office.



(Res. 04-01, passed 3-8-04)



§ 36.31  APPROVAL REQUIREMENTS.



   Prior to the approval, acceptance or execution of any purchase,
contract, amendment, change order, agreement or understanding which
contemplates the use of city funds, by any officer, board, or agency of the
city.  Such proposed purchase, contract, amendment, change order, agreement
or understanding which contemplates the use of city funds, must specify in a
permanently printed manner on the face of the first page of the document at
the time the document is presented for approval, the appropriation numbers
and amounts intended to be utilized for the purchase, contract, amendment,
change order, agreement or understanding which contemplates the use of city
funds, and upon the approval, acceptance, or execution of the purchase,
contract, amendment, change order, agreement or understanding which
contemplates the use of city funds, such sum shall be encumbered for such
purpose.  If the information required by the subsection is not provided at
the time of approval, the approval of the purchase, contract, amendment,
change order, agreement or understanding which contemplates the use of city
funds, is not valid and the purchase, contract, amendment, change order,
agreement or understanding which contemplates the use of city funds is null
and void.



(Res. 04-01, passed 3-8-04)



§ 36.32  PURCHASING REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Pursuant to the provisions in I.C. 5-22 et seq. the Board of
Public Works and Safety of the city is the Purchasing Agency for the city
government.



   (B)   Pursuant to I.C. 5-22 et seq. each department head is
designated as an additional purchasing agent and the Board of Public Works
and Safety may designate in writing additional deputy purchasing agents as
are necessary.



   (C)   Any purchasing agent herein designated may make purchases on
the open market without notices or bids if the purchase is less than $25,000.



   (D)   The Board of Public Works and Safety may adopt any rule or
policy consistent with I.C. 5-22 for small purchases and for services. 
Purchase orders and quotes are required for purchases over $1,000.



   (E)   Each purchasing agent may purchase services in any manner the
purchasing agent determines to be appropriate.



   (F)   The purchasing agents shall purchase supplies manufactured in
the United States unless any of the following applies:



      (1)   The supplies are not manufactured in the United States
in reasonably available quantities;



      (2)   The price of the supplies manufactured in the United
States exceeds by an unreasonable amount the price on available and
comparable supplies manufactured outside the United States;



      (3)   The quality of the supplies is substantially less than
the quality of comparably priced available supplies manufactured outside of
the United States; and



      (4)   The purchase of supplies manufactured in the United
States is not in the public interest.



(Ord. CO 04-04, passed 3-22-04)



RESIDENTIAL TAX ABATEMENTS



§ 36.40  DEDUCTIONS.



   That deductions relating to the construction of residential real
property shall be granted by the Council only when the Council finds that the
facility to be constructed is located in an economic development target area
following findings by the Council made pursuant to I.C. 6-1.1-12.1-7 and the
further provisions of this subchapter.



(Ord. CO-04-31, passed 1-10-05; Am. Ord. CO-06-13, passed 3-27-06; Am. Ord.
CO-07-01, passed 1-8-07)



§ 36.41  COUNCIL FINDINGS.



   Before the Common Council determines that an abatement is appropriate
for real property within an economic development target area, and after
following procedures required by I.C. 6-1.1-12.1-7, the Council shall make
all the following findings pertaining to said property:



   (A)   That the facility to be constructed consists of new
construction intended for the habitation of a single-family unit;



   (B)   That the applicant has not initiated his or her redevelopment
project prior to having submitted a completed statement of benefits form to
the Council; and



   (C)   That the construction of the facility will commence not later
than 12 months from the date that the Common Council passes its confirming
resolution under I.C. 6-1.1-12.25(c); and



   (D)   (1)   That the total project for which the applicant seeks
abatement consists of not less than one separate free standing structure,
which shall be intended for residential usage as an owner occupied single-
family dwelling.



      (2)   The term OWNER OCCUPIED SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING shall
include single-family homes and buildings constructed Indiana's Horizontal
Property Law, as amended. Multi-family units shall not qualify for the
deduction allowed hereunder for residential tax abatement, but may qualify
for real property tax deduction as may otherwise be allowable under I.C.
6-1.1-12.1.



   (E)   Any abatement allowed pursuant to this subchapter shall be
over a three-year period.  The percentage to be used in calculating
deductions on real property improvements over such three-year period shall be
as follows:



         Year of deduction         Percentage abated



         1st                     100%



         2nd                     66%



         3rd                     33%



(Ord. CO-04-31, passed 1-10-05; Am. Ord. CO-06-13, passed 3-27-06; Am. Ord.
CO-07-01, passed 1-8-07)



§ 36.42  FEES.



   The Clerk Treasurer for the city shall be entitled to charge a
reasonable fee payable to the “City of Frankfort” for applications for
the aforesaid residential tax abatement.  This fee shall be $250 per
single-family unit that has applied for abatement. This fee is nonrefundable
and shall be paid to the Clerk-Treasurer for deposit into the city’s
General Fund.



(Ord. CO-04-31, passed 1-10-05; Am. Ord. CO-06-13, passed 3-27-06; Am. Ord.
CO-07-01, passed 1-8-07; Am. Ord. 15-04, passed 8-10-15)



TITLE V:  PUBLIC WORKS



   Chapter



      50.   ELECTRIC UTILITY



      51.   SEWERS



      52.   WATERWORKS



      53.   STORM SEWER SYSTEM



      54.   STORM WATER RUNOFF; CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES



CHAPTER 50:  ELECTRIC UTILITY



Section



General Provisions



   50.01   Definitions



Rates and Charges



   50.05   Rate A schedule - residential service



   50.06   Rate B schedule - commercial service



   50.07   Rate C schedule - general power service



   50.08   Rate PPL schedule - primary power and light service



   50.09   Rate IP schedule - industrial power service



   50.10   Rate OL schedule - outdoor lighting service



   50.11   Rate SL schedule - public street lighting service



   50.12   Rate adjustment



   50.13   Purchased power cost tracking



   50.14   Schedule for economic development tracker



Rules and Regulations



   50.15   Customer deposits



   50.16   Written application, contract may be required



   50.17   Description of equipment to be connected to service



   50.18   Commencement of service



   50.19   Connection of lines to customer's facilities



   50.20   General power service (Rate C)



   50.21   Primary power and light service (Rate PPL)



   50.22   Temporary service



   50.23   Multiple dwellings



   50.24   Multiple use premises



   50.25   Power installations



   50.26   Fluctuating or intermittent loads



   50.27   Neon or fluorescent equipment



   50.28   Inside wiring and equipment



   50.29   Installation of meters; location



   50.30   Meter failure



   50.31   Increasing load; notice required



   50.32   Extension of lines, facilities by utility



   50.33   Access to premises



   50.34   Utility not liable for interrupted service



   50.35   Right of utility to shut off service



   50.36   Basis of utility rates



   50.37   Delinquent bills; collection charge, discontinuance of
service



   50.38   Customer wants service discontinued



   50.39   Fee for returned checks



   50.40   Fee for service calls



   50.41   Net metering



   50.42   Meter test fee



   50.43   Reconnection charge



Cross-reference:



   Borrowing funds from city utilities, see §  34.01



   Utility Employees Retirement Fund, see §§  35.10 through 35.27



   Utility Service Board, see §  34.03



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 50.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   MONTH.  The period between any two consecutive regular readings by the
utility of the meter or meters on the premises, such readings being taken as
nearly as practicable every 30 days.



('75 Code, § 6.33)



RATES AND CHARGES



§ 50.05  RATE A SCHEDULE - RESIDENTIAL SERVICE.



   (A)   Availability.  Available through one meter to individual
customers for single phase residential service, including lighting, household
appliances, refrigeration, cooking, water heating and small motors not
exceeding three horsepower individual capacity.



   (B)   Character of service.  Alternating current, 60 Hertz, single
phase, at a voltage of approximately 120 volts two-wire, or 120/240 volts
three-wire.



   (C)   Rate, subject to the provisions of § 50.12.



 

Customer charge per month
 
$8


Energy charge per kWh
 
$0.099021 per kWh



   



   (D)   Minimum charge.  The minimum monthly charge shall be the
customer charge.



('75 Code, § 6.01)  (Ord. CO-72-13, passed 12-20-72; Am. Ord. CO-74- 14,
passed 10-2-74; Am. Ord. CO-76-24, passed 11-17-76; Am. Ord. CO- 78-9, passed
5-3-78; Am. Ord. CO-83-3, passed 4-25-83; Am. Ord. 97- 12, passed 10-27-97;
Am. Ord. 16-17, passed 11-14-16; Am. Ord. 17-11, passed 9-12-17)



Cross-reference:



   Inapplicable to multiple use premises, see §  50.24



§ 50.06  RATE B SCHEDULE - COMMERCIAL SERVICE.



   (A)   Availability.  Available through one meter for single phase
commercial service including lighting, miscellaneous small appliances,
refrigeration, cooking, water heating, and incidental small motors not
exceeding five horsepower individual capacity.



   (B)   Character of service.  Alternating current, 60 Hertz, single
phase, at a voltage of approximately 120 volts two-wire or 120/240 volts
three-wire.



   (C)   Rate, subject to the provisions of § 50.12.



 

Customer charge per month
 
$15


Energy charge per kWh
 
$0.103273 per kWh



 



   (D)   Minimum charge.  The minimum monthly charge shall be the
customer charge.



('75 Code, § 6.02)  (Ord. CO-72-13, passed 12-20-72; Am. Ord. CO-74- 14,
passed 10-2-74; Am. Ord. CO-76-24, passed 11-17-76; Am. Ord. CO- 78-9, passed
5-3-78; Am. Ord. CO-83-3, passed 4-25-83; Am. Ord. 97- 12, passed 10-27-97;
Am. Ord. 16-17, passed 11-14-16; Am. Ord. 17-11, passed 9-12-17)



§ 50.07  RATE C SCHEDULE - GENERAL POWER SERVICE.



   (A)   Availability.  Available to any customer for light and/or
power purposes who are located on or adjacent to a distribution line of the
utility which is adequate and suitable for supplying the services required.



   (B)   Character of service.  Alternating current, 60 Hertz, at a
voltage which is standard with the utility in the area served.



   (C)   Rate, subject to the provisions of § 50.12.



 

Customer charge per month
 
$30


Energy charge per kWh
 
$0.098068 per kWh



 



   (D)   Minimum charge.  The minimum monthly charge shall be the
customer charge.



('75 Code, § 6.03)  (Ord. CO-72-13, passed 12-20-72; Am. Ord. CO-74- 14,
passed 10-2-74; Am. Ord. CO-76-24, passed 11-17-76; Am. Ord. CO- 78-9, passed
5-3-78; Am. Ord. CO-83-3, passed 4-25-83; Am. Ord. 97- 12, passed 10-27-97;
Am. Ord. 16-17, passed 11-14-16; Am. Ord. 17-11, passed 9-12-17)



§ 50.08  RATE PPL SCHEDULE - PRIMARY POWER AND LIGHT SERVICE.



   (A)   Availability.  Available through one meter for any customer
contracting for a specified capacity of not less than 25 kilovolt-amperes.
Applicant must agree to a one-year term of service and must be located
adjacent to an electric transmission or distribution line of the utility that
is adequate and suitable for supplying the service required.



   (B)   Character of service.  Alternating current having a frequency
of 60 Hertz and at a voltage which is standard with the utility in the area
served.



   (C)   Rate, subject to the provisions of § 50.12.



 

Customer charge per month
 
$60


Maximum load charge
 
$18.398 per kVA of billing maximum load


Energy charge
 
$0.040554 per kWh for all kWh



 



   (D)   Minimum charge.  The minimum monthly charge shall be the
customer charge.



   (E)   Measurement of maximum load and energy.  Maximum load shall
be measured by suitable instruments provided by the utility, and in any month
the maximum load expressed in kilovot-amperes shall be the average number of
kilowatts in the 30-minute interval in such month during which the energy
metered is greater than in any other such 30-minute interval in such month,
divided by the average lagging power factor (expressed as a decimal)
calculated for the month. Energy shall be measured by suitable integrating
instruments provided by the utility.



   (F)   Billing maximum load.  The billing maximum load for any month
shall be the maximum load for the month, but in no month shall the billing
maximum load be less than 25 kilovolt-amperes.



   (G)   Metering adjustment.  If service is metered at a voltage of
approximately 480 volts or lower, the maximum load and energy measurements
shall be increased by 2% to convert such measurements to the equivalent of
metering at the utility's primary voltage.



   (H)   Equipment supplied by customer.  When customer furnishes and
maintains the complete substation equipment, including any and all
transformers, and/or switches and/or the equipment necessary to take his
entire service at the primary voltage of the transmission or distribution
line from which is to be received, a credit of $0.34 per KVA of billing
maximum load will be applied to each month's net bill.



   (I)   Off-peak service. When customer elects to take electric
service during the following designated off-peak periods, the following
provisions will apply:



      (1)   Measurement of maximum load and energy. Maximum load
shall be measured by suitable recording instruments and, in any month the
maximum load for the on-peak hours shall be the highest 30-minute
kilovolt-ampere load calculated during such on-peak hours and the maximum
load for the off-peak hours shall be the highest 30-minute kilovolt-ampere
load calculated during such off-peak hours. Such 30- minute kilovolt-ampere
loads shall be calculated in accordance with the measurement of maximum load
and energy provisions of Rate PPL based on the use of the average lagging
power factor for both periods.



      (2)   Billing maximum load. The billing maximum load for any
month shall be the greatest of (1) the maximum load established during
on-peak hours for the month, or (2) 50% of the maximum load established
during off-peak hours for the month, but in no month shall the billing
maximum load be less than 500 kilovolt-amperes.



      (3)   Off-peak periods. Off-peak periods shall be all hours
between 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., local time, Monday through Friday, and all
hours of the day on Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays. Legal holidays
shall include New Year’s Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day,
Thanksgiving and Christmas Day.



      (4)   Special terms and conditions. The availability of off-
peak service shall be limited to an aggregate load of not more than 5,000
kilowatts on a first-come, first-serve basis.



('75 Code, § 6.04)  (Ord. CO-72-13, passed 12-20-72; Am. Ord. CO-74- 14,
passed 10-2-74; Am. Ord. CO-76-24, passed 11-17-76; Am. Ord. CO- 78-9, passed
5-3-78; Am. Ord. CO-83-3, passed 4-25-83; Am. Ord. CO- 90-10, passed 6-25-90;
Am. Ord. 97-12, passed 10-27-97; Am. Ord. 16-17, passed 11-14-16; Am. Ord.
17-11, passed 9-12-17)



§ 50.09  RATE IP SCHEDULE - INDUSTRIAL POWER SERVICE.



   (A)   Availability.  Available through one meter to any customer
having a minimum load requirement of ten megawatts or more and directly fed
from the utility’s 69kV transmission system. Applicant must be located
adjacent to the utility’s transmission line that is adequate and suitable
for supplying the services requested.



   (B)   Character of service.  Alternating current having a frequency
of 60 Hertz and furnished at a voltage which is standard with the utility in
the area served.



   (C)   Rate, subject to the provisions of § 50.12.



 

Customer charge
 
$600 per meter per month


Demand charge
 
$24.40 per KVA of billing demand


Energy charge
 
$0.028682 per kWh for all kWh



 



   (D)   Minimum charge.  The minimum monthly charge shall be the
customer charge.



   (E)   Determination of peak demand and measurement of energy. Peak
demand shall be measured by suitable recording instruments provided by the
utility and shall be the average number of kilo-volt amperes in the 15-minute
period during which the kilovolt-ampere demand is greater than any other
15-minute interval in such month. For those customers who are not being
metered by the use of a recording instrument, the peak demand, expressed in
kilo-volt amperes, shall be the average number of kilowatts in the recorded
15- minute interval in such month during which the energy metered is greater
than in any other such 15-minute interval in such month, divided by the
lagging power factor (expressed as a decimal) calculated for the month. For
billing purposes, the billing demand shall be the greater of the peak demand
occurring during the month or ten MVA. Energy shall be measured by suitable
integrating instruments.



   (F)   Metering adjustment.  If service is metered at a voltage of
approximately 13,800 volts or lower, the peak demand and energy measurements
shall be increased by 2% to convert such measurements to the equivalent of
metering at the utility's primary voltage.



   (H)   Equipment ownership. Customer must own all equipment necessary
to transform the power from 138kV to its suitable working voltage. This
equipment must include but is not limited to structures, foundations, large
power transformer, switches, breakers, station batteries, relay protection
and control, CTs, PTs, security, and the like. Customer is responsible for
proper routine maintenance on its customer owned equipment in accordance with
industry best practices.



(Ord. 16-17, passed 11-14-16; Am. Ord. 17-11, passed 9-12-17)



§ 50.10  RATE OL SCHEDULE - OUTDOOR LIGHTING SERVICE.



   (A)   Availability.  Available only for continuous year-round
service for outdoor lighting to any residential, farm, commercial, or
industrial customer located adjacent to an electric distribution line of
utility.



   (B)   Character of service.  Outdoor lighting service using lamps
available under this schedule and controlled by a photoelectric relay.



   (C)   Rate, subject to the provisions of § 50.12. 



 


Type of Lamp

 

Rate per Lamp per Month





175 Watt Mercury Vapor
 

$  6.24



250 Watt Mercury Vapor
 

$  7.83



400 Watt Mercury Vapor
 

$  8.97



100 Watt Sodium Vapor
 

$  3.67



150 Watt Sodium Vapor
 

$  4.31



250 Watt Sodium Vapor
 

$  5.64



400 Watt Sodium Vapor
 

$  7.26




Type of Lamp - Flood

 

Rate per Lamp per Month



Watt Mercury Vapor 400
 

$  7.61



Watt Mercury Vapor 150
 

$11.37



Watt Sodium Vapor 250
 

$  4.65



Watt Sodium Vapor 400
 

$  7.12



Watt Sodium Vapor 250
 

$10.43





 



   (D)   Ownership of system.  All facilities installed by utility for
service hereunder, including fixtures, controls, poles, transformers,
secondary lines, lamps and other appurtenances shall be owned and maintained
by utility. All service and necessary maintenance shall be performed only
during regularly scheduled working hours of utility.  Non-operative lamps
will normally be restored to service within 48 hours after notification by
customer.



   (E)   Hours of lighting.  All lamps shall burn approximately one-
half hour after sunset until approximately one-half hour before sunrise each
day in the year, approximately 4,000 hours per annum.



('75 Code, § 6.05)  (Ord. CO-72-13, passed 12-20-72; Am. Ord. CO-74- 14,
passed 10-2-74; Am. Ord. CO-76-24, passed 11-17-76; Am. Ord. CO- 78-9, passed
5-3-78; Am. Ord. CO-83-3, passed 4-25-83; Am. Ord. 97- 12, passed 10-27-97;
Am. Ord. 16-17, passed 11-14-16; Am. Ord. 17-11, passed 9-12-17)



§ 50.11  RATE SL SCHEDULE - PUBLIC STREET LIGHTING SERVICE.



   (A)   Availability.  Available for street lighting within the
corporate limits of the city and highway lighting within the area served by
the utility's distribution system.



   (B)   Character of service.  Standard street lighting service using
lamps available under this schedule.



   (C)   Rate, subject to the provisions of § 50.12.



 

Type of Lamp
 
Rate per Lamp per Month




Overhead Service


295 Watt Incandescent
 

$  8.84



100 Watt Mercury Vapor
 

$  5.14



175 Watt Mercury Vapor
 

$  7.34



250 Watt Mercury Vapor
 

$  8.08



400 Watt and over Mercury Vapor
 

$10.30



100 Watt Sodium Vapor - wood pole
 

$  5.82



100 Watt Sodium Vapor - metal pole
 

$  9.31



150 Watt Sodium Vapor - wood pole
 

$  6.84



250 Watt Sodium Vapor - wood pole
 

$  8.02



250 Watt Sodium Vapor - metal pole
 

$11.89



400 Watt Sodium Vapor - wood pole
 

$  9.81



400 Watt Sodium Vapor - metal pole
 

$13.00



Underground Service


100 Watt Sodium Vapor - metal pole
 

$  6.82



150 Watt Sodium Vapor - metal pole
 

$12.29



400 Watt Sodium Vapor - metal pole
 

$15.24





 



   (D)   Hours of lighting.  All lamps shall burn approximately one-
half hour after sunset until approximately one-half hour before sunrise each
day in the year, approximately 4,000 hours per annum.



   (E)   Facilities.  All facilities necessary for the service
hereunder, including all poles, fixtures, street lighting circuits,
transformers, lamps, and other necessary facilities will be furnished and
maintained by the utility.



('75 Code, § 6.06)  (Ord. CO-72-13, passed 12-20-72; Am. Ord. CO-74- 14,
passed 10-2-74; Am. Ord. CO-76-24, passed 11-17-76; Am. Ord. CO- 78-9, passed
5-3-78; Am. Ord. CO-83-3, passed 4-25-83; Am. Ord. 97- 12, passed 10-27-97;
Am. Ord. 16-17, passed 11-14-16; Am. Ord. 17-11, passed 9-12-17)



§ 50.12  RATE ADJUSTMENT.



   The rate adjustment in §§ 50.05 through 50.11 shall be on the basis
of a purchased power cost adjustment tracking factor occasioned solely by
changes in the cost of purchased power and energy, in accordance with the
order of the Indiana Utility Regulatory Commission, approved December 13,
1989 in Cause No. 36835-S3 as follows:



   Rate adjustments applicable to the below listed rate schedules are as
follows:



 

Residential Rate A
 
- $(0.000000) per KWH


Commercial Rate B
 
- $(0.000000) per KWH


General Power Rate C
 
- $(0.000000) per KWH


Industrial Rate PPL
 
- $(0.000000) per KVA


Industrial Rate IP
 
- $(0.000000) per KVA


 
 
- $(0.000000) per KWH


Flat Rates
 
- $(0.000000) per KWH



 



(Ord. CO-78-9, passed 5-3-78; Am. Ord. CO-83-3, passed 4-25-83; Am. Ord.
97-12, passed 10-27-97; Am. Ord. 16-17, passed 11-14-16)



§ 50.13  PURCHASED POWER COST TRACKING.



   When future changes occur in the utility's cost of purchased power
which changes would cause a change in the utility's purchase power cost
adjustment tracking factor calculated in accordance with the order of the
Indiana Utility Regulatory Commission approved on January 11, 1983, in Cause
No. 36835-S1, as may be hereafter amended by the Commission, the factor
automatically shall be changed accordingly and the utility's Superintendent
shall cause the appropriate documents for approval of the change to be filed
with the Commission and § 50.12 shall be deemed amended to reflect such
rates upon approval by the Commission.



(Ord. CO-78-9, passed 5-3-78; Am. Ord. CO-78-19, passed 8-16-78; Am. Ord.
CO-78-30, passed 10-30-78; Am. Ord. CO-83-3, passed 4-25-83; Am. Ord.
CO-97-6, passed 6-23-97; Am. Ord. 97-12, passed 10-27-97; Am. Ord. 16-17,
passed 11-14-16)



§ 50.14  SCHEDULE FOR ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT TRACKER.



   (A)   Availability of service.



      (1)   In order to encourage economic development in the
utility’s service area, limited-term reductions in billing demands herein
are offered to qualified new and existing customers who make application for
service under this Rider prior to January 1, 2025.



      (2)   Service under this Rider is intended for specific types
of commercial and industrial customers whose operations, by their nature,
will promote substantial sustained economic development based on plant and
facilities investment and job creation. This Rider is available to commercial
and industrial customers served under Tariff PPL or Tariff IP who meet the
following requirements:



         (a)   Size. A new customer must have billing demand of
1,000 kW or more. An existing customer must increase billing demand by 1,000
kW or more over the maximum billing demand during the 12 months prior to the
date of the application by the customer for service under this Rider (base
maximum billing demand).



         (b)   THD: total harmonic distortion. Both new and
existing customers must comply with Standard IEEE 519-2014 or its most
contemporary version, should the standard be revised.



         (c)   Load factor. Both new and existing customers must
maintain a monthly load factor of at least 70%. Load factor shall be
calculated as follows:



      “Total monthly kWH”/[“peak kWD” x “Days in Billing
Period” x “24 hours”]



         (d)   Power factor. Both new and existing customers must
maintain a monthly load factor of at least 98%.



         (e)   Applicable standards. Both new and existing
customers shall comply with the most contemporary versions of National
Electric Code, National Fire Protection Association Code, and relevant IEEE
standards.



         (f)   Business type. In no event shall service under
this Rider be available to a customer whose principal business at the service
location is classified in one of the following SIC Major Groups:



 

Standard Industrial Classification (SIC per US Dept. of Labor)




A:
 
Agriculture, Forestry, and Fishing

01:   Agricultural Production Crops

02:   Agricultural Production Livestock and Animal Specialties

07:   Agricultural Services

08:   Forestry

09:   Fishing, Hunting, and Trapping


C:
 
Construction

15:   Building Construction General Contractors and Operative Builders

16:   Heavy Construction Other Than Building Construction Contractors

17:   Construction Special Trade Contractors


F:
 
Wholesale Trade

50:   Wholesale Trade–Durable Goods

51:   Wholesale Trade–Non-Durable Goods


G:
 
Retail Trade

52:   Building Materials, Hardware, Garden Supply, and Mobile Home Dealers

53:   General Merchandise Stores

54:   Food Stores

55:   Automotive Dealers and Gasoline Service Stations

56:   Apparel and Accessory Stores

57:   Home Furniture, Furnishings, and Equipment Stores

58:   Eating and Drinking Places

59:   Miscellaneous Retail


H:
 
Finance, Insurance, and Real Estate

64:   Insurance Agents, Brokers, and Service

65:   Real Estate

67:   Holding and Other Investment Offices


I:
 
Services

70:   Hotels, Rooming Houses, Camps, and Other Lodging Places

78:   Motion Pictures

79:   Amusement and Recreation Services


North American Industry Classification System (NAICS per OMB post 1997)


 
 
11:   Agriculture, Forestry, Fishing and Hunting

22:   Utilities

23:   Construction

42:   Wholesale Trade

44:   Retail Trade

45:   Retail Stores

48:   Transportation

53:   Real Estate Rental and Leasing

71:   Arts, Entertainment, and Recreation

72:   Accommodation and Food Services

81:   Other Services (except Public Administration)




 



      (3)   A new customer, or the expansion by an existing
customer, must result in the creation of at least ten full-time equivalent
jobs (FTE) maintained over the contract term at the service location. Utility
reserves the right to verify FTE job counts. Failure to maintain the minimum
required FTE jobs will result in the termination of this Rider.



      (4)   The customer must demonstrate through form SB-1, to the
utility’s satisfaction that, absent the availability of this Rider, the
qualifying new or increased demand would be located outside of the
utility’s service territory or would not be placed in service due to poor
operating economics.



      (5)   Availability is limited to customers on a first-come,
first-served basis for loads aggregating to 25 MVA.



   (B)   Terms and conditions.



      (1)   To receive service under this Rider, the customer shall
make written application to the utility for the Economic Development Rider,
using form SB-1 “Statement of Benefits,” to be supplied by the utility,
with sufficient information contained therein to determine the customer’s
eligibility of service.



      (2)   For new customers, billing demands for which deductions
will be applicable under this Rider shall be for service at a new service
location and not merely the result of a change of ownership. Relocation of
the delivery point of the utility’s service does not qualify as a new
service location.



      (3)   For existing customers, billing demands for which
deductions will be applicable under this Rider shall be the result of an
increase in business activity and not merely the result of resumption of
normal operations following a force majeure, strike, equipment failure,
renovation or refurbishment, or other such abnormal operating condition. In
the event that such occurrence has taken place during the 12-month period
prior to the application by the customer for service under this Rider, the
monthly billing demands during the 12-month period shall be adjusted as
appropriate to eliminate the effects of such occurrence.



      (4)   All demand adjustments offered under this Rider shall
terminate no later than December 31, 2029.



      (5)   The existing local facilities of the utility must be
deemed adequate, in the judgment of the utility, to supply the new or
expanded electrical capacity requirements of the customer. If construction of
new or expanded local facilities by the utility is required, the customer may
be required to make a contribution-in-aid of construction for the installed
cost of such facilities pursuant to the provisions of the utility’s terms
and conditions of service.



   (C)   Determination of monthly adjusted billing demand.



      (1)   The qualifying incremental billing demand shall be
determined as the amount by which the billing demand, as determined according
to Tariff PPL or IP for current billing period without this Rider, exceeds
the base maximum billing demand. Such incremental billing demand shall be
considered to be zero, however, unless it is at least 1,000 kW for new
customers or existing customers.



      (2)   The monthly adjusted billing demand under this Rider
shall be the billing demand as determined according to Tariff PPL or IP for
the current billing period without this Rider less the product of the
qualifying incremental billing demand and the applicable adjustment factor.
No adjustment factors shall be applied to any portion of minimum billing
demands as calculated under Tariff PPL or IP.



   (D)   Determination of adjustment factor.



      (1)   Standard new development customers. Customers meeting
all availability and terms and conditions above shall contract for service
for a period of five years with a scheduled adjustment factor as follows:



         (a)   Year 1: 10%.



         (b)   Year 2 through 5: 5%.



      (2)   Urban redevelopment customers. Customers meeting all
availability and terms and conditions above, and that:



         (a)   Are locating a new business in an existing
building that has been unoccupied and/or has remained dormant for at least
one or more years and has no current or prior relationship with the previous
occupant, as determined by the utility, and



         (b)   Taking delivery at one point that does not require
significant distribution or transmission system investment, other than the
connection of service, shall qualify the same as standard new development
customer.



      (3)   The appropriate adjustment factor shall be applicable
over a period of 60 consecutive billing months beginning with the first such
month following the end of the start-up period. The start-up period shall
commence with the effective date of the contract addendum for service under
this Rider and shall terminate by mutual agreement between the utility and
the customer. In no event shall the start-up period exceed 12 months.



      (4)   Wholesale power credit.



         (a)   In addition to the demand credit provided herein,
a customer meeting all availability and terms and conditions above may be
eligible for pass-through of wholesale power credits received by the utility
from the Indiana Municipal Power Association ("IMPA") pursuant to the
Economic Development Rider to Schedule B of IMPA's tariff. To the extent the
utility receives a credit on its wholesale bill for the customer's new or
expanded load, the incentive amount received by the utility from IMPA for
such load will be passed in full to the customer. For reference purposes, the
discount to the customer's wholesale cost for qualifying new or expanded load
will be calculated according to the following schedule:



            1.   Year 1:  20%.



            2.   Year 2:  15%.



            3.   Years 3-4:  10%.



            4.   Year 5:  5%.



         (b)   The wholesale power credit provided herein is
provided herein in addition to the demand adjustment factor.



   (E)   Written annual statement of substantial compliance. Customers
must apply for the Economic Development Rider using Form SB-1 "Statement of
Benefits". Subsequent to qualifying for the Economic Development Rider, the
customer must file an updated SB-1 at least 30 days prior to the anniversary
of the start date identified in the utility's confirmation that customer is
eligible for the Economic Development Rider. Failure to comply with the
reporting requirements will result in the termination of eligibility for the
Economic Development Rider.



   (F)   Terms of contract.



      (1)   A contract or agreement addendum for service under this
Rider, in addition to service under Tariff PPL or IP, shall be executed by
the customer and the utility for the time period which includes the start-up
period and the five-year period immediately following the end of the start-up
period. The contract addendum shall specify the base maximum billing demand,
the anticipated total demand, the adjustment factor and related provisions to
be applicable under this Rider, and the effective date for the contract
addendum.



      (2)   The customer may discontinue service under this Rider
before the end of the contract or agreement addendum only by reimbursing the
utility for any demand adjustments received under this Rider billed at the
applicable rate.



   (G)   Special terms and conditions. Except as otherwise provided in
this Rider, written agreements shall remain subject to all of the provisions
of Tariff PPL or IP. This Rider is subject to the utility's terms and
conditions of service.



(Ord. CO-90-10, passed 6-25-90; Am. Ord. 16-17, passed 11-14-16; Am. Ord.
17-11, passed 9-12-17)



RULES AND REGULATIONS



§ 50.15  CUSTOMER DEPOSITS.



   (A)   The utility may require from all applicants for service a cash
deposit equal to the billing for the estimated amount of service to be used
by the applicant for a period of 60 days as a guarantee against the
non-payment of bills for service. The fee shall be a minimum of $50 for
residential customers and a minimum of $ 100 for all other customers. The
actual amount to be charged shall be based on the results of a credit check.
However, if the applicant is the owner of real property whose credit is
approved by the utility, the utility shall waive the cash deposit. Such a
guarantee shall not make the guarantor liable in an amount exceeding the
charge for a period of 60 days. The cash deposit minus any unpaid amounts for
service rendered the customer shall be returned upon the discontinuance of
service.



   (B)   In all cases where the monthly consumption is in excess of
that covered by the deposit, the utility may increase the amount of deposit
required, but the deposit shall not exceed an amount for an estimated 60-day
period.



   (C)   The original deposit certificate to the customer should be
presented when the deposit is refunded.



('75 Code, § 6.07)  (Am. Ord. 16-17, passed 11-14-16)



§ 50.16  WRITTEN APPLICATION, CONTRACT MAY BE REQUIRED.



   (A)   A written application or contract, properly executed, may be
required from the customer before the utility will supply service, however,
the utility may require a long term contract when unusual construction or
equipment expense is necessary to furnish the service.



   (B)   No promises, agreements, or representations of any agent of
the utility shall be binding on the utility unless they have been
incorporated in a written contract before the contract is signed and approved.



   (C)   The benefits and obligations of any contract shall inure and
be binding on the successors and assigns, for the full term thereof. No
assignment thereof shall be made by the customer without first obtaining the
utility's written consent.



('75 Code, § 6.17)



§ 50.17  DESCRIPTION OF EQUIPMENT TO BE CONNECTED TO SERVICE.



   The customer shall, upon request of the utility, present in writing to
the utility a list of the appliances, motors, and other equipment which are
to be connected to the utility's lines, giving the location of the premises
at which service is to be taken.  The utility will then advise the customer
as to the character of service it will furnish.



('75 Code, § 6.20)



§ 50.18  COMMENCEMENT OF SERVICE.



   The customer shall make application to the office of the utility to
secure proper authorization before he commences using the service.



('75 Code, § 6.18)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 50.19  CONNECTION OF LINES TO CUSTOMER'S FACILITIES.



   (A)   The utility will designate the point at which the service
lines will be connected to the customer's facilities.  The customer's wires
at the point of connection with the utility's lines, shall extend at least
three feet beyond the outer end of any conduit, weatherproof fitting, or
insulator in order to facilitate this connection.



   (B)   A customer desiring an underground service connection from the
overhead distribution system, must at his own expense install and maintain
service wires of an approved type from the utility's pole from which
connection is made to the customer's facilities, including the necessary
riser up the pole to the height specified by the utility.



   (C)   Any changes made in service connections at the customer's
request, after the original installation, shall be at the customer's expense.



('75 Code, § 6.21)



§ 50.20  GENERAL POWER SERVICE (RATE C).



   (A)   Any customer having active connected light or power load of 50
horsepower or more, will be permitted to take incidental lighting hereunder;
however, the connected load of the incidental lighting shall not exceed 30%
of the total connected power load.  Lighting will not be permitted in any
proportion on installations less than 50 horsepower active connected power
load, except that a power customer who has no lighting circuit may install an
extension with proper lamp or lamps to one phase of the power circuit in
order to provide emergency inspection light.



   (B)   The utility will maintain and supply at a single location, the
complete substation equipment that is necessary in order to make one
transformation to a standard voltage from the voltage of the available
transmission or distribution line as the utility deems adequate and suitable
to serve the capacity contracted for.  Not more than one such transformation
will be installed at the utility's expense for any customer, however when the
customer is permitted to take incidental lighting hereunder, and the voltage
of the load side of the power transformation is approximately 460 or 230
volts, and the customer requires approximately 115 volts two-wire (or 115-230
volts three-wire) for lighting purposes, the utility, at the same location,
will install at its own expense the additional transformation to obtain such
lighting voltage, for the customer.  Should the customer require service of
non-standard characteristic, the customer shall, at his own expense, furnish
and maintain all transformers and protective equipment therefor necessary in
order to obtain the non-standard characteristics.



   (C)   All wiring, pole lines, wires, and other electrical equipment
and apparatus located beyond the point of connection of the customer's
service lines with the lines of the utility are considered the distribution
system of the customer and shall be furnished, owned, and maintained by the
customer, except in the case of metering equipment and other equipment
incidental to the rendering of service, if any, that is furnished, owned, and
maintained by the company and installed beyond the point of connection.



   (D)   In case a fire or other casualty shall render the plant or
premises of the customer wholly unfit for the purpose of the customer's
business, the minimum charge specified shall be suspended until such time as
the premises shall have been reconstructed and reoccupied by the customer.



   (E)   In case a strike or lockout causes the temporary suspension of
the operation or business of the customer, the minimum charge specified will
be waived during the continuance of the strike or lockout, but the customer
shall be billed and liable for the payment, at the rates herein set out, for
all electric energy actually used during the period.



('75 Code, § 6.10)



Cross-reference:



   Rate C schedule for general power service, see § 50.07



§ 50.21  PRIMARY POWER AND LIGHT SERVICE (RATE PPL).



   (A)   All service metered at a primary voltage, as herein
designated, shall be furnished through one meter.  All service metered at a
secondary voltage, as herein designated, may be furnished through one meter,
or through not more than one meter for the lighting service and one meter for
the power service, unless it is required by law to install a separate service
for exit lighting, in which case a separate meter will be installed for the
exit lighting.



   (B)   Except in such cases where the customer owns the substation
and transformation equipment as provided for in "equipment supplied by
customer" under primary power rate, the utility will supply and maintain at a
single location the complete substation equipment that is necessary in order
to make one transformation to a standard voltage from the voltage of the
available transmission or distribution line as the utility deems adequate and
suitable to serve the capacity contracted for.  Not more than one such
transformation will be installed at the utility's expense for any customer,
however, where the voltage of the load side of this transformation is
approximately 400 or 230 volts and the customer requires approximately 115
volts two-wire or 115/230 volts three-wire for lighting purposes, the utility
will supply the transformation to obtain the lighting voltage.



   (C)   Where service is metered at a primary voltage and the customer
desires and requests transformation to more than one standard voltage or
service of a standard voltage at more than one location within his premises,
the utility will, at its option, furnish and maintain any additional
transformation equipment and any inter-connecting lines as may be
necessary.  The customer shall reimburse the utility for the amount of the
cost of furnishing such service as provided for above.  The right and title
to all equipment so furnished by the utility shall be and remain in the
utility.



   (D)   Should the customer require a non-standard voltage, the
customer shall, at his own expense, furnish and maintain all transformers and
protective equipment therefore necessary in order to obtain the non-standard
voltage.  The customer shall not be entitled to any credit as a result of
the ownership of the transformers and equipment unless the customer supplies
all transformers and equipment for his entire contracted capacity in
accordance with the provisions of equipment supplied by customer.



('75 Code, § 6.12)



Cross-reference:



   Rate PPL schedule for primary power and light service, see § 50.08



§ 50.22  TEMPORARY SERVICE.



   (A)   An applicant for temporary service shall be required to pay a
fee of $200 for the cost of labor and material required for supplying and
connecting the temporary service, for discontinuing and removing the service
equipment, and for the supervision, use of tools, and indirect costs, in
accordance with the job work order procedure of the utility.



   (B)   The utility may require a suitable deposit to insure payment
of the fee set forth above plus the charges for energy consumed. No temporary
installation may continue for a period of more than 12 months, unless the
installation conforms to the requirements of permanent installation.



('75 Code, § 6.32)  (Am. Ord. 16-17, passed 11-14-16)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 50.23  MULTIPLE DWELLINGS.



   The rate established for A classification is available for residential
service to an individual residence or dwelling only, designed and arranged to
provide living quarters for one family. Customers shall not have the
privilege of taking service for the case of an apartment house with a number
of individual apartments.  The landlord is given the option of providing
separate wiring for each apartment, so that the utility may supply each
apartment separately under these schedules, or instead of providing separate
wiring for each apartment, of taking the combined service under the
applicable schedule with the minimum charge and the quantity of
kilowatt-hours in each block multiplied by the number of apartments in the
building.



('75 Code, § 6.13)



Cross-reference:



   Rate A schedule for residential service, see § 50.05



§ 50.24  MULTIPLE USE PREMISES.



   The rate included in schedule A of § 50.05 shall not apply to that
portion of a residence which becomes regularly used for commercial or
manufacturing purposes.  Where a portion of the customer's premises becomes
regularly used for commercial or manufacturing purposes, the customer shall
have the option of separating the wiring so that the residential portion of
the premises can be served through a separate meter under the residential
schedule applicable, and the commercial or manufacturing portion of the
premises can be served through a separate meter under the applicable schedule
for the service required.  In the event the customer does not exercise the
option of separating the wiring, the applicable commercial or power rate
shall be applied to the total requirements of the customer.



('75 Code, § 6.14)



§ 50.25  POWER INSTALLATIONS.



   (A)   Single phase motors up to but not exceeding three horsepower
may be connected to a lighting service under the following conditions.



      (1)   Single phase motors not in excess of one-third
horsepower may be wound for 115 or 230 volts and may be operated from a
lighting circuit.



      (2)   Single phase motors one-half horsepower to three
horsepower, inclusive, must be wound for 230 volts, be connected across the
230 volt legs of the three-wire lighting service, and be operated from a
circuit separate from any lighting.



   (B)   Energy for lighting may be taken from a power service within
the limitations of the applicable rate, but from a separate branch circuit.



   (C)   The utility will supply single phase or polyphase service in
accordance with the following general provisions.



      (1)   Installations aggregating three horsepower or less shall
use single phase service unless polyphase service of the desired voltage is
adjacent to the customer's premises.



      (2)   Installations aggregating more than three horsepower and
not more than 7-1/2 horsepower may use either polyphase service or single
phase service, whichever is adjacent to the customer's premises, at the
desired voltage.



      (3)   Installations aggregating more than 7-1/2 horsepower
shall use polyphase service.



   (D)   The utility may require the use of such starting or current
limiting equipment as may, in its opinion, be necessary for any motor or
apparatus to prevent undue disturbance, or voltage fluctuation on its lines.



('75 Code, § 6.11)



§ 50.26  FLUCTUATING OR INTERMITTENT LOADS.



   Service to equipment having highly fluctuating or intermittent
characteristics and having a combined input capacity in excess of three kva
will not be permitted under a residential or commercial rate.  Customers
having X-ray or welding machines having a total input capacity in excess of
three kva can secure service for the equipment under the applicable power
rates.



('75 Code, § 6.15)



§ 50.27  NEON OR FLUORESCENT EQUIPMENT.



   Any customer installing neon, fluorescent, or other types of gaseous
tube lighting including signs, will be required to furnish, install and
maintain at his own expense, corrective apparatus so that the power factor at
all times of each unit or group of units controlled through one switch, will
not be less than 90% lagging.



('75 Code, § 6.16)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 50.28  INSIDE WIRING AND EQUIPMENT.



   An applicant for service must, at his own expense, equip his premises
with all wiring and entrance equipment, all of which shall be constructed and
maintained, subject to the approval of authorized inspectors, and in
accordance with the National Electric Code and the rules of the utility in
force at the time.  The utility shall be under no duty to inspect the wiring
and equipment of the customer.



('75 Code, § 6.23)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 50.29  INSTALLATION OF METERS; LOCATION.



   (A)   The electric energy shall be measured by a meter or meters of
standard manufacture, installed and maintained by the utility.  If more than
one meter is installed for metering different classes of service, a separate
bill shall be rendered for each meter in accordance with the applicable
rate.  When for the convenience of the utility or to meet legal
requirements, more than one meter is installed for metering the same class of
service on one premises, the sum of the measurements of all such meters shall
be used in calculating the bill.  Where the customer requires for his
convenience that more than one meter be installed for metering the same class
of service on one premises, a separate bill shall be rendered for each meter
in accordance with the applicable rate.  ('75 Code, § 6.25)



   (B)   The customer shall provide, free of expense to the utility,
near the service entrance a suitable place for the meter or meters and any
necessary metering transformers, and appurtenant devises, which may be
furnished by the utility.  ('75 Code, §  6.24)



§ 50.30  METER FAILURE.



   Whenever it is discovered that a meter is not recording within the
limits of accuracy as prescribed in the rules of the State Public Service
Commission, adjustment shall be made in accordance with those rules.



('75 Code, § 6.27)



§ 50.31  INCREASING LOAD; NOTICE REQUIRED.



   After initial installation of a service to a customer by the utility,
the customer shall not increase the demands for service by more than five hp
unless he notifies the utility of the need for increased service and obtains
written consent from the utility.



('75 Code, § 6.31)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 50.32  EXTENSION OF LINES, FACILITIES BY UTILITY.



   (A)   Unless otherwise provided in the utility 's rate schedules or
rules and regulations, the utility will extend its lines and facilities in
accordance with rules and standards of service for electrical utilities as
promulgated by the State Public Service Commission.



   (B)   Whenever, in the opinion of the utility, the necessary
expenditures to make connection to an applicant for service is not warranted
by the utility's estimate of the prospective revenues to be derived
therefrom, the utility may require the applicant to make an advance payment
for line construction or service connection.



('75 Code, § 6.22)



§ 50.33  ACCESS TO PREMISES.



   The properly authorized agents of the utility shall have the right to
enter upon the premises of the customer at all reasonable times for the
purpose of reading, inspecting, testing, repairing, or replacing the meter or
meters, or other equipment used in connection with its service, and for
removing the same upon the termination of the contract or discontinuance of
the service.



('75 Code, § 6.26)



§ 50.34  UTILITY NOT LIABLE FOR INTERRUPTED SERVICE.



   The utility shall not be responsible for damages for any failure to
supply service; the interruption or reversal of the supply of electric
energy, defective wiring on the customer's premises; or for damages resulting
to a customer or to third persons from the use of electricity or the presence
of the utility's equipment on the customer's premises.  Neither party shall
be liable to the other for any failure or delay in case such failure or delay
is caused by strikes, the acts of God, or unavoidable accidents or
contingencies beyond its control.



('75 Code, § 6.29)



§ 50.35  RIGHT OF UTILITY TO SHUT OFF SERVICE.



   (A)   The utility reserves the right to shut off the supply of
electric energy without notice for any of the following reasons.



      (1)   Repairs.



      (2)   Want of supply.



      (3)   Non-payment of any bill when due.



      (4)   Interference with any of the utility's meters,
equipment, or connections thereto.



      (5)   Failure to comply with the terms of the contract.



      (6)   Violation of any rules and regulations applicable to the
service.



      (7)   For any lawful reason.



   (B)   Discontinuance shall not invalidate any contract, and the
utility shall have the right to enforce any contract notwithstanding
discontinuance.



('75 Code, § 6.30)



§ 50.36  BASIS OF UTILITY RATES.



   The utility's rates are predicated upon the supply of service being
rendered separately for each premises and for the ultimate usage in or on the
premises.  The combining of service through one meter, of two or more
separate classifications, or of two or more premises, or of two or more
separate living quarters of the same premises will not be permitted except as
specifically provided for under these rules and regulations, or supplements
thereto, which are filed by the utility and approved by the Public Service
Commission of Indiana.  An outlying or adjacent building of the customer, if
located on the same premises, may be served from the supply to the main
building.  PREMISES, as herein used, shall mean the main residence or living
quarters for the use of a single-family or main building of a commercial
customer, and shall include the outlying or adjacent buildings used by the
same, provided the use of service in the outlying buildings is supplemental
and similar to the service used in the main residence or building.



('75 Code, § 6.28)



§ 50.37  DELINQUENT BILLS; COLLECTION CHARGE, DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE.



   (A)   Bills shall be due and payable at the office of the utility on
the first business day of each month.  If paid by the fifteenth day of the
month, the net shall be the amount to be paid.  If not paid by the fifteenth
of the month in which due, a collection charge of 4% of the total current
unpaid balance shall be added to the net bill.



   (B)   When the fifteenth day of the month falls on Sunday or on any
legal holiday, the first business day thereafter shall be considered as the
last day to pay the net bill.



('75 Code, § 6.08)



   (C)   Where bills for service have not been paid by the twenty-
fifth day of the month in which they are due, service shall be discontinued
and the reconnection charge established in § 50.43 shall be paid before
service is re-established.



('75 Code, § 6.09)  (Am Ord. 16-17, passed 11-14-16)



§ 50.38  CUSTOMER WANTS SERVICE DISCONTINUED.



   Whenever a customer desires discontinuance of service, he shall notify
the utility at its local office of this desire and of the date on which
service is to be discontinued, sufficiently in advance of the date to provide
a reasonable time for the utility to obtain a final meter-reading.  This
section shall not apply to any case where a customer has entered into a
contract with the utility to take service from the utility for a definite
period of time specified or provided in the contract.



('75 Code, § 6.19)



§ 50.39  FEE FOR RETURNED CHECKS.



   When any check, draft, or money order given by or for a customer to any
of the city's utilities or its Frankfort Municipal Utility Office in payment
for utility service or other charge is returned to the utility or the office
by the drawer's bank because of the drawer's insufficient funds in such bank
account or because such drawer has no such open account at such bank, then
the customer shall be charged an additional service fee of $25, or 5% of the
amount of the returned check, whichever greater, for each time the check is
so returned by the bank.



(Ord. CO-85-6, passed 6-10-85; Am. Ord. 16-17, passed 11-14-16)



§ 50.40  FEE FOR SERVICE CALLS.



   When a request is made by or for a customer to the City Light and Power
Plant for a service call, and upon making the service call, the utility's
serviceman determines that the customer's problem is not the fault of the
utility, then the customer shall be charged a service fee for each such
service call made, as follows:



   (A)   If the service call is made by the serviceman between the
hours of 7:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., a fee of $60.



   (B)   If the service call is made by the serviceman after 4:00 p.m.
and prior to 7:00 a.m. the next day, a fee of $150.



(Ord. CO-85-6, passed 6-10-85; Am. Ord. 16-17, passed 11-14-16)



§ 50.41  NET METERING.



   (A)   The findings and determinations set forth in the Preamble to
Ordinance10-03 are hereby made findings and determinations of the Council.



   (B)   The city encourages interested citizens and businesses to
invest in renewable electric energy generation systems and enter into a net
metering program with the municipal electric utility of the city.



   (C)   Eligible net metering customers include residential,
commercial and industrial customers in good standing that own and operate a
solar, wind, biomass, geothermal or hydroelectric generating facility that:



      (1)   Has a nameplate capacity less than or equal to ten
kilowatts(kw);



      (2)   Is located on the customer's premises and is operated by
the customer; and



      (3)   Is used primarily to offset all or part of the
customer's own electricity requirements.



   (D)   The Council authorizes the utility to offer net metering to
eligible net metering customers on a first come, first served basis.  The
utility shall limit the aggregate amount of net metering facility nameplate
capacity from all net metering customers to 0.1% of the utility's most recent
summer peak load.



   (E)   The utility shall measure the difference between the amount of
energy delivered by the utility to the net metering customer and the amount
of energy generated by the net metering customer and delivered to the
utility.  If the net metering customer generates more energy than it
consumes in a month, the customer shall receive a bill credit from the
utility for the amount of surplus energy generated.  The utility shall not
purchase or wheel power produced by an eligible net metering customer's
facilities.



   (F)   The Net Metering Tariff attached to Ordinance 10-03 and
incorporated herein by reference shall be adopted as the terms and conditions
under which the utility will offer net metering to eligible net metering
customers.



   (G)   In accordance with the Net Metering Tariff, the utility shall
enter into an interconnection agreement with the eligible net metering
customer prior to connecting the customer's net metering equipment to the
utility's system.  The connection agreement shall incorporate technical
interconnection requirements and applicable provisions of the Net Metering
Tariff, and shall not be in conflict with the terms of this section.



(Ord. 10-03, passed 3-22-10)



§ 50.42  METER TEST FEE.



   When a request is made by a customer for a meter test, and the customer
has already received a free meter test within the 12-month period in which
the request is made, the customer shall be charged a fee of $33 for the
additional meter test.



(Ord. 16-17, passed 11-14-16)



§ 50.43  RECONNECTION CHARGE.



   When it has been necessary to discontinue electric service to any
customer because of a violation of the utility's rules and regulations or on
account of non-payment of any bill for electric service, the customer shall
be charged a fee for reconnection of service for each such instance of
disconnection and reconnection, as follows:



   (A)   If the reconnection is made by the serviceman between the
hours of 7:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., a fee of $43.



   (B)   If the reconnection is made by the serviceman after 4:00 p.m.
and prior to 7:00 a.m. the next day, a fee of $125.



(Ord. 16-17, passed 11-14-16)



CHAPTER 51:  SEWERS



Section



General Provisions



   51.001   Definitions



   51.002   City may impose rules and regulations



   51.003   Application of regulations



   51.004   City to maintain books and records



   51.005   National pollution discharge elimination system permit



   51.006   Falsifying information



   51.007   Access to private property



   51.008   Annual review



   51.009   All users required to retain certain records



   51.010   Operating upsets; required report



   51.011   Construction of combined sewers prohibited



Rates and Charges



   51.015   Effective date



   51.016   User classifications



   51.017   Rates based on sewage volume



   51.018   Monthly charges



   51.019   Determination of user and debt service charges



   51.020   Minimum charges based on meter size



   51.021   Multiple users on single meter



   51.022   Lawn sprinkling



   51.023   Surcharge based on strength, character of waste



   51.024   Surcharge fee for incompatible pollutants



   51.025   Billing and collection



Connection Regulations



   51.030   Connection to public sewers



   51.031   Connection by out-of-city users



   51.032   Prohibited connections



   51.033   Connection of toilet facilities



Private Disposal Systems



   51.040   When permitted



   51.041   Permit required



   51.042   Connection required when public sewer available



   51.043   Privies, septic tanks prohibited



   51.044   Must be operated in sanitary manner



   51.045   Sewage systems prohibited near water supply



Building Sewers



   51.050   Permit required; classifications



   51.051   Cost and expense



   51.052   Separate sewer for each building; exception



   51.053   Old sewer connected to new building



   51.054   Construction specifications



   51.055   Elevation



   51.056   Connection of downspouts or drains



   51.057   Connection of building sewer to public sewer



   51.058   Joints and connections



   51.059   Excavations



   51.060   Responsibility of owner



Discharges



   51.065   Depositing unsanitary matter on public or private property



   51.066   Stormwater, unpolluted drainage



   51.067   Wastewater, polluted drainage



   51.068   Discharge of grease; grease trap interceptors



Wastewater Admissibility Standards



   51.070   Purpose



   51.071   Prohibited discharges



   51.072   Federal categorical pretreatment standards; modifications



   51.073   Excessive discharge



   51.074   Accidental discharge



   51.075   Emergency notification procedure



   51.076   Obstruction or damage to public sewers



   51.077   Special agreements



   51.078   Exclusion of certain industrial wastes; surcharges;
penalties



   51.079   New connections



   51.080   Stricter state requirements prevail



Industrial Wastes



   51.085   City approval required; periodic reports to be submitted



   51.086   Preliminary treatment facilities



   51.087   Pretreatment residues



   51.088   Grease, oil, and sand interceptors



   51.089   Major contributor permits; minor contributor permits



   51.090   Permit application; fee



   51.091   Permit modifications



   51.092   Permit terms and conditions



   51.093   Permit transfer



   51.094   Reporting requirements for permittee



   51.095   Surveillance of major contributors; charge



   51.096   Monitoring equipment for major contributors



   51.097   Laboratory procedures for examining industrial wastes



   51.098   Representative analysis to determine waste character,
strength



   51.099   Review of data by Environmental Protection Agency



   51.100   Confidential information



   51.101   Commercial or industrial waste haulers



Remedies



   51.105   Notice of violation



   51.106   Suspension of service, permit



   51.107   Revocation of permit



   51.108   Abatement of public nuisance



   51.109   Lien for damages



   51.110   Civil liability



   51.111   Criminal liability



   51.112   Other remedies



   51.113   Appeals



 



   51.999   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Borrowing funds from city utilities, see § 34.01



   Utility Employees Retirement Fund, see §§ 35.10 through 35.27



   Utility Service Board, see § 34.03



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 51.001  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   40 CFR 403.  General Pretreatment Regulations as published in the
Federal Register on June 26, 1978 and on January 28, 1981 and in subsequent
amendments thereto.  (Ord. CO-83-4, passed 4-25-83)



   ACT or THE ACT.  The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, (PL 92-500)
also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. 1251, et. seq.: as
well as any guidelines, limitations, and standards promulgated by the
Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to THE ACT.  (Ord. PO-80-1, passed
11- 24-80)



   ANNUAL FLOW.  The total amount of waste treated by the treatment plant
during the preceding year.



   ANNUAL REVENUES REQUIRED.  The total amount of revenues necessary to
operate the sewage works in an efficient and economical manner and meet all
known or anticipated expenditures, including but not limited to operation and
maintenance expenses, debt service, replacement, and depreciation.



(Ord. CO-80-19, passed 11-24-80)



   APPLICABLE PRETREATMENT STANDARD.  Any pretreatment limit or
prohibitive standard (federal or local) contained in this chapter deemed to
be the most restrictive which non-domestic users will be required to comply
with.  (Ord. CO-83-4, passed 4-25-83)



   APPROVAL AUTHORITY.  The Director in an NPDES state with an approved
state pretreatment program and the Administrator of the EPA in a non-NPDES
state or NPDES state without an approved state pretreatment program.



   ASTM.  American Society for Testing Materials.



   AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF AN INDUSTRIAL USER.



      (1)   A principal executive officer of at least the level of
vice-president, if the industrial user is a corporation.



      (2)   A general partner or proprietor if the industrial user
is a partnership or proprietorship, respectively.



      (3)   A duly authorized representative of the individual
designated above if the representative is responsible for the overall
operation of the facilities from which the indirect discharge originates.



   AVERAGE MONTHLY DISCHARGE LIMITATION.  The highest allowable average
of “daily discharges” over a calendar month, calculated as of all daily
discharges measured during a calendar month divided by the number of daily
discharges measured during that month.  (Ord. CO-83-4, passed 4-25-83; Am.
Ord. PO-98-4, passed 6-8-98)



   BENEFICIAL USES.  These uses include, but are not limited to,
domestic, municipal, agricultural, and industrial use, power generation,
recreation, aesthetic enjoyment, navigation, and the preservation and
enhancement of fish, wildlife, and other aquatic resources or reserves, and
other uses, both tangible or intangible, as specified by state or federal law.



   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND or BOD.  The quantity of dissolved oxygen in
milligrams per liter required during stabilization of the decomposable
organic matter by aerobic biochemical action under standard laboratory
procedures for five days at 20°C.  The laboratory determinations shall be
made in accordance with procedures set forth in "Standard Methods."



   BUILDING DRAIN or HOUSE DRAIN.  The lowest horizontal piping of
building drainage system which receives the discharge from waste, and other
drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to a point
approximately five feet outside the foundation wall of the building.



      (1)   SANITARY BUILDING DRAIN.  A building drain which
conveys sanitary or industrial sewage only.



      (2)   STORM BUILDING DRAIN.  A building drain which conveys
storm water or other clear water drainage, but no wastewater.



   BUILDING LATERAL SEWER or HOUSE LATERAL SEWER.  The extension from the
building drain to the sewerage system or other place of disposal.



      (1)   SANITARY BUILDING SEWER.  A building sewer which
conveys sanitary or industrial sewage only.



      (2)   STORM BUILDING SEWER.  A building sewer which conveys
storm water or other clear water drainage, but no sanitary or industrial
sewage.



   BUILDING UNITS.  Where more than one family, office, or business
occupies a single building. Example:  two or more apartments, two or more
offices, two or more businesses occupy the same building, then each
apartment, office, or business is counted as a single unit.



   CATEGORICAL STANDARDS.  National Categorical Pretreatment Standards or
Pretreatment Standard.



   CFR.  Code of Federal Regulations.



   CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND or COD.  A measure of the oxygen equivalent of
that portion of the organic matter in a sample that is susceptible to
oxidation by a strong chemical oxidant.  The laboratory determination shall
be made in accordance with procedures set forth in "Standard Methods."



   COMPATIBLE POLLUTANTS.  Biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids,
pH, and fecal coliform bacteria, plus additional pollutants identified in the
city's National Pollutant Discharge Elimination Systems (NPDES) permit, if
the treatment works was designed to treat such pollutants, and in fact does
remove such pollutants to a substantial degree.  The term substantial degree
is not subject to precise definition, but generally contemplates removals in
the order of 80% or greater.  Minor incidental removals in the order of 10%
to 30% are not considered substantial.  Examples of the additional
pollutants which may be compatible include the following.



      (1)   Chemical oxygen demand.



      (2)   Total organic carbon.



      (3)   Phosphorous and phosphorous compounds.



      (4)   Nitrogen and nitrogen compounds.



      (5)   Fats, oils, and greases of animal or vegetable origin
(except as prohibited where these materials would interfere with the
operation of the treatment works).



(Ord. PO-80-1, passed 11-24-80)



   COMPOSITE SAMPLE.  A COMPOSITE SAMPLE should contain a minimum of
eight discrete samples taken at equal time intervals, proportional to the
flow rate over the compositing period.  More than the minimum number of
discreet samples will be required where the wastewater loading is highly
variable.  (Am. Ord. PO-98-4, passed 6-8-98)



   CONTROL AUTHORITY.  Utility Service Board of the City of Frankfort,
Indiana.



   DAILY DISCHARGE.  Discharge of a pollutant measured during a calendar
day, or any 24-hour period that reasonably represents the calendar for
purposes of sampling.  (Am. Ord. PO-98-4, passed 6-8-98)



(Ord. CO-83-4, passed 4-25-83)



   DEBT SERVICE.  The total principal of and interest on the outstanding
revenue bonds of the sewage works due and payable within the next 12 calendar
months.  (Ord. CO-80-19, passed 11-24-80)



   DEPARTMENT.  The city wastewater treatment plant, including the sewer
collection.  (Ord. PO-80-1, passed 11-24-80)



   DEPRECIATION.  An annual operating cost reflecting capital consumption
and obsolescence (reduction of future service potential) of the sewage
works.  (Ord. CO-80-19, passed 11-24-80)



   DOMESTIC SEWAGE.  Wastewater from typical residential users and having
pollutant characteristics of not greater than 200 mg/l BOD and 250 mg/l
suspended solids.



   EASEMENT.  An acquired legal right of the specific use of land owned
by others.  (Am. Ord. PO-98- 4, passed 6-8-98)



   EFFLUENT.  Water, together with any wastes that may be present,
flowing out of a drain, sewer, receptacle, or outlet.



   ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY or EPA.  The U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency, or where appropriate the term may also be used as a
designation for the administrator or other duly authorized official of the
agency.  (Am. Ord. PO-98-4, passed 6-8-98)



   FECAL COLIFORM.  Any of a number of organisms common to the intestinal
tract of man and animals, whose presence in sanitary sewage is an indicator
of pollution.



   FLOATABLE OIL.  Oil, fat, or grease in a physical state, such that
will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved
pretreatment facility.



   GARBAGE.  Any solid wastes from the preparation, cooking, or
dispensing of food and from handling, storage, or sale of produce.



   GREASE AND OIL.  A group of substances including hydrocarbons, fatty
acids, soaps, fats, waxes, oils, or any other material that is extracted by a
solvent from an acidified sample and that is not volatilized during the
laboratory test procedures.  GREASES AND OILS are defined by the method of
their determination in accordance with "Standard Methods."



   GREASE AND OIL OF ANIMAL AND VEGETABLE ORIGIN.  Substances of
biodegradeable nature such as are discharged by meatpacking, vegetable oil
and fat industries, food processors, canneries, and restaurants.



   GREASE AND OIL OF MINERAL ORIGIN.  Substances that are less readily
biodegradeable than grease and oil of animal or vegetable origin, and are
derived from a petroleum source.  The substances include machinery
lubricating oils, gasoline station wastes, petroleum refinery wastes, and
storage depot wastes.



   GROUND (SHREDDED) GARBAGE.  Garbage that is shredded to such a degree
that all particles will be carried freely in suspension under the conditions
normally prevailing in the sewerage system, with no particle being greater
than ½ inch in dimension.



   GRAB SAMPLE.  A sample which is taken from a waste stream on a
one-time basis with no regard to the flow in the waste stream and without
consideration of time.



   HOLDING TANK WASTE.  Any waste from holding tanks, such as chemical
toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, vacuum pump trucks, and the like.



   INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANT.  Any pollutant that is not defined as a
compatible pollutant, including nonbiodegradable dissolved solids, and
further defined in Regulation 40 CFR Part 403.



   INDUSTRIAL USER.  Any industrial or commercial establishment
manufacturing or processing facility that discharges industrial waste to a
publicly owned treatment works.



   INDUSTRIAL WASTES.  Any solid, liquid, or gaseous substance or form of
energy discharged, permitted to flow or escape from an industrial,
manufacturing, commercial, or business process or from the development,
recovery, or processing of any natural resource carried on by a person and
shall further mean any waste from an industrial user.



   INDUSTRIAL WASTE PERMIT.  A permit to deposit or discharge industrial
waste into any sanitary sewer as issued by the POTW.



   INFILTRATION.  The water entering a sewer system, including sewer
service connections, from the ground, through such means as, but not limited
to, defective pipes, pipe joints, connections, or manhole walls.



   INFILTRATION/INFLOW.  The total quantity of water from both
infiltration and inflow without distinguishing the source.



   INFLOW.  The water discharged into a sewer system, including service
connections from such sources as, but not limited to, roof leaders, cellar,
yard and area drains, foundation drains, cistern overflows, cooling water
discharges, drains from springs and swampy areas, manhole covers, cross
connections from storm sewers and combined sewers, catch basins, storm
waters, surface run-off, street wash water, or drainage.  Inflow does not
include, and is distinguished from, infiltration.



   INFLUENT.  The water, together with any wastes that may be present,
flowing into a drain, sewer, receptacle, or outlet.



   INSPECTOR.  A person authorized by the Utility Service Board.



   INTERFERENCE.  The inhibition or disruption of the POTW treatment
processes or operations which contributes to a violation of any requirement
of the city's NPDES permit.  The term includes prevention of sewage sludge
use or disposal by the POTW in accordance with 405 of the Act, (33 U.S.C.
1345) or any criteria, guidelines, or regulations developed pursuant to the
Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances
Control Act, or more stringent state criteria (including those contained in
any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Title IV of SWDA)
applicable to the method of disposal or use employed by the POTW.



   ISBH.  Indiana State Board of Health.  (Ord. CO-83-4, passed 4-25-83)



   L.  Liter.



   MAJOR CONTRIBUTOR.  A contributor that meets any of the following
requirements.



      (1)   Has a flow of more than 25,000 gallons per average
workday.



      (2)   Has in its waste a toxic pollutant in toxic amounts as
defined in Section 307 of the Federal Act.



      (3)   Has a flow greater than 5% of the flow carried by the
municipal system receiving the waste.



      (4)   Has in its wastes toxic pollutants as defined pursuant
to Section 307 of the Act, of state statutes and rules.



      (5)   Is found by the city, state control agency, or the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to have significant impact, either
singly or in combination with other contributing industries, on the
wastewater treatment system, the quality of sludge, the system's effluent
quality, or air emissions generated by the system.



   MAXIMUM DAILY DISCHARGE LIMITATIONS.  Highest allowable daily
discharge.  (Ord. CO- 83-4, passed 4-25-83; Am. Ord. PO-98-4, passed 6-8-98)



   MG.  Milligrams.



   MG/L.  Milligrams per liter.



   MINOR CONTRIBUTOR.  A non-residential contributor that: (a) has
potential for discharging pollutants that could violate specific local
limits; or has potential for accidental spill or slug discharges of
pollutants to the sewage system.  (Ord. CO-83-4, passed 4-25-83; Am. Ord.
PO-98-4, passed 6-8-98)



   NATURAL OUTLET.  Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, lake, or other
body of surface or ground water.



   NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD OR PRETREATMENT STANDARD. 
Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA
in accordance with Section 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1347) which
applies to a specific category of industrial users.



   NATIONAL PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARD OR PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE
STANDARD.  Any regulation developed under the authority of 307 (b) of the
Act and 40 CFR, Section 403.5 and includes specific prohibitions or limits as
developed by a POTW, either as a requirement of an approved POTW pretreatment
program or an NPDES Permit.



   NEW SOURCE.  Any source, the construction of which is commenced after
the publication of proposed regulations prescribing a Section 307 (c) (33
U.S.C. 1317) categorical pretreatment standard which will be applicable to
that source, if the standard is thereafter promulgated within 120 days of
proposal in the Federal Register. Where the standard is promulgated later
than 120 days after proposal, a new source means any source, the construction
of which is commenced after the date of promulgation of the standard.



(Ord. PO-80-1, passed 11-24-80)



   NORMAL DOMESTIC SEWAGE.  Wastes such as are normally discharged from
individual residences and other housing units.  Normal domestic sewage shall
not include any waste containing a loading in excess of 200 milligrams per
liter (mg/l) "BOD" and 250 mg/l suspended solids. (Ord. CO-80- 19, passed
11-24-80)



   NPDES.  National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.



   NPDES PERMIT.  National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit
setting forth conditions for the discharge of any pollutant or combination of
pollutants to the navigable waters of the United States pursuant to Section
402 of PL 92-500.



   NUISANCE.  Anything which is injurious to health or offensive to the
senses or an obstruction to the free use of property so as to interfere with
the comfort or enjoyment of life or property.



   O & M.  Operation and maintenance.



(Ord. PO-80-1, passed 11-24-80)



   OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE EXPENSES.  All ordinary and necessary
expenses incurred in the normal operation of the sewage works, including but
not limited to salaries and wages, electrical power, chemicals, supplies,
minor repairs, insurance, and taxes.



(Ord. CO-80-19, passed 11-24-80)



   PASS THROUGH.  A discharge which exits the POTW into the waters of the
United States in quantities or concentrations which alone or with discharge
or discharges from other sources is a cause or causes a violation of the
POTW's NPDES Permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a
violation.  (Ord. CO-83-4, passed 4-25-83; Am. Ord. PO-98-4, passed 6-8-98)



   PERSON.  Any and all persons, natural or artificial, including any
individual, firm, company, municipal or private corporation, partnership,
copartnership, joint stock company, trust, estate, association, society,
institution, enterprise, governmental agency, the State of Indiana, the
United States of America, or other legal entity, or their legal
representatives, agents, or assigns.



   pH.  The logarithm to the base 10 of the reciprocal of the hydrogen
ion concentration of a solution expressed in gram atoms per liter of solution.



   POLLUTION.  An alteration of the quality of the waters of the state by
waste to a degree which unreasonably affects the waters for beneficial uses
or facilities which serve the beneficial uses.  The man- made or man-induced
alteration of the chemical, physical, biological, and radiological integrity
of water.



   POLLUTANT.  Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue,
sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological
materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment,
rock, sand, cellar dirt, and industrial, municipal, and agricultural waste
discharged into water.



   POTW.  See PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS.



(Ord. PO-80-1, passed 11-24-80)



   POTW TREATMENT PLANT.  That portion of the POTW designed to provide
treatment to wastewater.



   PREMISES.  A parcel of real estate including any single improvement
thereon which is determined by the Utility Service Board to be a single user
for purposes of receiving, using, and payment for service.



   PRETREATMENT.  The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the
elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of
discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a POTW.  The
reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical, or biological
processes, process changes or by other means, except as prohibited by 40 CFR
Section 403.6(d), and shall include all applicable rules and regulations
contained in the code of Federal Regulations as published in the Federal
Register, under Section 307 of Public Law 92- 500, under regulation 40 CFR
Part 403 pursuant to the Act, and amendments.



   PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS.  Any substantive or procedural requirement
related to pretreatment, other than a National Pretreatment Standard imposed
on an industrial user.



   PROPER OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE.  Procedures executed in a prudent,
cost-effective, and workmanlike manner which achieve the highest and/or the
required effluent quality of industrial discharge attainable in conformance
with the best available technology and practices.  PROPER OPERATION AND
MAINTENANCE requirements include avoidance of operational error; adherence to
manual instructions; preventive maintenance; avoidance of careless or
improper operation; neat accurate sampling; analysis and records retention;
storage of process chemicals, lubricants, solvents, and the like in a safe
and organized manner; avoidance of accidental spillage; keeping operating
logs; and other activities which produce the desired effluent quality. 
(Ord. CO-83-4, passed 4-25-83; Am. Ord. PO-98-4, passed 6-8-98)



   PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS or POTW.  A treatment works as defined
by Section 212 of the Act, (33 U.S.C. 1292) which is owned in this instance
by the city.  This definition includes any sewers that convey wastewater to
the "POTW" treatment plant, but does not include pipes, sewers, or other
conveyances not connected to a facility providing treatment.  For the
purposes of this chapter POTW shall also include any sewers that convey
wastewaters to the POTW from persons outside the city who are, by contract or
agreement with the city, users of the city's POTW.  Also, known as sewage
works.



   RCRA.  Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (P.1. 94-580). (Ord.
CO-83-4, passed 4-25-83)



   RECEIVING STREAM.  The watercourse, stream, or body of water receiving
the waters finally discharged from the wastewater treatment plant.



(Ord. PO-80-1, passed 11-24-80)



   REPLACEMENT.  Expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment,
accessories, or appurtenances which are necessary during the service life of
the treatment works, to maintain the capacity and performance for which the
works were designed and constructed.



(Ord. CO-80-19, passed 11-24-80)



   RESIDENTIAL.  Single family dwelling.



   SANITARY SEWAGE.  The waste from water closets, urinals, lavatories,
sinks, bathtubs, showers, basement drains, household laundries, garage floor
drains, bars, soda fountains, cuspidors, refrigerator drips, drinking
fountains, stable floor drains, and all other watercarried waste except
industrial wastes.  (Ord. PO-80-19, passed 11-24-80)



   SERVICE LIFE.  The estimated useful life of the sewage works. For
purposes of determining replacement, the city adopts the following guidelines
for service lives for components of its sewage works.



      (1)   Structures.  (Includes buildings, sewers, lift
stations)   50 years



      (2)   Process equipment.  (Includes major process equipment
such as clarifier mechanism and vacuum filters, steel process tankage and
chemical storage facilities, and electrical generating facilities on standby
service only.)   20 years



      (3)   Auxiliary equipment.  (Includes sewage pumps and
electric motors, mechanical equipment such as compressors, aeration systems,
centrifuges, and electrical generating facilities on regular
service.)   15 years



(Ord. CO-80-19, passed 11-24-80)



   SEWAGE WORKS.  Sewers, wastewater treatment plant, sewerage system,
and any associated structures or equipment.  Also known as POTW.



   SEWER.  A pipe or conduit laid for carrying wastewater or other
liquids.



      (1)   COMBINED SEWER.  A sewer which carries both storm,
surface, ground water runoff, and wastewater.



      (2)   PUBLIC SEWER.  A sewer in which all owners of abutting
property have equal rights and which is controlled by public authority,
including the following elements.



         (a)   COLLECTION SEWER.  A sewer whose primary purpose
is to collect wastewater from individual point source discharges.



         (b)   FORCE MAIN.  A pipe in which wastewater is
carried under pressure.



         (c)   INTERCEPTOR SEWER.  A sewer whose primary purpose
is to transport wastewater from collector sewers to a treatment facility.



         (d)   PUMPING STATION.  A station positioned in the
public sewerage system at which wastewater is pumped to higher level.



      (3)   SANITARY SEWER.  A sewer which carries wastewater and
to which storm, surface, and ground waters and unpolluted industrial
wastewater are not intentionally admitted.



      (4)   STORM SEWER.  A sewer which carries storm, surface, and
ground water drainage but excludes wastewater.



   SEWERAGE SYSTEM.  The network of publicly owned sewers and
appurtenances used for collecting, transporting, and pumping wastewater to
the wastewater treatment plant.



   SIC.  Standard Industrial Classification.



   SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER.  A contributor that is any Categorical
Industrial User (CIU) or contributor that is any other Industrial user (IU)
which:  (a) has a discharge of twenty-five thousand (25,000) gallons or more
per day; (b) has in its waste a toxic pollutants in toxic amounts as defined
in Section 307 of the Federal Act; (c) has a flow of five percent or greater
of the discharge carried by the municipal system receiving the waste; (d) has
a discharge which makes up five percent or more of the dry weather average
hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW; (e) has in its wastes toxic
pollutants as defined pursuant to Section 307 of the Act of State Statutes
and rules; (f) is found by the City, State Control Agency, or the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to have a reasonable potential, either
singly or in combination with other industries, for adversely affecting the
wastewater treatment system, the quality of sludge, the system's effluent
quality or air emissions generated by the system.  (Ord. PO-98-4, passed
6-8-98)



   SIGNIFICANT NON-COMPLIANCE.  Any user whose violation remains
uncorrected 45 days after notification of non-compliance; which is part of a
pattern of non-compliance over a twelve month period; which involves failure
to accurately report non-compliance; or which results in the POTW exercising
its emergency authority. For the purposes of this provision, an industrial
user is in non-compliance if its violation meets one or more of the following
criteria.



      (1)   Chronic violations of wastewaster discharge limits,
defined here as those in which 66% or more of all of the measurements taken
during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) the daily maximum limit
or the average limit for the same pollutant parameter;



      (2)   Technical Review Criteria (TRC) violations, defined here
as those in which 33% or more of all of the measurements for each pollutant
parameter taken during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of the
daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable TRC
(TRC = 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil and grease, and 1.2 for all other
pollutants except pH);



      (3)   Any other violation of a pretreatment effluent limit
(daily maximum or longer-term average) that the Control Authority determines
has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interferences or
pass through (including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the
general public);



      (4)   Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent
endangerment to human health, welfare or to the environment or has resulted
in the POTW's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a
discharge;



      (5)   Failure to meet, within 90 days after the schedule date,
a compliance schedule milestone contained in a local control mechanism or
enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction or
attaining final compliance;



      (6)   Failure to accurately report non-compliance;



      (7)   Any other violation or group of violations which the
Control Authority determines will adversely affect the operation or
implementation of the local pretreatment program.



(Ord. PO-98-4, passed 6-8-98)



   SLUDGE.  Any solid, semi-solid, or liquid waste generated from a
municipal commercial, or industrial wastewater treatment plant, water supply
treatment plant, or air pollution control facility or any other waste having
similar characteristics and effects as defined in standards issued under
Section 402, 405 of the Federal Act and in the applicable requirements under
Sections 3001, 3004 and 4004 of the Solid Waste Disposal Act PL 94-580.



   SLUG.  Any discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration of
any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of
duration longer than five minutes more than five times the average 24 hour
concentration of flow during normal operation and shall adversely affect the
sewage works.



   STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION or SIC.  A classification pursuant
to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive
Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1972.



   STANDARD METHODS.  The laboratory procedures set forth in the latest
edition, at the time of analysis, of "Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water and Wastewater" prepared and published jointly by the American Public
Health Association, the American Water Works Association and the Water
Pollution Control Federation.



   STORM WATER.  Any flow occurring during or following any form of
natural precipitation and resulting therefrom.



   SUPERINTENDENT.  The administrative head of the wastewater treatment
plant.



   SUPERVISOR, SEWER MAINTENANCE.  Administrative head of sewer
maintenance.



   SURCHARGE.  A charge for services in addition to the basic service
charge.



   SUSPENDED SOLIDS.  Solids which either float on the surface of or are
in suspension in water, sewage, or other liquid and which are removable by
laboratory filtration.  Their concentration shall be expressed in milligrams
per liter.  Quantitative determination shall be made in accordance with
procedures set forth in "Standard Methods."



   SWDA.  Solid Waste Disposal Act. 42 U.S.C. 6901, et seq.



   TOTAL SOLIDS.  The sum of suspended and dissolved solids.



   TOXIC AMOUNT.  Concentrations of any pollutant or combination of
pollutants which upon exposure to or assimilation into any organism will
cause adverse effects such as cancer, genetic mutations, and physiological
manifestations, as defined in standards issued pursuant to Section 307 (a) of
PL 92-500.



   TOXIC SUBSTANCES.  Any chemical or mixture that may present an
unreasonable risk of injury to health or the environment.



   TOXICS.  Those pollutants that have a toxic effect on living organisms.



   TSS.  Total suspended solids.



   UNPOLLUTED WATER.  Water of quality equal to or better than the
effluent criteria in effect, or water that would not cause violation of
receiving water quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to
sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.



   UPSET.  An exceptional incident in which a Discharger unintentionally
and temporarily is in a state of noncompliance with the standards set forth
in this chapter due to factors beyond the reasonable control of the
discharger, and excluding noncompliance to the extent caused by operational
error, improperly designed pretreatment facilities, lack of preventive
maintenance, or careless or improper operation thereof.  (Ord. CO-83-4,
passed 4-25-83; Am. Ord. PO-98-4, passed 6-8-98)



   USB.  Utility Service Board.



   USC.  United States Code.



   USER.  Any person that discharges, causes, or permits the discharge of
wastewater into the sewerage system.



(Ord. PO-80-1, passed 11-24-80)



   USER CHARGE.  That charge applied uniformly to all users of the sewage
works to cover operation and maintenance expenses and replacement, based on
the quantity of sewage produced as measured by water meters or other
acceptable measuring devices.  (Ord. CO-80-19, passed 11-24-80)



   USER CLASSES.



      (1)   INDUSTRIAL CLASS. Includes any user, identified in the
Standard Industrial Classification Manual of 1972, Office of Management and
Budget, as amended and supplemented, under the following divisions: 
Division A - Agriculture, Forestry and Fishing; Division B - Mining; Division
D - Manufacturing; Division E -Transportation, Communications, Electric, Gas
and Sanitary services; and Division I - Services.



      (2)   NON-INDUSTRIAL CLASS.  Includes all users whose wastes
are segregated domestic wastes or wastes from sanitary conveniences where
regular domestic wastes are those wastes generated by normal domestic
activity.



   UTILITY SERVICE BOARD.  The administrative governing body of the
public utilities of the city.  Herein also referred to as the "Board."



   VOLATILE ORGANIC MATTER.  The material in the sewage solids
transformed to gases or vapors when heated at 550°C. for 15 to 20 minutes.



   WASTE.  Includes sanitary sewage and any and all other waste
substances, liquid, solid, gaseous, or radioactive, associated with human
habitation, or of human or animal origin, or from any producing, processing,
manufacturing, or industrial operation of whatever nature, including such
waste placed within containers of whatever nature, prior to, and for purposes
of disposal.



   WASTEWATER.  The water-carried waste from residences, business
buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, singular or in any
combination, together with such ground, surface, and storm waters as may be
present.



   WASTEWATER CONSTITUENTS AND CHARACTERISTICS.  The individual chemical,
physical, bacteriological, and radiological parameters, including volume,
flow rate, and such other parameters that serve to define, classify or
measure the contents, quality, quantity, and strength of wastewater.



   WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT.  Any arrangement of devices and structures
used for treating wastewater.



   WATERCOURSE.  A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.



   WATERS OF THE STATE.  Any water, surface or underground, within the
boundaries of the state, except confined waters in sewers, tanks, and the
like.



   WPCF.  Water Pollution Control Federation.



(Ord. PO-80-1, passed 11-24-80)



§ 51.002  CITY MAY IMPOSE RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   (A)   The Utility Service Board shall, in accordance with state law
make and enforce whatever bylaws, rules, and regulations it may deem
necessary for the safe, economical, and efficient management of the city's
sewage works, for the construction and use of building sewers and connections
to the sewerage system, and for the implementation of the provisions of this
chapter in general.  (Ord. PO-80-1, passed 11-24-80)



   (B)   The city shall also make and enforce such by-laws and
regulations as may be deemed necessary for the safe, economic, and efficient
management of the city's sewage works, including the sewer system and the
treatment plant for the construction and use of house sewers and connections
to the sewer system, and for the regulation, collection, rebating, and
refunding of rates and charges.  ('75 Code, § 7.04)  (Ord. CO-67-18,
passed 11-28-67; Am. Ord. CO-80-19, passed 11-24-80)



§ 51.003  APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS.



   The terms of this chapter shall apply to the entire service area from
which sewage is received and treated at the wastewater treatment plant, both
inside and outside of the city's corporation limits.



(Ord. PO-80-1, passed 11-24-80)



§ 51.004  CITY TO MAINTAIN BOOKS AND RECORDS.



   (A)   The city shall keep proper books and records relative to the
revenues and expenses of the sewage works and shall maintain in its files all
reports relative to strength and character of usage.  All such records shall
be made available for inspection by representatives of the Environmental
Protection Agency at all reasonable times.



   (B)   The city shall report annually to the Environmental Protection
Agency information as requested by the Agency in the form the Agency shall
prescribe.



('75 Code, § 7.46)  (Ord. CO-80-19, passed 11-24-80)



§ 51.005  NATIONAL POLLUTION DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM PERMIT.



   The city has been issued National Pollution Discharge Elimination
System Permit No. IN0022934 by the Environmental Protection Agency governing
discharge from a publicly owned treatment works.  The provisions contained
in this chapter are set forth in accordance with the conditions relative to
the permit and directives of the Environmental Protection Agency.



(Ord. CO-80-19, passed 11-24-80)



§ 51.006  FALSIFYING INFORMATION.



   Any “person” who knowingly makes any false statements,
representation, record, report, plan, or other document filed with the
Utility Service Board or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders
inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under these regulations
violates this chapter, and in addition may be subject to prosecution as a
Class B misdemeaner pursuant to I.C. 13-30-6-2.



(Ord. PO-80-1, passed 11-24-80; Am. Ord. PO-98-4, passed 6-8-98)  Penalty,
see § 51.999



§ 51.007  ACCESS TO PRIVATE PROPERTY.



   (A)   The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the
Sewage Works bearing proper credential and identification shall be permitted
to enter all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling, and testing in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter. Entry may be made at any time deemed necessary by the Superintendent.



   (B)   While performing the necessary work on private properties
referred to in division (A) above, the Superintendent or duly authorized
employees of the utility shall observe all safety rules applicable to the
premises established by the company.  The Utility Service Board shall
indemnify the company against loss or damage to its property by utility
employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or
property damage asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging
and sampling operation, except those which may be caused by negligence or
failure of the company to maintain safe conditions.



   (C)   The Superintendent and/or other duly authorized employees of
the Sewage Works bearing proper credentials and identification shall be
permitted to enter all private properties of User which discharges to the
POTW for the purpose of, but not limited to inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the sewerage
works lying within the easement.  All entry and subsequent work, if any, on
the easement shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the easement
pertaining to the private property involved.



   (D)   Upon oral or written notification, the City (or its Agents)
reserves the right to enter upon private property to inspect and or perform
any test it deems necessary for the elimination of any direct or indirect
inflow. Any cost associated with the inspection and testing shall be borne by
the City. All cost and expenses of repairs that need to be performed shall be
borne by the owner.



('75 Code, § 7.46) (Ord. PO-80-1, passed 11-24-80; Am. Ord. PO-98-4, passed
6-8-98)



§ 51.008  ANNUAL REVIEW.



   This chapter shall be reviewed annually by the superintendent, or his
designated representative, to insure compliance with current state and
federal regulations, and as necessary recommend to the Utility Service Board
actions to upgrade this chapter.



(Ord. PO-80-1, passed 11-24-80)



§ 51.009  ALL USERS REQUIRED TO RETAIN CERTAIN RECORDS.



   (A)   All users subject to this chapter shall retain and preserve
for no less than five years any records, books, documents, memoranda,
reports, correspondence, and any and all summaries thereof, relating to the
monitoring, sampling, and chemical analysis made by, or in behalf of a user
in connection with its discharge.



   (B)   All records which pertain to matters which are the subject of
administrative adjustment or any other enforcement or litigation activities
brought by the city pursuant hereto shall be retained and preserved by the
user until all enforcement activities have concluded and all periods of
limitation with respect to any and all appeals have expired.



   (C)   The publicly owned treatment works shall retain and preserve
all permit files, records, and enforcement activity records for no less than
five years.



(Ord. CO-83-4, passed 4-25-83; Am. Ord. PO-98-4, passed 6-8-98)



§ 51.010  OPERATING UPSETS; REQUIRED REPORTS.



   (A)   Any user which experiences an upset in operations which places
the user in a temporary state of non-compliance with this chapter or a
wastewater discharge permit issued pursuant hereto shall inform the
Superintendent within 24 hours of first awareness of the commencement of the
upset.  Where such information is given orally, a written follow-up report
thereof shall be filed by the user with the publicly owned treatment works
within five days.



   (B)   The report shall specify the following.



      (1)   A description of the upset, the cause thereof, and the
impact of the upset on the discharger's compliance status.



      (2)   Duration of the non-compliance, including the exact date
and times of non-compliance, and if the non-compliance continues, the time by
which compliance is reasonably expected to occur.



      (3)   All steps taken or to be taken to reduce, eliminate, and
prevent recurrence of such an upset or other conditions of non-compliance.



(Ord. CO-83-4, passed 4-25-83; Am. Ord. PO-98-4, passed 6-8-98)



§ 51.011  CONSTRUCTION OF COMBINED SEWERS PROHIBITED.



   Construction of any new combined sewers is prohibited.



(Ord. PO-98-4, passed 6-8-98)



RATES AND CHARGES



§ 51.015  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   The rates and charges herein set forth shall be extended to, and cover,
any additional premises thereafter served, without the necessity of any
notice or hearing.



(Ord. CO-80-19, passed 11-24-80; Am. Ord. CO-81-8, passed 9-28-81)



§ 51.016  USER CLASSIFICATIONS.



   At the time of the adoption of this chapter, the city has classified
the users according to EPA guidelines.  The city shall annually perform
tests to determine that each user class is producing its proportionate share
of the total annual revenues required to operate the sewage system.  User
classes are as follows.



   (A)   Residential.  Includes all dwelling units including detached,
semi-detached, and row houses, mobile homes, garden and standard apartments,
and permanent multi-family dwellings.  Transient lodging, considered
commercial in nature, is not included.



   (B)   Commercial.  Includes transient lodging, retail and wholesale
establishments or places engaged in selling merchandise for personal,
household or industrial consumption, or rendering services to others.



   (C)   Institutional.  Includes social, charitable, religious, and
educational activities such as schools, churches, hospitals, nursing homes,
penal institutions, and similar institutional users.



   (D)   Governmental.  Includes legislative, judicial,
administrative, and regulatory activities of federal, state and local
governments, such as courthouses, police and fire stations, city halls, and
similar governmental users.



   (E)   Industrial.  Includes manufacturing activities involving the
mechanical or chemical transformation of materials and substances into other
products.  These activities occur in establishments usually described as
plants, factories, or mills and characteristically use power driven machines
and material handling equipment.



(Ord. CO-80-19, passed 11-24-80)



§ 51.017  RATES BASED ON SEWAGE VOLUME.



   For the use of and the services rendered by the sewage works, rates and
charges shall be collected from the owner of each and every lot, parcel of
real estate, or building that is connected with the city's sanitary sewage
system or otherwise discharges sanitary sewage, industrial waste, water, or
other liquids either directly or indirectly, into the sanitary sewage system
of the city, which rates and charges shall be payable as herein provided and
shall be in an amount determinable as follows.  The sewage rates and charges
shall be based on the volume of sewage discharged into the sanitary sewage
system of the city, from the property or premises subject to such rates and
charges, as the same is measured by the water meter there in use, except as
otherwise provided in this chapter.



('75 Code, § § 7.01 and 7.02)  (Ord. CO-67-18, passed 11-28-67; Am. Ord.
CO-80-19, passed 11-24-80)



§ 51.018  MONTHLY CHARGES.



   (A)   Monthly charges:



 

Per customer charge to cover customer costs and debt service (local capital
costs)
 

$7.88



User flow charge, per 100 cubic feet (for operation, maintenance,
replacement, and debt service
 

$3.43



Indiana Department of Environmental Management required phosphorous treatment
chemical costs, chemical feed building construction costs, and support costs
 

$0.014 per 100 cubic feet




 



   (B)   Customers outside the city limits shall pay 125% of the
calculated charges, unless governed by individual agreement between the
customer and the Utility Service Board.



('75 Code, § 7.05)  (Ord. CO-67-18, passed 11-28-67; Am. Ord. CO-78- 16,
passed 7-5-78; Am. Ord. CO-80-19, passed 11-24-80; Am. Ord. CO- 81-8, passed
9-28-81; Am. Ord. CO-83-6, passed 7-11-83; Am. Ord. 85- 13, passed 7-25-85;
Am. Ord. CO-04-27, passed 11-8-04; Am. Ord. CO- 06-10, passed 3-13-06; Am.
Ord. CO-07-08, passed 6-25-07; Am. Ord. 10-06, passed 6-14-10; Am. Ord.
17-18, passed 12-5-17)



§ 51.019  DETERMINATION OF USER AND DEBT SERVICE CHARGES.



   (A)   The user charge and debt service charge shall be revaluated
annually, as soon after the close of the calendar year as practical, and
shall be adjusted in accordance with the following formula.



               Annual Revenues Required for Operation,



               Maintenance, and Replacement



      CU =             (exclusive of customer costs)       
     



               Annual Flow in Hundred Cubic Feet



   (B)   The charge for debt service will in like manner be revaluated
in accordance with the following formula.



      CD =   Annual Revenues Required for Debt Service



            Annual Flow in Hundred Cubic Feet



(Ord. CO-80-19, passed 11-24-80)



§ 51.020  MINIMUM CHARGES BASED ON METER SIZE.



   (A)   Where meters larger than 5/8 inch and 3/4 inch are installed,
the following minimum charges shall apply for operation, maintenance,
replacement, and debt service:



 

Size of Water Meter
 




1 inch meter
 
$35.62


1 1/4 inch meter
 
$53.43


1 1/2 inch meter
 
$66.79


2 inch meter
 
$89.09


3 inch meter
 
$133.62


4 inch meter
 
$222.70


6 inch meter
 
$334.09




 



   (B)   The minimum charge for any service where the user is not a
metered water consumer shall be based on the size of the service connection,
but no such charge shall be less than $59.36.  In all cases where the user
is not a metered water consumer, the city shall have the right at all times
to estimate the usage and to bill the user in accordance with such estimated
usage, but the monthly charge shall be not less than $59.36.



   (C)   Customers outside the city limits shall pay 125% of the
calculated charges, unless governed by individual agreement between the
customer and the Utility Service Board.



('75 Code, § 7.06)  (Ord. CO-67-18, passed 11-28-67; Am. Ord. CO-78-16,
passed 7-5-78; Am. Ord. CO- 80-19, passed 11-24-80; Am. Ord. 85-13, passed
7-25-85; Am. Ord. PO-98-4, passed 6-8-98; Am. Ord. CO-04-27, passed 11-8-04;
Am. Ord. CO-06-10, passed 3-13-06; Am. Ord. CO-07-08, passed 6-25-07; Am.
Ord. 10-06, passed 6-14-10)



§ 51.021  MULTIPLE USERS ON SINGLE METER.



   (A)   In the event two or more residential lots, parcels of real
estate, or buildings discharging sanitary sewage, water, or other liquids
into the city's sanitary sewage system, either directly or indirectly, are
users of water and the quantity of water is measured by a single water meter,
then in each such case, for billing purposes, the quantity of water used will
be averaged for each user and the minimum charge and the sewage rates and
charges shall apply to each of the number of residential lots, parcels of
real estate, or buildings served through the single water meter.



   (B)   In the event two or more dwelling units, such as trailers,
apartments, or housekeeping rooms, discharging sanitary sewage, water, or
other wastes into the city's sanitary system, either directly or indirectly,
are users of water and the quantity of water is measured by a single water
meter, then in such event, billing shall be for a single service, to which
shall be added a charge of $1.71 per month, for each dwelling in excess of
one.



('75 Code, § 7.11)  (Ord. CO-67-18, passed 11-28-67; Am. Ord. CO-80-19,
passed 11-24-80; Am. Ord. CO-81-8, passed 9-28-81; Am. Ord. 10-06, passed
6-14-10)



§ 51.022  LAWN SPRINKLING.



   (A)   In order that domestic and residential users of sewage
services shall not be penalized for the sprinkling of lawns during the months
of June, July, August, and September, the billing for sewage service for
residences or domestic users for the months of June, July, August, and
September shall be based on the average of the water usage billed for the
previous months of January, February, March, and April.  In the event the
water usage for the previous months of January, February, March, and April is
greater than the water usage for the months of June, July, August, and
September, then the billing for sewage service shall be computed on the
actual water used in the month for which the sewage service bill is being
rendered.



      (1)   In case of an emergency drought situation during the
month of May, an adjustment will be made on sewage rates for those residents
of the city whose water meter readings show excessive water usage and are on
sprinkling rates from the previous year.  Said adjustment shall be computed
as set forth above.



      (2)   The decision concerning an emergency drought situation
will be made by the Utility Service Board prior to June 1.



   (B)   Domestic or residential sewage service, as applicable to the
sprinkling rate, shall apply to each lot, parcel of real estate, or building
which is occupied and used as a residence.  The sprinkling rate shall not
apply to any premises which are partially or wholly used for industrial or
commercial purposes.



   (C)   In the event a portion of the premises is used for commercial
or industrial purposes and a portion for residential use, the owner may
separate the water service so that the residential portion of the premises is
served through a separate meter, and in that case, the water usage as
registered by the water meter serving the portion of the premises used for
residential purposes would qualify under the sprinkling rate.



('75 Code, § 7.12)  (Ord. CO-67-18, passed 11-28-67; Am. Ord. CO-80-19,
passed 11-24-80; Am. Ord. CO-81-8, passed 9-28-81; Am. Ord. CO-88-13, passed
9-26-88; Am. Ord. PO-98-4, passed 6-8-98)



§ 51.023  SURCHARGE BASED ON STRENGTH, CHARACTER OF WASTE.



   (A)   In order that the rates and charges may be justly and
equitably adjusted to the service rendered, the city shall impose in addition
to the charge based on volume a surcharge based on the strength and character
of the sewage and waste which it is required to treat and dispose of.  The
city shall have the right to measure and determine or cause to be measured
and determined, the strength and content of all



sewage and waste discharged either directly or indirectly into the city's
sanitary sewage system in such manner and by such methods as may be deemed
practical in the light of the conditions and attending circumstances in order
to determine the proper charge.



   (B)   Any and all commercial and industrial installations having an
effluent discharge into the city's sewers with an average BOD exceeding 200
parts per million concentration and/or an average daily suspended solids
exceeding 250 parts-per million concentration shall be deemed to be
discharging sewage of such strength as to require a surcharge for the
treatment and disposal thereof.  The surcharges shall be as follows:



 

BOD in excess of 200 mg/l
 
$0.22 per pound


SS in excess of 250 mg/l
 
$0.18 per pound


Ammonia in excess of 40 mg/l
 
$1.01 per pound


Compatible fats, oils and greases in excess of 100 mg/l
 
$0.25 per pound


Phosphorous in excess of 1 mg/l
 
$0.90 per pound



 



   (C)   The city is authorized to prohibit the dumping of waste into
the city’s sewage system, which, in the city’s discretion are deemed
harmful to the operation of the sewage treatment works of the city and is
further authorized to require methods of pretreatment of the wastes to reduce
the harmful characteristics of the waste prior to discharge thereof into the
city’s system.



   (D)   The surcharges to be imposed by the city for the treatment of
such waste shall be based upon the following formula:



Surcharge = (Bo (BOD5 - ba) + So (SS - Sa) + Ao (Amm - Aa) x (8.34 x V). 
For the purposes of this formula, the following definitions shall apply.



      (1)   Bo    =  Average unit cost of treatment, chargeable
to BOD, dollars per pound.



      (2)   BOD5 +  The concentration of BOD5 in the wastewater
from a specific user, parts per million.



      (3)   Ba    =  Maximum concentration of BOD5 in parts per
million which can be discharged into the city's collection system without a
surcharge - 200 parts per million.



      (4)   So    =  Average unit cost of treatment (including
sludge treatment) chargeable to suspended solids, dollars per pound.



      (5)   SS    =  The concentration of suspended solids in the
wastewater from a specific user.



      (6)   Sa    =  Maximum concentration of suspended solids in
parts per million which can be discharged into the city's collection system
without a surcharge - 250 parts per million.



      (7)   Ao  =  Average unit cost of treatment chargeable to
ammonia, dollars per pound.



      (8)   Amm  =  The concentration of ammonia in the wastewater
from a specific user, parts per million.



      (9)   Aa  =  Maximum concentration of ammonia in parts per
million which can be discharged into the city’s collection system without a
surcharge - 40 parts per million.



      (10)   V  =  Volume in million gallons.



   (E)   Customers outside the city limits shall pay 125% of the
calculated charges, unless governed by individual agreement between the
customer and the Utility Service Board.



('75 Code, § 7.15)  (Ord. CO-67-18, passed 11-28-67; Am. Ord. CO-80- 19,
passed 11-24-80; Am. Ord. CO-83-6, passed 7-11-83; Am. Ord. 85- 13, passed
7-25-85; Am. Ord. CO-04-27, passed 11-8-04; Am. Ord. CO- 06-10, passed
3-13-06; Am. Ord. CO-07-08, passed 6-25-07; Am. Ord. 10-06, passed 6-14-10;
Am. Ord. 14-02, passed 3-24-14; Am. Ord. 17-18, passed 12-5-17)



§ 51.024  SURCHARGE FEE FOR INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANTS.



   (A)   A surcharge fee shall be charged any contributor who
discharges incompatible pollutants into the sewerage system.  Such surcharge
fee shall be determined by the pounds of such material contributed to the
sewerage system over the permit or ordinance limits, whichever is most
restrictive.



   (B)   The levying and paying of a surcharge fee shall not abrogate
the legal requirements as described in CFR 40 or Section 10 and Section 11 of
this chapter, as they may be amended.



   (C)   The surcharge fee per pound of excess material shall be 100
times the fee in effect at the time such surcharge is levied for 100 cubic
feet of sewerage.



   (D)   The surcharge fee for exceeding the permit limits for two
consecutive quarters shall be twice the regular surcharge fee for the
particular quarter.



   (E)   The surcharge fee for exceeding the permit limits for three
consecutive quarters shall be four times the regular surcharge fee for the
particular quarter.



   (F)   The regular surcharge fee shall be calculated as follows:



 

Parts
 
 
Million gal.
 
 
1003#
 
 
$173
 
 


Mill.  over limit
 
x
 
For Calendar Quarter
 
x
 
12 Gal.
 
x
 
#
 
=
 
Regular Surcharge Fee



 



   (G)   The quarters for which such surcharge fee will be calculated
are the calendar quarters ending March 31, June 30, September 30, and
December 31, respectively.



(Ord. CO-88-19, passed 2-13-89; Am. Ord. PO-98-4, passed 6-8-98)



§ 51.025  BILLING AND COLLECTION.



   The rates and charges shall be prepared and billed by the city, and
shall be collected in the manner provided by law and ordinance. The rates and
charges will be billed to the tenant or tenants occupying the property
served, unless otherwise requested in writing by the owners, but the billing
shall in no way relieve the owner from liability in the event payment is not
made as herein required.  The owners of the property served, which are
occupied by tenants, shall have the right to examine the collection records
of the city for the purpose of determining whether the rates and charges have
been paid by the tenants, provided that the examination shall be made in the
office in which the records are kept and during the hours that the office is
open for business.



('75 Code, § 7.03)  (Ord. CO-67-18, passed 11-28-67; Am. Ord. CO-80-19,
passed 11-24-80)



Cross-reference:



   Fee for returned checks, see § 50.39



CONNECTION REGULATIONS



§ 51.030  CONNECTION TO PUBLIC SEWERS.



   (A)   No owner or occupant of any real property shall tap or drain
either directly or indirectly into any public sewer until a sewer tap permit
has been obtained and until he has satisfied his obligation to pay all
assessments, reimbursement, or prorated shares of sewer extension costs laid
against that property for public sewers installed to serve it.  A tap permit
given in error or sewerage service charges billed to a property in error
shall not operate to nullify any such obligation that has been duly recorded.



   (B)   The Utility Service Board shall have the authority to require
an owner of real property to disconnect from a building sewer which drains
into a sanitary sewer any downspouts, basement sub-surface drains, cistern
overflows, yard drains, or other drains which carry the runoff of natural
precipitation.  Property owners shall have 30 days after notice to comply
with any such requirements. The Utility Service Board shall not authorize any
tap permit which will cause excess flow, BOD or suspended solid loading of
the wastewater treatment plant, force, mains, lift stations, or sewers.



('75 Code, § 7.17)  (Ord. 4-78, passed 7-18-55; Am. Ord. PO-80-1, passed
11-24-80)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.031  CONNECTION BY OUT-OF-CITY USERS.



   (A)   The installation, construction, or extension of sewers outside
the corporate limits of the city and the connection or extension of sewers
into the city's sewerage system, by or from properties located outside the
limits shall be prohibited, except upon prior approval by the Utility Service
Board and the Common Council of the city by duly enacted ordinance.



   (B)   Notwithstanding the provisions of division (A) above, the
Utility Service Board shall have the authority to permit a property located
outside the corporate limits of the city to connect to an existing sewer
which is part of the city's sewerage system, provided the property abuts,
adjoins, and is immediately contiguous to the street, alley, or easement in
which the sewer is located and provided the property owner or occupant has
complied with the conditions set out in § 51.030.



(Ord. PO-80-1, passed 11-24-80)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.032  PROHIBITED CONNECTIONS.



   The Utility Service Board shall prohibit any new connection from inflow
sources into the sanitary sewer portions of the sewerage system and shall
assure that policies are established such that new sewers and connections to
the sanitary sewers are properly designed and connected.  The Board shall
not approve any new connection into the sanitary sewers which will cause
overloading.



(Ord. PO-80-1, passed 11-24-80)



§ 51.033  CONNECTION OF TOILET FACILITIES.



   The owner of any house, building, or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purpose, situated within the city
and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now
located a public sanitary or combined sewer of the city, is hereby required
at his expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect
the facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter, within 90 days after date of official notice to
do so, provided that the public sewer is within 100 feet of the property line.



(Ord. PO-80-1, passed 11-24-80)  Penalty, see § 51.999



PRIVATE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS



§ 51.040  WHEN PERMITTED.



   Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of
§§ 51.065 through 51.067, the building sewer shall be connected to a
private sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this
subchapter.  No statement contained in this subchapter shall be construed to
interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the city.



('75 Code, § 7.20)  (Ord. 4-78, passed 7-18-55; Am. Ord. PO-80-1, passed
11-24-80)



§ 51.041  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   Before commencement of construction of a private sewage
disposal system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit from the
city.  The application for the permit shall be made on a form furnished by
the city, which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications,
and other information as deemed necessary by the city.  A permit and
inspection fee of $325 for each residential connection, $400 for each
commercial connection, and $1,000 for each industrial connection shall be
paid to the Sewer Maintenance Division at the time the application is filed.
If more than one Family, Office, or Business occupies the same building, then
the initial permit/ connection fee shall be a minimum of $400 plus an
additional $25 per unit thereafter.



   (B)   A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become
effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the
city.  The city shall be allowed to inspect the work at any state of
construction, and in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the
city when the work is ready for final inspection, and before any underground
portions are covered.  The inspection shall be made within 48 hours of the
receipt of notice by the city.



   (C)   The type, capacities, location, and layout of a private sewage
disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the State Board of
Health and the Clinton County Health Department.  No permit shall be issued
for any private sewage disposal system employing sub-surface soil absorption
facilities where the area of the lot is less than 15,000 square feet.  No
septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any public sewer
or natural outlet.



('75 Code, § 7.21)  (Ord. 4-78, passed 7-18-55; Am. Ord. PO-80-1, passed
11-24-80; Am. Ord. PO-98-4, passed 6-8-98)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.042  CONNECTION REQUIRED WHEN PUBLIC SEWER AVAILABLE.



   (A)   For persons located within the municipal boundaries of the
City of Frankfort, at such time as a public sewer becomes available to a
property served by a private sewage disposal system by reason of a sanitary
sewer line being brought to within 300 feet of the property line of that
person, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance
with this chapter, and any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private
disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with a suitable sand and
gravel mixture.



   (B)   For property owners outside the municipal boundries of the
City of Frankfort to whom the public sanitary sewer system of the City of
Frankfort becomes available by a public sewer line being constructed to
within 300 feet of that persons property line, the board, may by resolution,
require the connection by such persons to the sanitary sewer line, and any
septic tanks, cesspools, or similar private sewage disposal facility shall be
abandoned and filled with a suitable sand and gravel mixture.



('75 Code, § 7.24)  (Ord. 4-78, passed 7-18-55; Am. Ord. PO-80-1, passed
11-24-80; Am. Ord. PO-98-4, passed 6-8-98)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.043  PRIVIES, SEPTIC TANKS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   Except as provided in this subchapter, it shall be unlawful to
construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other
facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage.  ('75 Code, § 7.19) 
(Ord. 4-78, passed 7-18-55; Am. Ord. PO-80-1, passed 11-24-80)



   (B)   Every factory, dwelling house, shop, hotel, and occupied
building where connection with a public sewer and water main is not
accessible, shall be provided with a suitable water closet, septic tank, or
privy vault located, constructed, kept, and maintained according to the rules
and regulations provided from time to time by the Board of Health having
jurisdiction in the city.  No water closet, septic tank, or privy vault so
constructed shall be kept, used, or maintained where connection with a public
sewer and water main has become accessible for a longer period than 60 days
from the time the connection becomes accessible.  ('75 Code, §  39.02) 
(Ord. 164, passed 10-20-52)



   (C)   All water closets, septic tanks, or privy vaults not located,
constructed, or maintained as provided in this chapter, or which emit noxious
and offensive odors, are hereby declared to be a nuisance.  The Board of
Health having jurisdiction in the city shall cause such nuisances to be
abated.  ('75 Code, §  39.04)  (Ord. 164, passed 10-20-52)



Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.044  MUST BE OPERATED IN SANITARY MANNER.



   The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal
facilities in a sanitary manner at all times at no expense to the city.



(Ord. PO-80-1, passed 11-24-80)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.045  SEWAGE SYSTEMS PROHIBITED NEAR WATER SUPPLY.



   No person, firm, or corporation shall erect any privy, cesspool, septic
tank, sanitary sewer, or any other structure, tank, or container above, on,
or below the ground that might contaminate the city water supply, closer than
200 feet to the nearest property line of any well or well field of the city
waterworks.  However, if any installation is approved by the Board of Public
Works and Safety of the city and the State Board of Health and a permit
issued for the installation contrary to the provisions set out in this
chapter, the person, firm, or corporation shall have the right to cause the
installation to be made.



('75 Code, §  39.03)  (Ord. 173, passed 5-3-60)  Penalty, see § 51.999



BUILDING SEWERS



§ 51.050  PERMIT REQUIRED; CLASSIFICATIONS.



   (A)   No person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening
into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer, or appurtenance thereof,
without first obtaining a written permit from the Utility Service Board or
its agents.



   (B)   There shall be three classes of building sewer inspection
permits for replacement or repair: (1) residential service, (2) for
commercial service, and (3) for service to establishments producing
industrial wastes.  In each case, the owner or his representative shall make
application on a special form furnished by the Board.  The permit
application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other
information considered pertinent in the judgment of the Board or its
agents.  There shall be a charge of $25 for a residential service, $50 for a
commercial service, and $100 for an industrial service made for the permit
and inspection.



   (C)   New services.



      (1)   Residential sewer tap/connection fee shall be $325. If
more than one tap is required per lot, additional tap(s) shall be billed
based on time and material with a minimum cost of $325 per tap.



      (2)   All other sewer tap/connections shall be $400. If no tap
is available, the tap/connection fee will be billed based on time and
material with a minimum cost $400 per tap.



      (3)   If more than one tap is required per lot, additional
tap(s) shall be billed based on time and material with a minimum cost of $400
per tap.



      (4)   If more than one Family, Office, or Business occupies
the same building, then the initial permit/connection fee shall be a minimum
of $400 plus an additional $25 per unit thereafter.



('75 Code, § 7.29)  (Ord. 4-78, passed 7-18-55; Am. Ord. PO-80-1, passed
11-24-80; Am. Ord. PO-98-4, passed 6-8-98)  Penalty, see §  51.99



§ 51.051  COST AND EXPENSE.



   All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of
the building sewer shall be borne by the owner.  The owner shall indemnify
the Utility Service Board for any loss or damage that may directly or
indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.



('75 Code, § 7.30)  (Ord. 4-78, passed 7-18-55; Am. Ord. PO-80-1, passed
11-24-80)



§  51.052  SEPARATE SEWER FOR EACH BUILDING; EXCEPTION.



   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building designed for human occupancy or business, except that where one
building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private
sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an
adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway, the building sewer from the front
building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one
building sewer. Cost of repair to be shared equally by both owners.



('75 Code, § 7.25)  (Ord. 4-78, passed 7-18-55; Am. Ord. PO-80-1, passed
11-24-80; Am. Ord. PO-98-4, passed 6-8-98)



§ 51.053  OLD SEWER CONNECTED TO NEW BUILDING.



   Old building sewers may be used in connection with a new building only
when they are found, on examination and test by the Supervisor of sewer
maintenance, to meet all requirements of this chapter.



(Ord. PO-80-1, passed 11-24-80)



§ 51.054  CONSTRUCTION SPECIFICATIONS.



   The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building
sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe,
jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the
requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and
regulations of the city.  In the absence of code provisions or in
amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate
specifications of the ASTM and WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9 current issue,
and the Uniform Building and Plumbing Code of the state shall apply.



('75 Code, § 7.26)  (Ord. PO-80-1, passed 11-24-80)



§ 51.055  ELEVATION.



   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building
at an elevation below the basement floor.  A cleanout shall be installed no
farther than three feet from the foundation.  No building sewer shall be
laid parallel to or within three feet of any bearing wall. The depth shall be
sufficient to afford protection from frost.  The building sewer shall be
laid at uniform grade and in straight alignment insofar as possible.



('75 Code, § 7.27)  (Ord. 4-78, passed 7-18-55; Am. Ord. PO-80-1, passed
11-24-80; Am. Ord. PO-98-4, passed 6-8-98)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.056  CONNECTION OF DOWNSPOUTS OR DRAINS.



   No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation
drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to
a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or
indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.



(Ord. PO-80-1, passed 11-24-80)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.057  CONNECTION OF BUILDING SEWER TO PUBLIC SEWER.



   (A)   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer
shall be made at the "Y" branch/tap connection as set forth in § 51.050. 
Special fittings may be used for the connection only when approved by the
Superintendent ofthe Sewer Maintenance Division.



   (B)   The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the
Supervisor of sewer maintenance when the building sewer is ready for
inspection and connection to the public sewer.  The connection shall be made
under the supervision of the Supervisor or his representative.



('75 Code, §§ 7.32 and 7.34)  (Ord. 4-78, passed 7-18-55; Am. Ord.
PO-80-1, passed 11-24-80; Am. Ord. CO-92-16, passed 10-12-92; Am. Ord.
PO-98-4, passed 6-8-98) Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.058  JOINTS AND CONNECTIONS.



   All joints and connections shall be made gastight and watertight.



('75 Code, § 7.33)  (Ord. 4-78, passed 7-18-55; Am. Ord. PO-80-1, passed
11-24-80)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.059  EXCAVATIONS.



   (A)   All excavations for building sewer installation shall be
adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public
from hazard.  Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property
disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner
satisfactory to the Supervisor of sewer maintenance.  ('75 Code, § 7.36)



   (B)   All excavations required for the installation of a building
sewer shall be open trench work unless otherwise approved by the Supervisor
of sewer maintenance.  Pipe laying and backfill shall be performed in
accordance with ASTM (C12-19) except that no backfill shall be placed until
the work has been inspected.  ('75 Code, § 7.35)



   (C)   Any person who makes, or causes to be made, an excavation for
the installation, replacement or repair of any sewer within the public
right-of-way, which excavation exceeds five (5) feet in depth, shall use a
safety trench box or similar device for the protection of employees, workers
and the general public from the hazards of cave-ins.  (Ord. PO-98-4, passed
6-8-98)



(Ord. 4-78, passed 7-18-55; Am. Ord. PO-80-1, passed 11-24-80) Penalty, see
§ 51.999



§ 51.060  RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNER.



   The owner of any building or other real estate which has a sewer,
sometimes referred to herein as "building sewer," connected now or in the
future to a public sewer shall be responsible for the maintenance, repair,
replacement and cleaning of the part of said building sewer which runs on or
under his said real estate to the following point, to-wit:  to the clean-out
and/or curb line in the case where the public sewer is under a street; to the
nearest edge of the traveled portion of the alley, in the case where the
public sewer is under an alley, and; to the nearest line of the particular
easement, where the public sewer is in an easement.  Provided, however, that
this requirement shall not change the obligation of the owner under § 51.057
or any other paragraph, regarding the initial construction and connection of
a building sewer to a public sewer.



(Ord. CO-92-16, passed 10-12-92; Am. Ord. PO-98-4, passed 6-8-98)



DISCHARGES



§ 51.065  DEPOSITING UNSANITARY MATTER ON PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the
city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any human or animal
excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste.



(Ord. PO-80-1, passed 11-24-80)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.066  STORMWATER, UNPOLLUTED DRAINAGE.



   (A)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged to any
sanitary sewer, whether directly or indirectly, stormwater, surface water,
ground water, roof run-off, subsurface drainage, cooling water, unpolluted
water, or unpolluted industrial process water.  The Utility Service Board
shall require the removal of unpolluted water from any wastewater collection
or treatment facility if the removal is cost- effective and is in the best
interest of all users of those facilities.



   (B)   Stormwater, surface water, ground water, roof run-off,
sub-surface drainage, cooling water, unpolluted water or unpolluted
industrial process water may be admitted to storm sewers which have adequate
capacity for their accommodation.  No person shall use the sewers, however,
without the specific permission of the city.  No new connection shall be
made unless there is capacity available to all downstream storm sewers.



   (C)   New and existing service.  There shall be three classes of
storm sewer permits: (1) for residential service, (2) for commercial service,
and (3) for service to industrial users. In each case, the owner or his
representative shall make application on a special form furnished by the
Board. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans,
specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgement of
the Board or its Agents. There shall be a charge of $25 for a residential
inspection, $50 for a commercial inspection, and $100 for an industrial
inspection made for such permit and inspection. When requested, and no
connection is available, such connection maybe made available and all cost
and expenses incident to the installation and connection shall be borne by
the party requesting said connection.



('75 Code, § 7.42)  (Ord. 4-78, passed 7-18-55; Am. Ord. PO-80-1, passed
11-24-80; Am. Ord. PO-98-4, passed 6-8-98)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.067  WASTEWATER, POLLUTED DRAINAGE.



   (A)   No person shall place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in
any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the jurisdiction
of the city, any wastewater or other polluted waters except where suitable
treatment has been provided in accordance with provisions of this chapter and
the NPDES permit.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within
the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the Utility Service Board,
sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been
provided in accordance with provisions of this chapter and the NPDES permit.



(Ord. PO-80-1, passed 11-24-80)  Penalty, see § 51.999



Cross-reference:



   Wastewater admissibility, see §§ 51.070 through 51.080



§ 51.068  DISCHARGE OF GREASE; GREASE TRAP INTERCEPTORS.



   It is unlawful for the owner, tenant, occupant, or any person in a
building or place where cooking is done, to discharge any grease into the
city sewer system. Any commercial cooking facility shall install a grease
trap interceptor and shall provide the city with proof of proper cleaning and
disposal of said interceptor upon request. Grease-trap interceptors are not
required for private living quarters or residential dwellings.



(Ord. PO-98-4, passed 6-8-98)



WASTEWATER ADMISSIBILITY STANDARDS



§ 51.070  PURPOSE.



   (A)   The objectives of these prohibitions and limitations are as
follows.



      (1)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the
municipal wastewater system which will interfere with the operation of the
system or contaminate the resulting sludge.



      (2)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the
municipal wastewater system which will pass through the system, inadequately
treated, into receiving waters or the atmosphere or otherwise be incompatible
with the system.



      (3)   To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim
wastewaters and sludges from the system.



   (B)   The POTW reserves the right to establish by ordinance more
stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to the wastewater
disposal system if deemed necessary to comply with the objectives presented
in division (A) above.



(Ord. PO-80-1, passed 11-24-80)



§ 51.071  PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.



   Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall discharge or cause to
be discharged wastewater containing in excess of the following concentrations
at the point or points where the wastewater enters the sewerage system based
upon average monthly discharge by-flow composite samples.  Multiple
industrial wastewater discharges from a permitted facility may be combined in
a flow-weighted manner to determine compliance with the following limitations
for the average monthly discharge.



   (A)   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150°F.
(65°C.).



   (B)   Any waters or wastes containing more than 100 milligrams per
liter of compatible animal or vegetable fats, oils, greases, or waxes of
animal or vegetable origin, whether emulsified or not, which may solidify or
become viscous at temperatures between 32°F. and 150°F. (0°C. and 65°C.).



   (C)   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, mineral or synthetic
oil, or any other flammable or explosive liquid, solid, or gas of mineral
origin whether emulsified or not.



   (D)   Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance which, either alone
or by integrating with other wastes, is capable of creating a public nuisance
or hazard to life or of preventing entry into sewers for their maintenance
and repair.



   (E)   Any garbage that has not been properly ground.



   (F)   Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, wood, metal,
glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, paunch manure, butchers' offal or any
other solid or viscous substance capable of causing interference with the
proper operation of the sewerage system or the wastewater treatment plant.



   (G)   Any waters or wastes containing any identifiable chlorinated
hydrocarbons.



   (H)   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than six or higher than
eleven or having any other property capable of causing damage or posing
hazards to the structures, equipment, or personnel



of the sewage works. If at any time the above limits are found to have an
adverse effect upon the Wastewater Treatment Plant or the collection system,
the limits will be changed to become more stringent and/or corrective action
will be taken to insure that the City does not violate its discharge permit.



   (I)   Any copper (Cu) in excess of 2.7 milligrams per liter in any
wastes discharged into a public sewer.



   (J)   Any zinc (Zn) in excess of 2.6 milligrams per liter in any
wastes discharged into a public sewer.



   (K)   Any chromium (Cr) (hexavalent) in excess of two milligrams per
liter in any wastes discharged into a public sewer.



   (L)   Any chromium (Cr) (trivalent) in excess of two milligrams per
liter in any wastes discharged into a public sewer.



   (M)   Total chromium (Cr) in any wastes discharged into a public
sewer shall not be in excess of four milligrams per liter.



   (N)   Any nickel (Ni) in excess of 2.6 milligrams per liter in any
wastes discharged into a public sewer.



   (O)   Any lead (Pb) in excess of 0.4 milligram per liter in any
wastes discharged into a public sewer.



   (P)   Any cadmium (Cd) in excess of 0.7 milligram per liter in any
wastes discharged into a public sewer.



   (Q)   Any silver (Ag) in excess of 0.01 milligram per liter in any
wastes discharged into a public sewer.



   (R)   Any cyanides, as total CN ions, in excess of 2.7 milligrams
per liter in any wastes discharged into a public sewer.



   (S)   Any tin (Sn) in excess of one milligram per liter in any
wastes discharged into a public sewer.



   (T)   Any phenolic compound in excess of one milligram per liter in
any wastes discharged into a public sewer.



   (U)   Arsenic value will be set per EPA or IDEM requirement.



   (V)   Selenium value will be set per EPA or IDEM requirement.



   (W)   Molybdenum value be set per EPA or IDEM requirement.



   (X)   Any waters or wastes containing acid metallic pickling wastes
or concentrated plating solutions.



   (Y)   Any toxic radioactive isotopes, without a special permit. The
radioactive isotopes I 131 and P 32 used in hospitals are not prohibited, if
they are properly diluted before being discharged into the sewerage system.



   (Z)  Any waters or wastes containing any toxic substances in
quantities that are sufficient to interfere with the biochemical processes of
the wastewater treatment plant, that will pass through the plant into the
receiving stream in amounts exceeding the standards set by federal,
interstate, state, or other competent authority having jurisdiction, or
contaminate sewage sludge.  Any waters or wastes containing iron or any
other toxic ions, compounds, or substances in concentrations or amounts
exceeding the limits established from time to time by the Utility Service
Board, or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, but in no event
shall the limits exceed those set forth in General Pretreatment Regulations
(40 CFR, Part 403) for Existing and New Sources of Pollution published June
1978, and Effluent Guidelines and Standards pursuant to this document, or
exceed the limits and restrictions set forth in the city NPDES Permit No. IN-
0022934 and amendments and revisions incorporated herein by reference.



   (AA)   Any unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes
constituting "slugs" that for a duration of five minutes or more have a
concentration or flow of more than five times the average concentration of
the BOD, the suspended solids, or flow of the customer's sewage discharged
during a 24-hour period of normal operation.



   (BB)   Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids or dissolved
solids of such character and quantity that unusual provision, attention, and
expense would be required to handle the materials at the wastewater treatment
plant, its pumping stations, or other facilities.



   (CC)   Any substance which may cause the POTW's effluent or any
other product of the POTW such as residues, sludges, or scums, to be
unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation
process.  In no case, shall a substance discharged to the POTW cause the
POTW to be in non- compliance with sludge use or disposal criteria,
guidelines or regulations developed under Section 405 of the Act, or any
criteria, guidelines, or regulations affecting sludge use or disposal
developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the
Toxic Substances Control Act, or state criteria applicable to the sludge
management method being used.



   (DD)   Any pollutant, including oxygen demanding pollutants (such as
biochemical oxygen demand), released in a discharge at a flow rate or
pollutant concentration which will cause interference.



('75 Code, § 7.41)  (Ord. 4-78, passed 7-18-55; Am. Ord. PO-80-1, passed
11-24-80; Am. Ord. CO-83-4, passed 4-25-83; Am. Ord. PO-98-4, passed
6-8-98)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.072  FEDERAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS; MODIFICATIONS.



   (A)   Upon the promulgation of the federal categorical pretreatment
standards for a particular industrial subcategory, the federal standard, if
more stringent than limitations imposed under this chapter for sources in
that subcategory, shall immediately supersede the limitations imposed under
this chapter.  The Superintendent shall notify all affected users of the
applicable reporting requirements under 40 CFR, Section 403.12.



   (B)   Where the POTW achieves consistent removal of pollutants
limited by federal pretreatment standards, the POTW may apply to the approval
authority for modification of specific limits in the federal pretreatment
standards.  Consistent removal shall mean reduction in the amount of a
pollutant or alteration of the nature of the pollutant by the wastewater
treatment system to a less toxic or harmless state in the effluent which is
achieved by the system (95% samples taken) when measured according to the
procedures set forth in Section 403.7 (c) (2) of (Title 40 of the Code of
Federal Regulations, Part 403) - "General Pretreatment Regulations for
Existing and New Sources of Pollution" promulgated pursuant to the Act.  The
POTW may then modify pollutant discharge limits in the federal pretreatment
standards if the requirements contained in 40 CFR, Part 403, Section 403.7,
are fulfilled and prior approval from the approval authority is obtained.



(Ord. PO-80-1, passed 11-24-80)



§ 51.073  EXCESSIVE DISCHARGE.



   No user shall ever increase the use of process water or, in any way,
attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for
adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in
the federal categorical pretreatment standards, or in any other
pollutant-specific limitation developed by the city or the state.



(Ord. PO-80-1, passed 11-24-80)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.074  ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE.



   (A)   Each non-residential user shall provide protection from
accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by
this chapter.  Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited
materials shall be provided and maintained at the owner or user's own cost
and expense.  Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to
provide this protection shall be submitted to the POTW for review, and shall
be approved by the POTW before construction of the facility.  All existing
users shall complete such a plan by January 1, 1983.  No user who commences
contribution to the POTW after the effective date of this chapter shall be
permitted to introduce pollutants into the system until accidental discharge
procedures have been approved by the POTW.  Review and approval of such
plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the user from the
responsibility to modify the user's facility as necessary to meet the
requirements of this chapter.  In the case of an accidental discharge, it is
the responsibility of the user to immediately telephone and notify the POTW
of the incident.  The notification shall include location of discharge, type
of waste, concentration and volume, and corrective actions.



   (B)   Within 15 days following an accidental discharge, the user
shall submit to the Superintendent a detailed written report describing the
cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent
similar future occurrences.  Notification shall not relieve the user of any
expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result
of damage to the POTW, fish kills, or any other damage to person or property,
nor shall notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties, or
other liability which may be imposed by this chapter or other applicable law.



(Ord. PO-80-1, passed 11-24-80)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.075  EMERGENCY NOTIFICATION PROCEDURE.



   A notice shall be permanently posted on any non-residential user's
bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in
the event of a dangerous discharge.  Employers shall insure that all
employees who may cause or suffer such a dangerous discharge to occur are
advised of the emergency notification procedure.



(Ord. PO-80-1, passed 11-24-80)



§ 51.076  OBSTRUCTION OR DAMAGE TO PUBLIC SEWERS.



   If a public sewer becomes obstructed or damaged because any of the
aforementioned substances where improperly discharged, the person or persons
responsible for the discharge shall be billed and shall pay for the expenses
incurred by the Utility Service Board in cleaning out, repairing, or
rebuilding the sewer.



(Ord. PO-80-1, passed 11-24-80)



§ 51.077  SPECIAL AGREEMENTS.



   No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed as
prohibiting any special agreement or arrangement between the Utility Service
Board and any person whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or
character may be accepted by the Board for treatment whether with or without
pretreatment, provided that the agreement does not violate national
categorical pretreatment standards for the specific category of industrial
user, provided that there is no impairment of the functioning of the sewage
works by reason of the admission of such wastes and provided that no extra
costs are incurred by the Board without recompense by the person.



(Ord. PO-80-1, passed 11-24-80)



§ 51.078  EXCLUSION OF CERTAIN INDUSTRIAL WASTES; SURCHARGES; PENALTIES.



   (A)   All or certain industrial wastes shall be excluded when
conditions are such that NPDES permit restrictions cannot be met.



   (B)   Surcharges shall be imposed by the Utility Service Board for
any compatible pollutant discharged in excess of the limits set forth herein.



   (C)   Penalties for incompatible pollutants shall be imposed by the
Board for any incompatible pollutant discharged in excess of the limits set
forth herein.



(Ord. PO-80-1, passed 11-24-80; Am. Ord. PO-98-4, passed 6-8-98)



§ 51.079  NEW CONNECTIONS.



   No new connection shall be made unless there is flow capacity available
in all down stream sewers, lift stations, force mains, and the wastewater
treatment plant including capacity for BOD and TSS.



(Ord. PO-80-1, passed 11-24-80)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.080  STRICTER STATE REQUIREMENTS PREVAIL.



   State requirements and limitations on discharges shall apply in any
case where they are more stringent than federal requirements and limitations
or those in this chapter.



(Ord. PO-80-1, passed 11-24-80)



INDUSTRIAL WASTES



§ 51.085  CITY APPROVAL REQUIRED; PERIODIC REPORTS TO BE SUBMITTED.



   (A)   The admission into the public sewers for any water or wastes
having a five day BOD greater than 200 parts per million by weight,
containing more than 250 parts per million by weight of suspended solids,
containing any quantity or substances having the characteristics described in
§ 51.071, or having an average daily flow greater than 25,000 gallons, shall
be subject to the review and approval of the Superintendent.  Where
necessary in the opinion of the Superintendent, the owner shall provide at
his expense, any preliminary treatment necessary to reduce the BOD to 200
parts per million and suspended solids to 250 parts per million by weight,
reduce the objectionable characteristics or constituents to within maximum
limits provided in § 51.071, and provide control or flow equalization of any
wastes described in § 51.071 so as to avoid any "slug" loads or excessive
loads that may be harmful to the sewage works.  (Ord. PO-80- 1, passed
11-24-80)



   (B)   Every industrial user or user whose discharge is of a strength
in excess of normal domestic sewage shall submit to the city periodic reports
containing characteristics of their waste discharge. Unless the city requires
more frequent reports, the user shall submit within 30 days after the close
of a calendar quarter the report for the calendar quarter.  The city shall
specify the form and content of the report to each user.  For purposes of
verifying reports submitted by industrial or high strength users, the city
may collect and analyze samples of waste at any time and as  frequently as
deemed necessary. In the case of a potential industry applying for connection
to the city's sewage works, the city shall require a report from the
potential user which shall set forth the anticipated BOD, suspended solids,
and flow of the user's waste.  (Ord. CO-80-19, passed 11-24-80)



Cross-reference:



   Reporting requirements for major contributors, see § 51.094



§ 51.086  PRELIMINARY TREATMENT FACILITIES.



   (A)   When, after making such a review, the Superintendent concludes
that, before the person discharges his wastes into the public sewers, he must
modify or eliminate those constituents which would be harmful to the
structures, processes, or operations of the sewage works or injurious to
health, then the person shall either modify his wastes at the point of origin
or shall provide and operate at his own expense such preliminary treatment or
processing facilities as may be determined to be necessary to render his
wastes acceptable for admission to the public sewers.  Appropriate
pretreatment technology includes control equipment, such as equalization
tanks or facilities, for protection against "slugs" that might interfere with
or otherwise be incompatible with the sewage works.  Where there is reason
to believe that the use of equalization tanks or other facilities which have
potential for dilution is resulting in dilution, the Superintendent may
impose mass limitations on the user employing the tanks or other facilities.



   (B)   Plans, specifications, and other pertinent information
relating to proposed preliminary treatment and processing facilities shall be
submitted to the Utility Service Board through the Superintendent's office
for examination and approval and no construction of such facilities shall
begin until the Board has given its written approval.  Approval shall not
exempt the person from the obligation to make further reasonable adaptations
of the facilities when such adaptations of the facilities prove necessary to
secure the results desired.  Plans, specifications, and other pertinent
information shall also be submitted to the Stream Pollution Control Board for
approval in accordance with Stream Pollution Control Board Resolution 330 IAC
3-1 through 3-3 (formerly No. SPC 15).



   (C)   When such preliminary treatment facilities are provided, they
shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operating
condition by the person at his own expense and shall be subject to periodic
inspection by the Superintendent.  The person shall maintain suitable
operating records and shall submit to the Superintendent any monthly summary
reports of the character of the influent and effluent as the latter may
prescribe.  The user shall notify the Superintendent immediately of any slug
loading as defined herein and in accordance with § § 51.074 and 51.075.



('75 Code, § 7.40)  (Ord. 4-78, passed 7-18-55; Am. Ord. PO-80-1, passed
11-24-80)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.087  PRETREATMENT RESIDUES.



   Sludge from an industrial or commercial pretreatment system shall not
be placed into the sewage works.  Sludge shall not be disposed of by a
licensed hauler in a site approved by the state board of health in accordance
with requirements of Section 402 (b) and 405 of the Act and Sections 3001,
3004, and 4004 of the Solid Waste Disposal Act.



(Ord. PO-80-1, passed 11-24-80)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.088  GREASE, OIL, AND SAND INTERCEPTORS.



   Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the
opinion of the Superintendent, they are necessary for the proper handling of
liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable
wastes, sand, or other harmful ingredients, except that such interceptors
shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units.  All
interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the Superintendent,
and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for inspection,
and kept clean at all times. Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed
of impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in
temperature.  They shall be of substantial construction, watertight, and
equipped with easily removable covers which when bolted in place, shall be
gastight and watertight, and capable of the the maximum flow rate of the pipe
installed therein.



('75 Code, § 7.37)  (Ord. 4-78, passed 7-18-55; Am. Ord. PO-80-1, passed
11-24-80)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.089  MAJOR CONTRIBUTOR PERMITS; MINOR CONTRIBUTOR PERMITS.



   (A)   Significant Industrial User Permits.



      (1)   Any industrial user and any other user on demand of the
Superintendent shall provide the Utility Service Board with sufficient
information to determine if that user is a major contributor, and shall be
required to obtain a permit which describes the wastewater constituents and
characteristics allowed and which sets forth the applicable surveillance
schedule and the monitoring requirements the user shall be subject to in
order to discharge into the POTW's sewerage system.  A major contributor
permit shall be valid for four years unless process changes are made that, in
the opinion of the Superintendent, alter the wastewater constituents and
characteristics significantly.  In the event of such a change, a new
application shall be filed accordingly.  A permit shall be renewed by new
application at the end of four years.  The reapplication for renewal will be
subject to normal application fees in force at reapplication.  Nothing in a
major contributor permit shall constitute an exception to the prohibitions
and limitations on wastewater admissibility as set forth herein.  Major
contributors are subject to all applicable fees, rates, and charges set forth
in this chapter.  In support of the application, the user shall submit, in
units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the following information.



         (a)   Name, address, and location (if different from the
address).



         (b)   The SIC number according to the Standard
Industrial Classification Manual, Bureau of the Budget, 1972, as amended.



         (c)   Wastewater constituents and characteristics
including but not limited to those mentioned in § 51.071 of this chapter as
determined by a reliable analytical laboratory; sampling and analysis shall
be performed in accordance with procedures established by the EPA pursuant to
Section 304 (g) of the Act and contained in 40 CFR, Part 136, as amended.



         (d)   The time and duration of contribution.



         (e)   Average daily and three minute peak wastewater
flow rates, including daily, monthly, and seasonal variations if any.



         (f)   Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing
plans and details to show all sewers, sewer connections, and appurtenances by
the size, location, and elevation.



         (g)   A description of the activities, facilities, and
plant processes on the premises including all materials which are or could be
discharged.



         (h)   Where known, the nature and concentration of any
pollutants in the discharge which are limited by any city, state, or federal
pretreatment standards, and a statement regarding whether or not the
pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and if not,
whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) or additional pretreatment
is required for the user to meet applicable pretreatment standards.



         (i)   If additional pretreatment or O&M will be required
to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user
will provide the additional pretreatment.  The completion date in this
schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the
applicable pretreatment standard.  The following conditions shall apply to
this schedule.



            1.   The schedule shall contain increments of
progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major
events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment
required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such as
hiring an engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans,
executing contract for major components, commencing construction, completing
construction, and the like).



            2.   No increment referred to in division (a)
above, shall exceed nine months.



            3.   Not later than 14 days following each date in
the schedule and the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a
progress report to the Superintendent including, as a minimum, whether or not
it complied with the increment of progress to be met on that date and, if
not, the date on which it expects to comply with this increment of progress,
the reason for delay, and the steps being taken by the user to return the
construction to the schedule established.  In no event shall more than nine
months elapse between such progress reports to the Superintendent.



         (j)   Each product produced by type, amount, process, or
processes and rate of production.



         (k)   The type and amount of raw materials processed
(average and maximum per day).



         (l)   The number and type of employees, and hours of
operation of plant and proposed or actual hours of operation of pretreatment
system.



         (m)   Any other information by 40 CFR Chapter I,
Subchapter N, Part 403.12(b) to evaluate the permit application. The
reporting requirements for POTW's and industrial users, found in 40 CFR
Chapter I, Subchapter N, part 403.12(b) are hereby incorporated into this
chapter.



         (n)   The information for the permit application shall
be signed by the authorized representative of the Industrial User and
certified by a qualified professional as to whether pretreatment standards
are being met on a consistent basis and if not whether additional operation
and maintenance and/or additional pretreatment is required for the Industrial
User to meet the pretreatment Standards and Requirements. The certification
shall read as follows:



            “I certify under penalty of law that this document
and all attachments were prepared under my direction and supervision in
accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly
gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the
person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly
responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to
the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware
that there are significant penalties for submitting false information,
including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violation.”



      (2)   The POTW will evaluate the data furnished by the user
and may require additional information.  After evaluation and acceptance of
the data furnished, the POTW may issue a wastewater contribution permit
subject to terms and conditions provided herein.



(Ord. PO-80-1, passed 11-24-80; Am. Ord. PO-98-4, passed 6-8-98)  Penalty,
see § 51.999



   (B)   Minor contributor permits.



      (1)   Minor contributor permits shall be issued to a user that
is considered a minor contributor.  The minor contributor shall submit the
following information.



         (a)   Name, address, and location (if different from the
address).



         (b)   Wastewater pollutants



         (c)   Site plans and an outline for a spill control.



      (2)   The permit shall be valid for four years unless process
changes are made that could significantly alter the wastewater effluent. 
The permit will list possible pollutants that may be generated but shall not
be limited to those listed.



(Ord. PO-80-1, passed 11-24-80; Am. Ord. CO-83-4, passed 4-25-83)



Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.090  PERMIT APPLICATION; FEE.



   (A)   Significant Industrial User Permit Applications.



      (1)   Significant industrial user permit applications shall
make application for the proposed discharge on a form provided by the Utility
Service Board. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans,
specifications, studies, or other information considered pertinent by the
Superintendent, to evaluate compatibility with the sewerage system.  It is
the purpose of charges and fees to provide for the recovery of costs from
Users of the POTW for the implementation of the program established herein. 
The applicable charges or fees shall be set forth in the Board's schedule of
charges and fees.



      (2)   The Board may adopt charges and fees which may include
those set out in divisions (a) through (g) below.  These fees relate solely
to the matters covered by this chapter and are separate from all other fees
chargeable by the Board.



         (a)   Fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and
operating the POTW's pretreatment program.



         (b)   Fees for monitoring, inspections, and surveillance
procedures.



         (c)   Fees for reviewing accidental discharge procedures
and construction.



         (d)   Fees for permit applications.



         (e)   Fees for filing appeals.



         (f)   Fees for consistent removal (by the POTW) of
pollutants otherwise subject to federal pretreatment standards.



         (g)   Other fees as the Board may deem necessary to
carry out the requirements contained herein. 



      (3)   Permit fees for major contributors shall be as follows.



 

 
Permit Fee


Initial Major Contributor Permit
 
$ 100


Industries connected to sewerage works prior to the effective date of this
chapter
 
100


Industries connected to sewerage works after the effective date of this
chapter and all reapplication permits.
 
1000



 



   (B)   Minor contributions.  A fee of $25 will be paid for each
minor contributor permit.



(Ord. PO-80-1, passed 11-24-80; Am. Ord. CO-83-4, passed 4-25-83)



§ 51.091  PERMIT MODIFICATIONS.



   Within nine months of the promulgation of a National Categorical
Pretreatment Standard, the Wastewater Contribution Permit of users subject to
such standards shall be revised to require compliance with that standard
within the time frame prescribed by the standard.  Where a user, subject to
a national categorical pretreatment standard, has not previously submitted an
application for a wastewater contribution permit as required by § 51.089,
the user shall apply for a wastewater contribution permit and file a 40 CFR
403.12 (b) baseline report within 180 days after the promulgation of the
applicable national categorical pretreatment standard.  In addition, the
user with an existing wastewater contribution permit shall submit to the
Superintendent within 180 days after the promulgation of an applicable
federal categorical pretreatment standard the information required by§ 
51.089 (A) (8) and (9).



(Ord. PO-80-1, passed 11-24-80; Am. Ord. CO-83-4, passed 4-25-83)  Penalty,
See § 51.999



§ 51.092  PERMIT TERMS AND CONDITIONS.



   (A)   Wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly subject to all
provisions of this chapter and all other applicable regulations, user
charges, and fees established by the Utility Service Board. Permits may
contain the following.



      (1)   The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for
the wastewater to be discharged to a community sewer.



      (2)   Limits on the average and maximum wastewater
constituents and characteristics.



      (3)   Limits on average and maximum rate and time of discharge
or requirements for flow regulations and equalization.



      (4)   Requirements for installation and maintenance of
inspection and sampling facilities.



      (5)   Specifications for monitoring programs which may include
sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types, and standards for
tests and reporting schedule.



      (6)   Compliance schedules.



      (7)   Requirements for submission of technical reports or
discharge reports.



      (8)   Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records
relating to wastewater discharge as specified by the Board and affording
Board access thereto.



      (9)   Requirements for notification of the Board or any new
introduction of wastewater constituents or any substantial change in the
volume or character of the wastewater constituents being introduced into the
wastewater treatment system.



      (10)   Requirements for notification of slug discharges as per
§§ 51.071 (X), 51.074, and 51.075.



      (11)   Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the Board to
ensure compliance with this chapter.



   (B)   The terms and conditions of the permit may be subject to
modification by the Board during the term of the permit as limitations or
requirements as identified in § 51.071 are modified or other just cause
exists. The user shall be informed of any proposed changes in his permit at
least 30 days prior to the effective date of change. Any changes or new
conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for
compliance.



(Ord. PO-80-1, passed 11-24-80)



§ 51.093  PERMIT TRANSFER.



   Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific user for a
specific operation.  A wastewater discharge permit shall not be reassigned
or transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different premises, or a new
or changed operation without the approval of the Utility Service Board.  Any
suceeding owner or user shall comply with the terms and conditions of a new
permit.



(Ord. PO-80-1, passed 11-24-80) Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.094  REPORTING REQUIREMENTS FOR PERMITTEE.



   (A)   Compliance date report.  Within 90 days following the date
for final compliance with applicable pretreatment standards or, in the case
of a new source, following commencement of the introduction of wastewater
into the POTW, any user subject to pretreatment standards and requirements
shall submit to the Superintendent a report indicating the nature and
concentration of all pollutants in the discharge from the regulated process
which are limited by pretreatment standards and requirements and the average
and maximum daily flow for these process units in the user facility which are
limited by such pretreatment standards or requirements.  The report shall
state whether the applicable pretreatment standards or requirements are being
met on a consistent basis and, if not, what additional operation and
maintenance or pretreatment is necessary to bring the user into compliance
with the applicable pretreatment standards or requirements.  This statement
shall be signed by an authorized representative of the industrial user, and
certified to by a qualified professional engineer.



   (B)   Periodic compliance reports.



      (1)   Any user subject to a pretreatment standard, after the
compliance date of the pretreatment standard, or, in the case of a new
source, after commencement of the discharge into the POTW, shall submit to
the Superintendent during the months of June and December, unless required
more frequently in the pretreatment standard or by the Superintendent, a
report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the effluents
which are limited by the pretreatment standards.  In addition, this report
shall include a record of all daily flows which during the reporting period
exceeded the average daily flow reported in § 51.089(A)(1)(e).  At the
discretion of the Superintendent and in consideration of such factors as
local high or low flow rates, holidays, budget cycles, and the like, the
Superintendent may agree to alter the months during which these reports are
to be submitted.



      (2)   The Superintendent may impose mass limitations on users
which are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or
requirements, or in other cases where the imposition of mass limitations are
appropriate.  In such cases, the report required by division (1) above shall
indicate the mass of pollutants regulated by pretreatment standards in the
effluents of the user.



         (a)   These reports shall contain the results of
sampling and analysis of the discharge, including the flow and the nature and
concentration, or production and mass where requested by the Superintendent,
of pollutants contained therein which are limited by the applicable
pretreatment standards.



         (b)   The frequency of monitoring shall be prescribed in
the applicable pretreatment standard.  All analysis shall be performed in
accordance with procedures established by the administrator pursuant to
Section 304 (g) of the Act and contained in 40 CFR, Part 136 and amendments
thereto or with any other test procedures approved by the administrator. 
"Sampling shall be performed in accordance with the techniques approved by
the Administrator.



   (C)   Where 40 CFR, Part 136 does not include a sampling or
analytical technique for the pollutant in question, sampling and analysis
shall be performed in accordance with the procedures set forth in the EPA
publication, "Sampling and Analysis Procedures for screening of Industrial
Effluents for Priority Pollutants, April, 1977," and amendments thereto, or
with any other sampling and analytical procedures approved by the
administrator.



   (D)   (1)   The Industrial User shall notify the POTW, the EPA
Regional Waste Management Division Director and State hazardous waste
authorities in writing of any discharge into the POTW of a substance, which
if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR part 261.
Such notification must include the name of the hazardous waste as set forth
in 40 CFR part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number and the type of discharge
(continuous, patch or other). If the Industrial User discharges more than 100
kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the POTW, the notification
shall also contain the following information to the extent such information
is known and readily available to the Industrial User. An identification of
the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes, an estimation of the mass
and concentration of such constituents in the wastestreams discharged during
that calendar month and an estimation of the mass of constituents in the
wastestream expected to be discharged during the following 12 months.
Industrial users who commence discharging after the effective date of this
rule shall provide the notification prior to the dischargeof the listed or
characteristic hazardous waste. Any notification under this paragraph need to
be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged. However,
notification of changed discharges must be submitted under 40 CFR 403.129(j).
The notification required in this section does not apply to pollutants
already reported under the self-monitoring requirements of 40 CFR 403.12(b),
(d), and (e).



      (2)   In the case of any new regulation under section 3001 of
the RCRA identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing
any additional substance as a harzardous waste, the Industrial User must
notify the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management Waste Division Direct and
State hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within
90 days of the effective date of such regulations.



      (3)   In the case of any notification made under paragraph (c)
of this section, the Industrial User shall certify that it has a program in
place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous waste generated to the
degree it has determined to be economically practical.



   (E)   Minor contributors.  On the anniversary date of the permit,
the minor contributor shall report on his letterhead stationery to the
publicly owned treatment works regarding the method for disposing of the
minor contributor's wastes.



(Ord. PO-80-1, passed 11-24-80; Am. Ord. CO-83-4, passed 4-25-83; Am. Ord.
PO-98-4, passed 6-8-98)



Cross-reference:



   Reports required by industrial or high-strength users in general, see
§ 51.085



§ 51.095  SURVEILLANCE OF MAJOR CONTRIBUTORS; CHARGE.



   (A)   To establish a feasible surveillance schedule, the following
classes of major contributors are formed.



 

Class
 
Qualifications
 
Minimum Surveillance Schedule


A
 
Flow of 100,000 gallons per day (0.1 MGD) and greater per average workday.
 
Monthly


B
 
Flow from 0.025 MGD to 0.1 MGD per average workday or discharge with
constituents or characteristics that result in a major contributor
classification.
 
Quarterly



 



   (B)   The surveillance period will normally be for a period of five
consecutive days, but can be of longer or shorter duration at the discretion
of the Superintendent.  In cases where the surveillance period extends for a
greater number of consecutive days than five, the POTW shall have the
prerogative of selecting the five consecutive days of its choice for
establishing rates and charges.



   (C)   The minimum charge for each surveillance survey shall be $200
per day with a maximum charge for five days of $1,000. Surveillance survey
charges are to be adjusted annually if deemed necessary by the Superintendent.



(Ord. PO-80-1, passed 11-24-80; Am. Ord. PO-98-4, passed 6-8-98)



§ 51.096  MONITORING EQUIPMENT FOR MAJOR CONTRIBUTORS.



   A major contributor shall install at its own expense a suitable control
manhole (vault), together with such necessary appurtenances in or on each
building lateral sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of
the wastewater, and such sampling devices as may be reasonably necessary,
unless otherwise instructed by the Superintendent.  A user may be required
by the Superintendent to install such manholes (vault) to verify his status
either as a major contributor or otherwise.  The manholes (vaults) and
sampling and testing devices shall be provided and maintained to the
Superintendent's satisfaction at the expense of the user, but shall be under
the control of the POTW.  The POTW shall provide monitoring equipment during
a surveillance period.  Monitoring equipment shall, unless otherwise
specified by the POTW, include a device for automatically measuring and
recording flow and a device for automatically taking a composite by-flow
sample of wastewater during a 24-hour period.



('75 Code, § 7.38)  (Ord. 4-78, passed 7-18-55; Am. Ord. PO-80-1, passed
11-24-80)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.097  LABORATORY PROCEDURES FOR EXAMINING INDUSTRIAL WASTES.



   Laboratory procedures used in the examination of industrial wastes
shall be those set forth in "Standard Methods."  However, alternative
methods for certain analyses of industrial wastes may be used subject to
mutual agreement between the Superintendent and the user provided they meet
federal requirements as set forth in 40CFR136.  The POTW shall charge to the
user, the standard initial analyses of the user's wastes as well as other
non-standard tests as required by the user's specific process waste
loading.  Regular periodic check analysis and analysis made by the
Superintendent at the request of the user shall be charged to the user
according to the standard work order billing practice.  All such analyses
shall be binding in determining strength of wastes surcharges and other
matter dependent upon the character and concentration of wastes.



(Ord. PO-80-1, passed 11-24-80)



§ 51.098  REPRESENTATIVE ANALYSIS TO DETERMINE WASTE CHARACTER, STRENGTH.



   Until an adequate analysis of a representative sample of user's wastes
has been obtained, the POTW shall, for the purpose of this chapter, make a
determination of the character and concentration of the user's wastes by
using data based on analysis of similar processes or data for his type of
business that are available from the EPA or from industry-recognized
authoritative sources.  This method, if selected by the POTW, shall continue
at the POTW's pleasure or until an adequate analysis has been made.



(Ord. PO-80-1, passed 11-24-80)



§ 51.099  REVIEW OF DATA BY ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY.



   All data collected pertaining to industrial wastes including records
kept by each industrial user shall be subject to audit and review by the EPA
or approval authority upon request.  The Utility Service Board shall
annually publish in the local newspaper a list of the users which were not in
compliance with any pretreatment requirements or standards at least once
during the 12 previous months.  The notification shall also summarize any
enforcement actions taken against the user during the same 12 months.



(Ord. PO-80-1, passed 11-24-80)



§ 51.100  CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.



   (A)   Information and data obtained from reports, questionnaires,
permit applications, permits and monitoring programs and from inspections
shall be available to the public or other governmental agency without
restriction unless the user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate
to the satisfaction of the Utility Service Board that the release of such
information would divulge information, processes, or methods of production
entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user.



   (B)   When requested by the person furnished a report, the portions
of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not
be made available for inspection by the public but shall be made available
upon written request to governmental agencies for uses related to this
chapter, the NPDES permit, state disposal system permit or the pretreatment
programs.  However, such portions of a report shall be available for use by
the state or any state agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings
involving the person furnishing the report.  Wastewater constituents and
characteristics will not be recognized as confidential information.



   (C)   Information accepted by the Utility Service Board as
confidential, shall not be transmitted to any governmental agency or to the
general public by the Board until and unless a ten-day notification is given
to the user.



(Ord. PO-80-1, passed 11-24-80)



§ 51.101  COMMERCIAL OR INDUSTRIAL WASTE HAULERS.



   (A)   A person who is a licensed commercial or industrial waste
hauler may discharge compatible pollutants to the wastewater treatment plant
at a time and place and in such amounts as permitted by the Superintendent. 
Wastewater so received must have been generated from within Clinton County.



   (B)   Application to the Superintendent and approval must be secured
prior to any dumping along with payment of dumping fees as follows.



      (1)   Septic tank (Residential)      $35 per 1,000
gallons.



      (2)   Industrial and/or commercial      $60 per 1,000
gallons.



   (C)   A listing of all wastes and source information must be
submitted with each application.



(Ord. PO-80-1, passed 11-24-80; Am. Ord. 85-09, passed 7-8-85; Am. Ord.
PO-98-4, passed 6-8-98; Am. Ord. 17-18, passed 12-5-17)



REMEDIES



§ 51.105  NOTICE OF VIOLATION.



   (A)   Whenever the Utility Service Board finds that any user has
violated or is violating §§ 51.006 or 51.030 through 51.101, wastewater
contribution permit, or any prohibition, limitation or requirements contained
herein, the Board may serve on the person a written notice stating the nature
of the violation.  Within 30 days of the date of the notice, a plan for the
satisfactory correction thereof shall be submitted by the user.



   (B)   Any person found to be violating or failing to comply with any
of the provisions of §§ 51.006 or 51.030 through 51.101 shall be served by
the Board with a written notice stating the nature of the violation and
providing a reasonable time limit for its satisfactory correction as
discussed in §§ 51.105 through 51.113, and 51.999.  The offender shall,
within the period of time stated in the notice, permanently cease all
violations.



('75 Code, § 7.44)  (Ord. PO-80-1, passed 11-24-80)



§ 51.106  SUSPENSION OF SERVICE, PERMIT.



   (A)   The Utility Service Board may suspend the wastewater treatment
service or a wastewater contribution permit when suspension is necessary, in
the opinion of the Board, in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge
which presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the
health or welfare of persons, to the environment, causes interference to the
POTW or causes violation to any condition of its NPDES permit.



   (B)   Any person notified of a suspension of the wastewater
treatment service or the wastewater contribution permit shall immediately
stop or eliminate the contribution.  In the event of a failure of the person
to comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the Board shall take such
steps as deemed necessary including immediate severance of the sewer
connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW system or endangerment
to any individuals.  The Board shall reinstate the wastewater contribution
permit or the wastewater treatment service on proof of the elimination of the
noncomplying discharge.  A detailed written statement submitted by the user
describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to
prevent any further occurrence shall be submitted to the Board within 15 days
of the date of occurrence.



(Ord. PO-80-1, passed 11-24-80)



§ 51.107  REVOCATION OF PERMIT.



   Any user who violates the following conditions of §§ 51.006 or 51.030
through 51.101 or applicable state and federal regulations, is subject to
having his permit revoked in accordance with the procedures of § 51.112.



   (A)   Failure of a user to factually report the wastewater
constituents and characteristics of his discharge as described in § 51.112.



   (B)   Failure of the user to report significant changes in
operations, or wastewater constituents and characteristics.



   (C)   Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the
purpose of inspection or monitoring.



   (D)   Violation of conditions of the permit.



(Ord. PO-80-1, passed 11-24-80)



§ 51.108  ABATEMENT OF PUBLIC NUISANCE.



   Discharges of wastewater in any manner in violation of §§ 51.006 or
51.030 through 51.101, or of any order issued by the Superintendent as
authorized by this chapter, is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be
corrected or abated as directed by the Superintendent.  Any person violating
this chapter by creating a public nuisance shall be subject to the penalty
provisions of this chapter found at § 51.105, and the Board may seek
injunctive relief from a court of competent jurisdication, and payment of
damages as provided at § 51.109.



(Ord. PO-80-1, passed 11-24-80; Am. Ord. PO-98-4, passed 6-8-98)



§ 51.109  LIEN FOR DAMAGES.



   When a discharge of wastes causes an obstruction, damage, or any other
impairment to the wastewater treatment plant facilities, the Utility Service
Board may assess a charge against the user for the work required to clean or
repair the facility and add the charge to the user's charges and fees.



(Ord. PO-80-1, passed 11-24-80)



§ 51.110  CIVIL LIABILITY.



   Any person who violates any provision of §§ 51.006 or 51.030 through
51.101 or permit condition or who discharges wastewater which causes
pollution, or who violates any cease and desist order, prohibition, effluent
limitation, national standard of performance, pretreatment or toxicity
standard shall be liable civilly to a penalty not to exceed $10,000 for each
day in which the violation occurs.  The Utility Service Board shall petition
a court of competent jurisdiction to impose, assess, and recover such sums.



(Ord. PO-80-1, passed 11-28-80)



§ 51.111  CRIMINAL LIABILITY.



   (A)   Any person who intentionally or negligently violates any
provision of §§ 51.006 or 51.030 through 51.101 or permit condition or who
discharges wastewater which causes pollution or who violates any cease and
desist order prohibition, effluent limitation, national standard of
performance, pretreatment or toxicity standard shall be liable to a sum not
to exceed $25,000 for each day in which the violation occurs, or to
imprisonment for not more than one year, or both.  If the conviction is for
a violation committed after the first conviction of the person, punishment
shall be by a fine of not more than $50,000 for each day in which the
violation occurs or by imprisonment for not more than two years, or both. 
The Utility Service Board shall petition a court of competent jurisdiction to
impose, assess, and recover such sums.



   (B)   Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the stated
time limit shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine in an amount
of not less than $25 nor more than $10,000.  Each day in which any such
violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense.  Any person
violating any provision of §§ 51.006 or 51.030 through 51.101, and
convicted thereof shall become liable to the city for expense, loss, or
damage occasioned by the city by reason of the violation.



(Ord. PO-80-1, passed 11-28-80)



§ 51.112  OTHER REMEDIES.



   The Utility Service Board shall have the following methods of recourse
in the event of repeated or willful failure by a user to meet the wastewater
admissibility requirements of §§ 51.006 or 51.030 through 51.101.



   (A)   When the Board finds that a discharge of wastewater has been
taking place, in violation of the admissibility requirements prescribed in
§§ 51.070 through 51.080 and 51.085 through 51.088, the Board may require
the user to submit for approval a detailed time schedule of specific actions
which the user shall take in order to prevent or correct a violation of
requirements.



   (B)   When the Board finds that a discharge of wastewater has taken
place in violation of the admissibility requirements of §§ 51.070 through
51.080 and 51.085 through 51.088, the Superintendent may issue an order to
cease and desist, and direct that those persons not complying with such
prohibitions, limits, requirements, or provisions shall do the following.



      (1)   Comply forthwith.



      (2)   Comply in accordance with a time schedule set forth by
the Board.



      (3)   Take appropriate remedial or preventative action in the
event of a threatened violation.



   (C)   When the Board finds that a discharge of wastewater is in
violation of the admissibility requirements of §§ 51.070 through 51.080 and
51.085 through 51.088, or otherwise causes or threatens to cause a condition
of pollution or nuisance, the Board may petition a court of competent
jurisdiction for the issuance of a preliminary or permanent injunction, or
both, as may be appropriate in restraining the continuance of such a
discharge.



   (D)   The Board may terminate or cause to be terminated wastewater
service or permit if a violation of any provision of §§ 51.006 or 51.030
through 51.101 is found to exist or if a discharge causes or threatens to
cause a condition of pollution or nuisance as defined in this chapter or
causes the POTW to violate the terms of its NPDES Permit IN-0022934.  This
provision is in addition to other statutes, rules, or regulations authorizing
termination of service for delinquency in payment.



(Ord. PO-80-1 passed 11-24-80)



§ 51.113  APPEALS.



   Any user affected by any decision, action, or determination, including
cease and desist orders, made by the Superintendent, interpreting or
implementing the provisions of §§ 51.006 or 51.030 through 51.101, or any
permit issued herein, may file with the Superintendent a written request for
reconsideration within ten days of such a decision, action, or determination,
setting forth in detail the facts supporting the user's request for
reconsideration.  If the ruling made by the Superintendent is unsatisfactory
to the person requesting reconsideration, he may, within ten days from the
notification to him by the Superintendent the ruling, file a written appeal
to the Utility Service Board.  The written appeal shall be heard by the
Board within 30 days from the date of filing.  The Board shall make a final
ruling on the appeal within 15 days of the close of the meeting.  The
Superintendent's decision, action, or determination shall remain in effect
during the period for reconsideration.



(Ord. PO-80-1, passed 11-24-80)



§ 51.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person found guilty of any act prohibited by §§ 51.006
or 51.030 through 51.101 shall be subject to punishment as set forth in §
10.99.  Sanctions shall be imposed by a court with authority to hear such
violations in the state.  (Ord. PO-80-1, passed 11-24-80)



   (B)   Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the stated
time limit shall be subject to a fine in an amount of not less than $25 nor
more than $2,500. Each day in which any such violation shall continue shall
be deemed a separate offense. Any person violating any provision of this
chapter shall be liable to the City for expense, loss or damage incurred by
the City by reason of such violation.  (Ord. PO- 98-4, passed 6-8-98)



   (C)   Any person who knowingly or intentionally discharges any
hazardous waste to the POTW shall be subject to prosecution under state law
as a Class D felony and shall be subject to daily fines provided therein. 
(Ord. PO-98-4, passed 6-8-98)



CHAPTER 52:  WATERWORKS



Section



   52.01   Schedule of rates and charges



   52.02   Fire protection costs



   52.03   Contract rate



 



   52.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Borrowing funds from city utilities, see § 34.01



   Utility Employees Retirement Fund, see §§ 35.10 through 35.27



   Utility Service Board, see § 34.03



§ 52.01  SCHEDULE OF RATES AND CHARGES.



   (A)   Use and service rates. 



      (1)   There are established for the use of and the service
rendered by the waterworks system of the city, the following rates and
charges, based on the use of water supplied by the waterworks system.



 

Metered Rates Per Month
 
Rate per 100 Cubic Feet


First 6,000 cubic feet
 
$ 2.57


Next 6,500 cubic feet
 
2.28


Next 55,000 cubic feet
 
1.98


Next 65,000 cubic feet
 
1.77


Next 132,500 cubic feet
 
1.62


Next 265,000 cubic feet
 
1.45



 



      (2)   A customer outside the city limits shall pay 125% of the
calculated charges, unless the customer is governed by an agreement between
the customer and the city to make payments in lieu of taxes.



   (B)   Minimum charges.  Each user shall pay a minimum charge in
accordance with the following applicable size of meter installed, for which
the user will be entitled to the quantity of water set out in the above
schedule of rates.



 

Size of Meter
 
Cubic Feet Allowed
 
Per Month




5/8 and 3/4 inch meter
 
400
 
$ 10.28


1 inch meter
 
1,610
 
41.38


1 1/4 inch meter
 
2,415
 
62.07


1 1/2 inch meter
 
3,020
 
77.61


2 inch meter
 
4,025
 
103.44


3 inch meter
 
6,050
 
155.34


4 inch meter
 
11,050
 
269.34


6 inch meter
 
18,830
 
427.73




 



      (2)   A customer outside the city limits shall pay 125% of the
calculated charges, unless the customer is governed by an agreement between
the customer and the city to make payments in lieu of taxes.



('75 Code, § 8.01)  (Ord. CO-82-1, passed 2-22-82; Am. Ord. CO-86-8, passed
6-23-86; Am. Ord. 90-9, passed 7-9-90; Am. Ord. CO-01-18, passed 12-10-01;
Am. Ord. 2008-02, passed 6-9-08; Am. Ord. 09-05, passed 3-23-09)



§ 52.02  FIRE PROTECTION COSTS.



   (A)   Public fire protection.



      (1)   Within the city. 



         (a)   The costs for the production, storage,
transmission, sale, delivery or furnishing of water for public fire
protection purposes ("fire protection costs") shall be recovered from all
customers of the utility located inside the city' corporate limits through
the assessment of a monthly fire protection surcharge.  The fire protection
surcharge shall be $4 per month and shall be assessed to all customers
located within the city's corporate limits.  The fire protection surcharge
shall be collected by and retained by the utility.



         (b)   Effective upon the date of this change in the
manner of recovering fire protection coss, the city shall cease collecting
fire hydrant user fees.



         (c)   Effective upon the date of this change in the
manner of recovering fire protection costs, the utility shall cease billing
the city for fire protection costs.  The public fire hydrant rate set forth
in Ordinance 2008-02 shall no longer be charged and is repealed.  Any
balance remaining in Fund 324 entitled User Fee Hydrant Fee shall be paid to
the utility.



         (d)   Nothwithstanding this change in the recovery of
fire protection costs, the construction of any new fire hydrants installed at
the request of the city shall continue to be paid for by or on behalf of the
city.



      (2)   Outside the city.  The costs for the production,
storage, transmission, sale, delivery or furnishing of water for public fire
protection purposes ("fire protection costs") for customers of the utility
located outside the city's corporate limits shall be recovered from customers
who benefit from such public fire protection by means of a monthly
out-of-town fire protection surcharge.  The initial monthly out-of- town
fire protection surcharge shall be $5 per month. Customers outside the
corporate limits whoa re within 1,000 feet of a public fire hydrant (measured
from the hydrant to the nearest point on the property line of the customer)
shall be deemed to benefit from such public fire protection.



('75 Code, § 8.03)  (Ord. CO-82-1, passed 2-22-82; Am. Ord. 90-9, passed
7-9-90; Am. Ord. CO-01-18, passed 12-10-01; Am. Ord. 2008-02, passed 6-9-08;
Am. Ord. 09-10A, passed 6-8-09; Am. Ord. 10-08, passed 8-23-10)



   (B)   Private fire protection water service. 



      (1)   For use in extinguishing fires only.



 

Fireline up to:
 
Per Annum




2 3/4 inch line
 
$  331.63


3 inch line
 
    497.47


4 inch line
 
    718.55


6 inch line
 
    1,464.71


8 inch line
 
  2,929.40


10 inch line
 
    4,559.92


12 inch line
 
    5,814.94




 



         (2)   A customer outside the city limits shall pay 125%
of the calculated charges, unless the customer is governed by an agreement
between the customer and the city to make payments in lieu of taxes.



('75 Code, § 8.04)  (Ord. 4-227, passed 10-18-60; Am. Res. 69-7, passed
11-13-69; Am. Ord. CO-82-1, passed 2-22-82; Am. Ord. CO-86-8, passed 6-23-86;
Am. Ord. 90-9, passed 7-9-90; Am. Ord. CO-01-18, passed 12-10-01; Am.
2008-02, passed 6-9-08)



§ 52.03  CONTRACT RATE.



   (A)   There are hereby established for the use of and the service
rendered by the Frankfort Water Works the following contract rate which shall
be available to customers that have entered into a 20-year agreement for the
provision of water service and guarantee revenue of at least $700,000 per
year commencing in 2010:



      (1)   Metered rates per month (2009 and 2010).



 

Fee Type
 
2009 Rate
 
2010 Rate


Metered rate per hundred cubic feet (CCF)
 
$1.12
 
$1.23



 



      (2)   Rate for water supply from 2011 through 2019.  For
usage in each calendar year from 2010 through 2019, the metered rate per
hundred cubic feet (CCF) shall increase annually at a rate equal to the
aggregate consumer price index (CPI) calculated by the U.S. Department of
Labor Bureau Statistics or successor agency as applied to the city's variable
costs. Variable costs shall be those costs treated as variable in the cost of
service study conducted to support the rates and charges placed into effect
on June 9, 2008, provided that variable costs shall not include debt service.
The city will adopt ordinances prior to the commencement of the change in
rates for calendar years 2011 through 2019 identifying the rates resulting
from this calculation.



      (3)   Minimum revenue requirement after 2010. Customer's rates
and charges ("rates") for services shall generate a minimum of $700,000 per
year for the city after the city issues bonds to construct a new water
treatment plant. To determine whether the customer has satisfied the minimum
revenue requirement, the city will calculate the total amount of rates
generated ("total rates") and the total usage from the customer for the prior
year. Such calculation shall be completed on or before January 31 of each
calendar year and a copy of the calculation shall be provided to the customer
on or before February 15. Based on this calculation, customer will be
responsible for any shortfall as a result of its failure to meet the minimum
revenue (i.e. $700,000 per year) requirements. The city may demand payment
for the shortfall by sending notice to the customer (with the city's
calculation of the shortfall) on or before February 15 of the given year.
Within 45 calendar days of receiving the notice, the customer shall pay the
shortfall absent a good faith dispute over the city's calculation of the same.



   (B)   Excluded accounts.  Customers with separate meters are
assigned separate account numbers for each meter. The terms of any agreement
executed pursuant to this contract rate may exclude certain account numbers
from the metered rates. Such excluded accounts shall be billed under the
city's general rate schedule.



(Ord. 09-04, passed 3-23-09)



§ 52.99  PENALTY.



   Any person or persons violating the provisions of Rules 2 and 3 of the
Frankfort Water Utility's Rules and Regulations shall, upon conviction, be
fined in any sum not to exceed $200 for each and every offense.



('75 Code, § 8.13)  (Ord. 35, passed 3-20-1891; Am. Ord. 09-05, passed
3-23-09)



CHAPTER 53: STORM SEWER SYSTEM



Section



General Provisions



   53.01   Purpose and intent



   53.02   Definitions



   53.03   Applicability



   53.04   Responsibility for administration



   53.05   Severability



   53.06   Ultimate responsibility



   53.07   Discharge prohibitions



   53.08   Suspension of MS4 access



   53.09   Industrial or construction activity discharges



   53.10   Monitoring of discharges



   53.11   Requirement to prevent, control, and reduce stormwater
pollutants by the use of best management practices



   53.12   Watercourse protection



   53.13   Notification of spills



   53.14   Enforcement



   53.15   Appeal of notice of violation



   53.16   Enforcement measures after appeal



   53.17   Cost of abatement of the violation



   53.18   Injunctive relief



   53.19   Compensatory action



   53.20   Violations deemed a public nuisance



   53.21   Remedies not exclusive



Storm Water Management



   53.35   Definitions



   53.36   Provisions for storm water and drainage



   53.37   Storm water user fees



   53.38   Billing and collection of storm water user fees



   53.39   Grievance procedure



Cross-reference:



   Storm water runoff; construction activities, see Ch. 54



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 53.01  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to provide for the health, safety,
and general welfare of the citizens of Frankfort through the regulation of
non-storm water discharges to the storm drainage system to the maximum extent
practicable as required by federal and state law. This chapter establishes
methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the municipal
separate storm sewer system (MS4) in order to comply with requirements of the
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process. The
objectives of this subchapter are:



   (A)   To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal
separate storm sewer system (MS4) by storm water discharges by any user;



   (B)   To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the
municipal separate storm sewer system; and



   (C)   To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection,
surveillance and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with
this subchapter.



(Ord. CO-04-24, passed 11-22-04)



§ 53.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AUTHORIZED ENFORCEMENT AGENCY.  The city including its agents,
employees or designees.



   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs).  Schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution
prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other
management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants
directly or indirectly to storm water, receiving waters, or storm water
conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating
procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge
or water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.



   CLEAN WATER ACT.  The federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C.
§ 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.



   CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY.  Activities subject to NPDES Construction
Permits. These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance of
one acre or more.  Such activities include but are not limited to clearing
and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition.



   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS.  Any material, including any substance, waste, or
combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or
physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly
contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health,
safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored,
transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.



   ILLEGAL DISCHARGE.  Any direct or indirect non-storm water discharge
to the storm drain system, except as exempted in § 53.07 of this chapter.



   ILLICIT CONNECTIONS.  An illicit connection is defined as either of
the following:



      (1)   Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or
subsurface, which allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drain system
including but not limited to any conveyances which allow any non-storm water
discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the
storm drain system and any connections to the storm drain system from indoor
drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had been
previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement
agency; or



      (2)   Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or
industrial land use to the storm drain system which has not been documented
in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized
enforcement agency.



   INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY.  Activities subject to NPDES Industrial Permits
as defined in 40 CFR, Section 122.26 (b)(14). 



   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) STORM WATER
DISCHARGE PERMIT.  A permit issued by EPA (or by a State under authority
delegated pursuant to 33 USC § 1342(b)) that authorizes the discharge of
pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable
on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis.



   NON-STORM WATER DISCHARGE.  Any discharge to the storm drain system
that is not composed entirely of storm water.



   PERSON.  Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm,
corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner
or as the owner's agent.



   POLLUTANT.  Anything which causes or contributes to pollution.
Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and
solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid and solid
wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded
or abandoned objects, ordinances, and accumulations, so that same may cause
or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and
fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and
pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and
residues that result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious
or offensive matter of any kind.



   PREMISES.  Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land
whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking
strips.



   STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM.  Publicly-owned facilities by which storm water
is collected and/or conveyed, including but not limited to any roads with
drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm
drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and
human-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage
structures.



   STORMWATER.  Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting
entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from
such precipitation.



   STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN.  A document which describes the
Best Management Practices and activities to be implemented by a person or
business to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the
actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to storm water, storm
water conveyance systems, and/or receiving waters to the maximum extent
practicable.



   WASTEWATER.  Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated
storm water, discharged from a facility.



(Ord. CO-04-24, passed 11-22-04)



§ 53.03  APPLICABILITY.



   This subchapter shall apply to all water entering the storm drain
system generated on any developed and undeveloped lands unless explicitly
exempted by an authorized enforcement agency.



(Ord. CO-04-24, passed 11-22-04)



§ 53.04  RESPONSIBILITY FOR ADMINISTRATION.



   The city, through its Building Inspector's Office, shall administer,
implement, and enforce the provisions of this subchapter. Any powers granted
or duties imposed upon said authorized enforcement agency may be delegated in
writing by the City Building Inspector to persons or entities acting in the
beneficial interest of or in the employ of the agency.



(Ord. CO-04-24, passed 11-22-04)



§ 53.05  SEVERABILITY.



   The provisions of this subchapter are hereby declared to be severable.
If any provision, clause, sentence, or paragraph of this subchapter or the
application thereof to any person, establishment, or circumstances shall be
held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or
application of this chapter.



(Ord. CO-04-24, passed 11-22-04)



§ 53.06  ULTIMATE RESPONSIBILITY.



   The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this
subchapter are minimum standards; therefore this subchapter does not intend
nor imply that compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no
contamination, pollution, nor unauthorized discharge of pollutants.



(Ord. CO-04-24, passed 11-22-04)



§ 53.07  DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS.



   (A)   Prohibition of illegal discharges.  No person shall discharge
or cause to be discharged into the municipal storm drain system or
watercourses any materials, including but not limited to pollutants or waters
containing any pollutants that cause or contribute to a violation of
applicable water quality standards, other than storm water.



   (B)   Exceptions.  The commencement, conduct or continuance of any
illegal discharge to the storm drain system is prohibited except as described
as follows:



      (1)   The following discharges are exempt from discharge
prohibitions established by this subchapter: water line flushing or other
potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream
flows, rising ground water, ground water infiltration to storm drains,
uncontaminated pumped ground water, foundation or footing drains (not
including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air
conditioning condensation, springs, non-commercial washing of vehicles,
natural riparian habitat or wet-land flows, swimming pools (if dechlorinated
- typically less than one PPM chlorine), fire fighting activities, and any
other water source not containing pollutants.



      (2)   Discharges specified in writing by the authorized
enforcement agency as being necessary to protect public health and safety.



      (3)   Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but requires a
verbal notification to the authorized enforcement agency prior to the time of
the test.



      (4)   The prohibition shall not apply to any non-storm water
discharge permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order
issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the Federal
Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full
compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other
applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been
granted for any discharge to the storm drain system.



   (C)   Prohibition of illicit connections.



      (1)   The construction, use, maintenance or continued
existence of illicit connections to the storm drain system is prohibited.



      (2)   This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation,
illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection
was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time
of connection.



      (3)   A person is considered to be in violation of this
subchapter if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4, or
allows such a connection to continue.



(Ord. CO-04-24, passed 11-22-04)



§ 53.08  SUSPENSION OF MS4 ACCESS.



   (A)   Suspension due to illicit discharges in emergency
situations.  The city may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge
access to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or
threatened discharge which presents or may present imminent and substantial
danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the
MS4 or waters of the United States. If the violator fails to comply with a
suspension order issued in an emergency, the authorized enforcement agency
may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the
MS4 or waters of the United States, or to minimize danger to persons.



   (B)   Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharge.  Any
person discharging to the MS4 in violation of this subchapter may have their
MS4 access terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an illicit
discharge. The authorized enforcement agency will notify a violator of the
proposed termination of its MS4 access. The violator may petition the
authorized enforcement agency for a reconsideration and hearing. A person
commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access to premises terminated
pursuant to this section, without the prior approval of the authorized
enforcement agency.



(Ord. CO-04-24, passed 11-22-04)



§ 53.09  INDUSTRIAL OR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY DISCHARGES.



   Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES
storm water discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit.
Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to
the city prior to the allowing of discharges to the MS4.



(Ord. CO-04-24, passed 11-22-04)



§ 53.10  MONITORING OF DISCHARGES.



   (A)   Applicability.  This section applies to all facilities that
have storm water discharges associated with industrial activity, including
construction activity.



   (B)   Access to facilities.



      (1)   The city, Frankfort Utilities, Frankfort Plan
Commission, or representative thereof shall be permitted to enter and inspect
facilities subject to regulation under this subchapter as often as may be
necessary to determine compliance with this subchapter. If a discharger has
security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance
before entry into its premises, the discharger shall make the necessary
arrangements to allow access to representatives of the authorized enforcement
agency.



      (2)   Facility operators shall allow the city ready access to
all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling,
examination and copying of records that must be kept under the conditions of
an NPDES permit to discharge storm water, and the performance of any
additional duties as defined by state and federal law.



      (3)   The city shall have the right to set up on any permitted
facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the authorized
enforcement agency to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the facility's
storm water discharge.



      (4)   The city has the right to require the discharger to
install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and
monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper
operating condition by the discharger at its own expense. All devices used to
measure storm water flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their
accuracy.



      (5)   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy
access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly
removed by the operator at the written or oral request of the city and shall
not be replaced.  The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the
operator.



      (6)   Unreasonable delays in allowing the city access to a
permitted facility is a violation of a storm water discharge permit and of
this subchapter. A person who is the operator of a facility with a NPDES
permit to discharge storm water associated with industrial activity commits
an offense if the person denies the authorized enforcement agency reasonable
access to the permitted facility for the purpose of conducting any activity
authorized or required by this subchapter.



      (7)   If the city has been refused access to any part of the
premises from which storm water is discharged, and he/she is able to
demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this
subchapter, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a
routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with
this subchapter or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall
public health, safety, and welfare of the community, then the authorized
enforcement agency may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of
competent jurisdiction.



(Ord. CO-04-24, passed 11-22-04)



§ 53.11  REQUIREMENT TO PREVENT, CONTROL, AND REDUCE STORM WATER POLLUTANTS
BY THE USE OF BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES.



   The city will adopt requirements identifying Best Management Practices
for any activity, operation, or facility which may cause or contribute to
pollution or contamination of storm water, the storm drain system, or waters
of the U.S. The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment
shall provide, at their own expense, reasonable protection from accidental
discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the municipal storm
drain system or watercourses through the use of these structural and
non-structural BMPs. Further, any person responsible for a property or
premise, which is, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge, may be
required to implement, at said person's expense, additional structural and
non-structural BMPs to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the
municipal separate storm sewer system. Compliance with all terms and
conditions of a valid NPDES permit authorizing the discharge of storm water
associated with industrial activity, to the extent practicable, shall be
deemed compliance with the provisions of this section. These BMPs shall be
part of a storm water pollution prevention plan (SWPP) as necessary for
compliance with requirements of the NPDES permit.



(Ord. CO-04-24, passed 11-22-04)



§ 53.12  WATERCOURSE PROTECTION.



   Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or
such person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse
within the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other
obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow
of water through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall
maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a
watercourse, so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use,
function, or physical integrity of the watercourse.



(Ord. CO-04-24, passed 11-22-04)



§ 53.13  NOTIFICATION OF SPILLS.



   Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person
responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency
response for a facility or operation has information of any known or
suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illegal
discharges or pollutants discharging into storm water, the storm drain
system, or water of the U.S. said person shall take all necessary steps to
ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event
of such a release of hazardous materials said person shall immediately notify
emergency response agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch
services. In the event of a release of non-hazardous materials, said person
shall notify the authorized enforcement agency in person or by phone or
facsimile no later than the next business day. Notifications in person or by
phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the
Frankfort Public Works Department within three business days of the phone
notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial
or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment
shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions
taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least
three years.



(Ord. CO-04-24, passed 11-22-04)



§ 53.14  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Notice of violation.  Whenever the city finds that a person
has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this
subchapter, the authorized enforcement agency may order compliance by written
notice of violation to the responsible person. Such notice may require
without limitation:



      (1)   The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;



      (2)   The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;



      (3)   That violating discharges, practices, or operations
shall cease and desist;



      (4)   The abatement or remediation of storm water pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property;



      (5)   Payment of a fine to cover administrative and
remediation costs; and



      (6)   The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.



   (B)   If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected
property is required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such
remediation or restoration must be completed. The notice shall further advise
that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore within the established
deadline, the work will be done by a designated governmental agency or a
contractor and the expense thereof shall be charged to the violator.



(Ord. CO-04-24, passed 11-22-04)



§ 53.15  APPEAL OF NOTICE OF VIOLATION.



   Any person receiving a Notice of Violation may appeal the determination
of the authorized enforcement agency. The notice of appeal must be filed with
the Board of Public Works and Safety for the city within ten days from the
date of the Notice. Hearing on the appeal before the Board of Public Works
shall take place within 15 days from the date of its receipt of the notice of
appeal. The decision of the Board of Public Works shall be final.



(Ord. CO-04-24, passed 11-22-04)



§ 53.16  ENFORCEMENT MEASURES AFTER APPEAL.



   If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements
set forth in the Notice of Violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within
ten days of the decision of the municipal authority upholding the decision of
the authorized enforcement agency, then representatives of the authorized
enforcement agency shall enter upon the subject private property and are
authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation
and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner,
agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the
government agency or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the
purposes set forth above.



(Ord. CO-04-24, passed 11-22-04)



§ 53.17  COST OF ABATEMENT OF THE VIOLATION.



   Within 30 days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the
property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative
costs. The property owner may file a written protest objecting to the amount
of the assessment within ten days. If the amount due is not paid within a
timely manner as determined by the decision of the municipal authority or by
the expiration of the time in which to file an appeal, the charges shall
become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien
on the property for the amount of the assessment. Any person violating any of
the provisions of this article shall become liable to the city by reason of
such violation. The liability shall be paid in not more than 12 equal
payments. Interest at the rate of 8% per annum shall be assessed on the
balance beginning on the first day following discovery of the violation. If
such amount is not timely paid, then the authorized enforcement agency may
authorize the amount due and unpaid to the Treasurer of Clinton County to be
collected as taxes.



(Ord. CO-04-24, passed 11-22-04)



§ 53.18  INJUNCTIVE RELIEF.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to
comply with any of the requirements of this subchapter. If a person has
violated or continues to violate the provisions of this subchapter, the
authorized enforcement agency may petition for a preliminary or permanent
injunction restraining the person from activities which would create further
violations or compelling the person to perform abatement or remediation of
the violation.



(Ord. CO-04-24, passed 11-22-04)



§ 53.19  COMPENSATORY ACTION.



   In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties, and remedies authorized
by this subchapter, the authorized enforcement agency may impose upon a
violator alternative compensatory actions, such as storm drain stenciling,
attendance at compliance workshops, creek cleanup, etc.



(Ord. CO-04-24, passed 11-22-04)



§ 53.20  VIOLATIONS DEEMED A PUBLIC NUISANCE.



   In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any
condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions
of this subchapter is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is
declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at
the violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise
compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken.



(Ord. CO-04-24, passed 11-22-04)



§ 53.21  REMEDIES NOT EXCLUSIVE.



   The remedies listed in this subchapter are not exclusive of any other
remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law and it is
within the discretion of the authorized enforcement agency to seek cumulative
remedies.



(Ord. CO-04-24, passed 11-22-04)



STORM WATER MANAGEMENT



§ 53.35  DEFINITIONS.



      For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



   COMBINED RESIDENTIAL/BUSINESS PROPERTY. A residential property in which
business is conducted on the property.  Business shall mean an act or means
of providing goods or services for compensation.  For example, a residential
property that conducts accounting services in the home shall be classified as
a COMBINED RESIDENTIAL/BUSINESS PROPERTY.



   EQUIVALENT RESIDENTIAL UNIT (ERU).  The average amount of impervious
surface area for a single-family residential property located within the
corporate limits of the city.  The ERU for the City of Frankfort is 2,860
square feet, and shall be used in calculating user fees for non-residential
and combined residential/business.



   IMPERVIOUS SURFACE AREA.  The horizontal surface area of property
covered with materials that include, but are not limited to, concrete,
asphalt, rooftop, blacktop, gravel and stone, such that the infiltration of
storm water is prevented or impeded.  The total amount of impervious surface
area located on a property without regard to topographic features of the
property is included.  Driveways, roadways, parking lots and other areas
used for vehicular traffic are considered IMPERVIOUS SURFACE AREAS.
Undisturbed land, tilled agricultural land, ponds, lawns and fields are not
considered IMPERVIOUS SURFACE AREA.



   INFILTRATION.  The process of allowing runoff to penetrate the ground
surface and flow through the upper soil surface.



   MULTI-FAMILY PROPERTY.  A multi-family property containing four or
more units shall be classified as a non-residential (business) property for
the purposes of the storm water utility.  Those containing one, two or three
units shall be classified as a residential property.



   NON-RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY.  All properties not categorized as
residential properties. Nonresidential properties include, but are not
limited to the following:



      (1)   Agricultural property;



      (2)   Businesses;



      (3)   Churches and other places of religious affiliation;



      (4)   Colleges;



      (5)   Commercial property;



      (6)   Community centers;



      (7)   Federal, state and local government property;



      (8)   Hospitals and medical centers;



      (9)   Industrial property;



      (10)   Multi-family properties which contain four or more
units;



      (11)   Mobile home parks that are operated as a business in
which the business owner rents or leases mobile homes to tenants.



      (12)   Retirement centers;



      (13)   Schools;



      (14)   Properties whose primary function is not as a
single-family residence; and



      (15)   Common areas of residential properties including, but
not limited to, private streets and parking lots, recreational areas, office
areas, maintenance areas and all other areas not occupied by residential
units.



   PRIVATE STORM WATER FACILITIES.  Facilities designed to transport,
move or regulate storm water that are not subject to the control and/or not
under the ownership of the local, state or federal government.



   PUBLIC STORM WATER FACILITIES.  Facilities designed to transport, move
or regulate storm water that are subject to the control and/or under the
ownership of the local, state or federal government. This shall include
facilities in a right-of-way or easement.



   RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY.  A lot or parcel on which a building or mobile
home is situated in which a single-family resides, or on which one, two, or
three residential units is located.  See, however, the definition for
“Non-Residential Property” regarding mobile home parks and properties not
primarily residential in function.



   STORM WATER USER.  The owner/renter of a lot or parcel of residential
property, non-residential property or combined residential/business property
within the city.



   STORM WATER SYSTEM.  All facilities and conveyances subject to the
control of and/or under the ownership of the city used for collecting and
conveying storm water to, through and from drainage areas to the point of
final outlet, including, but not limited to, inlets, conduits and appurtenant
features, pipes, pumping stations, manholes, structures, channels, outlets,
creeks, catch basins, ditches, streams, culverts, retention or detention
basins and other structural components and equipment that transport, move or
regulate storm water.  The system includes public streets, roads, alleyways
and highways.



(Ord. 2006-16, passed 7-26-06)



§ 53.36  PROVISIONS FOR STORM WATER AND DRAINAGE.



   (A)   Storm water utility operation.  The city shall operate its
storm water utility through the Utility Service Board pursuant to the
provisions of I.C. 36-9-23.  The storm water utility will be responsible for
the management of the Frankfort Storm Water System and will fund storm water
management activities by charging user fees to the owner/renter of each
property containing impervious surface area within the corporate limits of
the city.



   (B)   Policies and procedures.  Policies and procedures have been
established for the Frankfort Storm Water Utility for determining impervious
surface area, establishing the Equivalent Residential Unit (ERU) and
multiplier for storm water users, for billing and collection.  These
policies and procedures may be reviewed and revised by the Utility Service
Board and a manual of policies and procedures shall be maintained by the
Utility Service Board.



   (C)   Assessment of user fees.  All residential properties will be
charged a uniform user fee.  User fees for non-residential and combined
residential/business properties will be based upon the amount of impervious
surface area contained within the property.  The amount of impervious
surface area for each property has been determined based upon measurements
using aerial photography and by field measurements.  Public right-of-way is
exempt from the user fee.



   (D)   Compliance with other ordinances, statutes, and regulations. 
User fees do not relieve any property owner from compliance with the City of
Frankfort and/or Clinton County ordinances and/or other applicable state
and/or federal laws/regulations.



(Ord. 2006-16, passed 7-26-06)



§ 53.37  STORM WATER USER FEES.



   (A)   Residential storm water user fee.  The monthly user fee is
uniform for all residential properties which are assigned one ERU.  The
monthly user fee for one ERU shall be $4.83.



   (B)   Nonresidential storm water user fee.  The monthly user fee
for a non-residential property, combined residential/business property, or a
multi-family property with four or more units (defined as non-residential) is
determined using an ERU multiplier, which is calculated by dividing the total
impervious surface area within the property by the base ERU of 2,860 square
feet.  This method allows for the non-residential property user fees to be
based upon the amount of impervious surface area within the property as
compared to the amount of impervious surface area of the average residential
property. For example, a non-residential property with 30,000 square feet of
impervious surface area receives an ERU multiplier of 10.5 (30,000/2,860). 
The ERU multiplier shall be rounded to one decimal place and the minimum ERU
shall be one.  The ERU multiplier is then multiplied by the current fee for
one ERU to determine the actual user fee in dollars. However, no storm water
user fee shall exceed the sum of $750 for any one month as to any single
property. For purposes of this monthly maximum, a SINGLE PROPERTY is defined
as a property having its own address.



(Ord. 2006-16, passed 7-26-06; Am. Ord. 13-04, passed 4-30-13; Am. Ord.
16-09, passed 6-27-16)



§ 53.38  BILLING AND COLLECTION OF STORM WATER USER FEES.



   (A)   Billing.  A database has been developed consisting of each
property owner's/renter's name, property address, property's square footage
of impervious surface area, user fee multiplier and monthly user fee. 
Charges for storm water service shall be billed by and through Frankfort
Municipal Utilities on the monthly utility bill and with the implementing of
related policies.



   (B)   Disconnection of utilities for delinquent fees.  Where the
property having a delinquent account for charges for storm water service is
served by the city's Waterworks Department and/or the city Light and Power,
said water and electric utilities may, after reasonable notice to the owner
and/or customer, shut off the water or electrical service to the property. 
Service may not be restored until the delinquent account and associated costs
have been paid.



   (C)   Sewer lien.  Unpaid storm water user fees constitute a lien
upon the corresponding lot, parcel of land, building or premises at or upon
which such fees are incurred.  Storm water user fees shall be the obligation
of the property owner and shall also be the obligation of any renter
occupying the property.  Storm water user fees shall be billed to the
property owner if there is no renter known to the storm water utility, and to
the renter if the property is rented and the renter is known to the storm
water utility.  When a renter vacates a property, or if storm water user
fees remain unpaid by a renter after utility disconnection and the storm
water bill is not paid within 45 days, the property owner will be notified. 
Additionally, if the owner's address has been provided to the utility billing
office, the owner shall be notified within 20 days of the time the storm
water user fees become 60 days delinquent.  If the owner does not pay within
one month after the owner's first receipt of the bill, the utility may take
action to collect delinquent fees.  Delinquent fees may be collected in
either or both of the following ways (and also in any other way allowed by
law):



      (1)   A civil action may be brought against the renter and/or
property owner.



      (2)   The fees may be recorded as sewage liens in the Office
of the Clinton County Recorder and certified to the auditor of Clinton
County, who shall place the same on the tax duplicate of the county with the
interest and penalties allowed by law to be collected as ad valorem property
taxes are collected.



   (D)   Application of storm water user fees to improvements. All
storm water user fees collected pursuant to this subchapter shall be utilized
for storm water drainage improvements and maintenance, including debt service
for such improvements, personnel to collect, account for, and deliver the
user fees, and personnel and equipment to install and maintain storm water
improvements.  However, personnel and equipment expenses paid from the user
fees collected shall not exceed 30% of the total storm water user fees
collected.  The financial benefit to the city sewage works realized by the
collection of storm water user fees pursuant to this subchapter shall be
devoted to maintenance of and improvements to the city sewage works.



(Ord. 2006-16, passed 7-26-06)



§ 53.39  GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE.



   (A)   Storm water users may petition the Utilities Service Board for
an adjustment if sufficient cause exists to believe the impervious surface
area measurements were determined erroneously.  The petitioner must not be
delinquent in the storm water user fees and must file the petition within
three months of receiving the storm water user fee billing in question.  The
petitioner shall state in writing why it is believed an adjustment is
justified and shall include any supporting evidence, clearly defined, with
the petition.  The Utilities Service Board-appointed reviewer shall examine
the petition and any submitted documentation, make a determination as to
whether the petitioner is entitled to an adjustment of the storm water user
fee and notify the petitioner in writing of the decision and the basis of the
decision within 60 days.  The reviewer may grant, deny or modify the
adjustment requested in the petition.  If it is determined that the
petitioner is entitled to an adjustment of the user fees, the adjustments
will be made in the form of a credit against future storm water user fees.



   (B)   The petitioner may appeal the reviewer's decision to the
Utilities Service Board provided the Board has received written notice of the
appeal from the petitioner within 30 days of the reviewer's determination. 
The Board shall notify the petitioner of the time and place of the hearing on
the appeal. The hearing shall be recorded by audiotape.  The Utilities
Service Board will make a determination as to whether the petitioner is
entitled to an adjustment of the storm water user fee and notify the
petitioner in writing within 30 days of the appeal hearing.  The Utilities
Service Board may grant, deny, or modify the adjustment requested in the
petition.



(Ord. 2006-16, passed 7-26-06)



CHAPTER 54: STORM WATER RUNOFF; CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES



Section



General Provisions



   54.01   Definitions 



   54.02   Applicability



   54.03   Submittals, review and approval



   54.04   Storm water pollution prevention plan



   54.05   Design requirements



   54.06   Inspection



   54.07   Enforcement



Post-Construction Storm Water Quality Runoff Controls



   54.15   Introduction; purpose



   54.16   Applicability



   54.17   Submittals, review and approval



   54.18   Inspection



   54.19   Enforcement



   54.20   Appeals



   54.21   Fee schedule



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 54.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning
and according to Rule 5, 327 IAC 15-5, also known as Rule 5.



   AGRICULTURAL LAND DISTURBING ACTIVITY.  Tillage, planting,
cultivation, or harvesting operations for the production of agricultural or
nursery vegetative crops. The term also includes pasture renovation and
establishment, the construction of agricultural conservation practices, and
the installation and maintenance of agricultural drainage tile. For purposes
of this chapter, the term does not include land disturbing activities for the
construction of agricultural related facilities, such as barns; buildings to
house livestock; roads associated with infrastructure; agricultural waste
lagoons and facilities; lakes and ponds; wetlands; and other infrastructure.



   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES.  An activity or structure that helps
improve the quality of storm water runoff.



   CERTIFIED CONTRACTOR.  A person who has received training and is
licensed by the state or other local agency to inspect and maintain erosion
and sediment control practices and best management practices.



   CLEARING.    Any activity that removes the vegetative surface cover.



   CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY.  Land disturbing activities, such as, land
disturbing activities associated with the construction of infrastructure and
structures. This term does not include routine ditch or road maintenance or
minor landscaping projects.



   CONSTRUCTION PLAN.  A representation of a project site and all
activities associated with the project. The plan includes the location of the
project site, buildings and other infrastructure, grading activities,
schedules for implementation, and other pertinent information related to the
project site.  A storm water pollution prevention plan is a part of the
construction plan.



   DEVELOPER.  Any person financially responsible for construction
activity; or an owner of property who sells or leases, or offers for sale or
lease, any lots in a subdivision.



   EROSION.  The detachment and movement of soil, sediment, or rock
fragments by water, wind, ice, or gravity.



   EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL MEASURE.  A practice, or a combination of
practices, to control erosion and resulting sedimentation.



   EROSION CONTROL.  A measure that prevents erosion.



   GRADING.  The cutting and filling of the land surface to a desired
slope or elevation.



   LAND DISTURBANCE OR LAND DISTURBING ACTIVITY.  Any man-made change of
the land surface, including removing vegetative cover that exposes the
underlying soil, excavating, filling, transporting, and grading.



   MEASURABLE STORM EVENT.  A precipitation event that results in a total
measured precipitation accumulation equal to, or greater than, one-half inch
of rainfall.



   PROJECT SITE.  The entire area on which construction activity is to be
performed.



   PROJECT SITE OWNER.  The person required to submit the Notice of
Intent ("NOI") per Rule 5 and required to comply with the terms of this
chapter, including either a developer or a person who has financial and
operational control of construction activities and project plans and
specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans
and specifications.



   SEDIMENT.  Solid material (both mineral and organic) that is in
suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its place of origin
by air, water, gravity, or ice and has come to rest on the earth's surface.



   SEDIMENT CONTROL.  Measures that prevent eroded sediment from leaving
the project site.



   SOIL.  The unconsolidated mineral and organic material on the surface
of the earth that serves as the natural medium for the growth of plants.



   SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION DISTRICT OR SWCD.  A political subdivision
established under I.C. 14-32.



   STORM WATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN OR SWPPP.  A plan developed to
minimize the impact of storm water pollution resulting from construction and
post-construction activities. The plan describes the specific measures and
sequencing to be used to control sediment, soil erosion and other
construction site wastes during and after construction.



   STORM WATER QUALITY MEASURE.  A practice, or a combination of
practices, to control or minimize pollutants associated with storm water
run-off.



   SUBDIVISION.  Any land that is divided or proposed to be divided into
lots, whether contiguous or subject to zoning requirements, for the purpose
of sale or lease as part of a larger common plan of development or sale.



   TECHNICAL REVIEW AND COMMENT FORM.  A form issued by the Frankfort
Building Inspector's Office stating that the Storm Water Pollution Prevention
Plan is adequate; or stating revisions needed to the plan before approval can
be granted.



   TRAINED INDIVIDUAL.  An individual who is trained and experienced in
the principles of storm water quality, including erosion and sediment control
as may be demonstrated by state registration, professional certification,
experience, or completion of coursework that enable the individual to make
judgments regarding storm water control or treatment and monitoring.



(Ord. CO-04-26, passed 11-22-04)



§ 54.02 APPLICABILITY.



   (A)   The requirements under this chapter are intended to comply
with 327 IAC 15-5 (Rule 5) and apply to all persons meeting the requirements
of 327 IAC 15-5-2. In general, this subchapter requires the control of
polluted run-off from construction sites with a land disturbance greater than
or equal to one acre, or disturbances of less than one acre of land that are
part of a larger common plan of development or sale if the larger common plan
will ultimately disturb one or more acres of land.



   (B)   The requirements under this chapter do not apply to persons
who are involved in agricultural land disturbing activities; or forest
harvesting activities.



   (C)   The requirements under this chapter do not apply to the
following activities, provided other applicable permits contain provisions
requiring immediate implementation of soil erosion control measures:



      (1)   Landfills that have been issued a certification of
closure under 329 IAC 10.



      (2)   Coal mining activities permitted under I.C. 14-34.



      (3)   Municipal solid waste landfills that are accepting waste
pursuant to a permit issued by the Indiana Department of Natural Resources
under 329 IAC 10 that contains equivalent storm water requirements, including
the expansion of landfill boundaries and construction of new cells either
within or outside the original solid waste permit boundary.



   (D)   In addition to the requirements of this subchapter, Storm
Water Pollution Prevention Plans shall be developed in accordance with the
current Frankfort Storm Water Standards, which standards are attached to Ord.
16-04 as Exhibit "A" and are incorporated herein.



(Ord. CO-04-26, passed 11-22-04; Am. Ord. 16-04, passed 5-23-16)



§ 54.03  SUBMITTALS, REVIEW AND APPROVAL.



   (A)   A Technical Review and Comment Form stating that the "Plan is
Adequate" together with a Building Permit must be obtained prior to the
initiation of any land disturbing activities within the city.



   (B)   An application for permit together with a complete Storm Water
Pollution Prevention Plan (as described in the Frankfort Storm Water
Standards and in accordance with Rule 5) shall be submitted in duplicate to
the Frankfort Building Inspector's Office prior to the initiation of any land
disturbing activities.



   (C)   The date and time of submittal to the Building Inspector's
Office will be recorded.



   (D)   Each application shall bear the names and addresses of the
owner or developer of the project site, and of any consulting firm retained
by the applicant together with the name of the applicant's principal contact
at the firm and shall be accompanied by a filing fee as defined in the
Frankfort Storm Water Standards.



   (E)   Each application shall include a statement that any land
clearing, construction, or development involving the movement of earth shall
be in accordance with the Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan and that a
certified contractor shall be on the project site on all days when
construction or grading activity takes place.



   (F)   The Frankfort Building Inspector's Office shall review each
Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) to determine its conformance
with the provisions of this subchapter and Rule 5. Within 28 days after
receiving the SWPPP, and upon successfully fulfilling the provisions of the
chapter and Rule 5, the Frankfort Building Inspector's Office shall, in
writing:



      (1)   Approve the Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan and
provide a Technical Review and Comment Form stating that the "Plan is
Adequate";



      (2)   Approve the Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan
subject to the reasonable conditions as may be necessary to secure
substantially the objectives of this regulation, and issue the Technical
Review and Comment Form stating that the "Plan is Adequate"; or



      (3)   Provide a Technical Review and Comment Form stating that
the "Plan is Deficient" and indicating the reason(s) and procedure for
submitting a revised application and/or submission.



   (G)   Failure of the Frankfort Building Inspector's Office to act on
an original or revised application within 28 days of receipt shall authorize
the applicant to proceed in accordance with the plans as filed unless the
time is extended by agreement between the applicant and the Frankfort
Building Inspector's Office.



   (H)   The sufficiency of the SWPPP shall be based upon Rule 5
regulations and the criteria described in the current Frankfort Storm Water
Standards.



   (I)   After receiving a Technical Review and Comment Form stating
that the "Plan is Adequate", if revisions to the SWPPP require a change in
measures appropriate to control the quality or quantity of storm water
runoff, then revised plans must be submitted to the Frankfort Building
Inspector's Office within 14 days for further review and approval. Pending
preparation and approval of a revised plan, development activities may be
allowed to proceed in accordance with conditions established by the Frankfort
Building Inspector's Office.



   (J)   The applicant who has received his or her "Plan is Adequate"
clearance will be required to file with the city a faithful performance bond,
letter of credit, or other improvement security in an amount deemed
sufficient by the city to cover all costs of improvements, landscaping,
maintenance of improvements for the period as specified by the city, and
engineering and inspection costs to cover the cost of failure or repair of
improvements installed on the project site.



   (K)   After receiving a Technical Review and Comment Form stating
that the "Plan is Adequate" from the Frankfort Building Inspector's Office,
and within 48 hours of the start of construction, the following shall be
submitted to the Indiana Department of Environmental Management and Frankfort
Building Inspector's Office:



      (1)   Notice of Intent Form (required by 327 IAC 15-5);



      (2)   A copy of the Technical Review and Comment Form stating
that the "Plan is Adequate"; and



      (3)   Proof of Publication required by 327 IAC 15-5-5(9).



   (L)   The project site owner must submit a Notice of Termination
(NOT) letter to Indiana Department of Environmental Management (IDEM) and
transmit a copy of the NOT letter to the Frankfort Building Inspector's
Office when all land disturbing activities have been completed, the entire
project site has been stabilized and all temporary erosion and sediment
control measures have been removed.



(Ord. CO-04-26, passed 11-22-04)



§ 54.04  STORM WATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN.



   The Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan including erosion and
sediment control measures shall meet the requirements contained in Rule 5,
the Frankfort Storm Water Standards, and the Indiana Storm Water Quality
Manual.



(Ord. CO-04-26, passed 11-22-04)



§ 54.05  DESIGN REQUIREMENTS.



   Erosion and sediment control measures shall be designed and installed
in accordance with Rule 5, the Frankfort Storm Water Standards, and the
Indiana Storm Water Quality Manual.



(Ord. CO-04-26, passed 11-22-04)



§ 54.06  INSPECTION.



   (A)   A self-monitoring program must be implemented. A trained
individual shall perform a written evaluation of the project site by the end
of the next business day following each measurable storm event and at a
minimum of one time per week.



   (B)   The evaluation must address the maintenance of existing storm
water quality measures to ensure they are functioning properly; and identify
additional measures necessary to remain in compliance with all applicable
statutes and rules.



   (C)   Written evaluation reports must include the following:



      (1)   The name of the individual performing the evaluation;



      (2)   The date of the evaluation;



      (3)   Problems identified at the project site; and



      (4)   Details of corrective actions recommended and completed.



   (D)   All evaluation reports for the project site must be made
available to the inspecting authority within 48 hours of a request.



   (E)   All persons engaging in construction activities in a project
site must comply with the Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan, this
chapter, Rule 5 and the Frankfort Storm Water Standards.



   (F)    Construction site owners shall allow right-of-entry for the
Frankfort Building Inspector's Office, or city, county, or state regulatory
agency or a representative thereof to inspect any project site involved in
construction activities.



   (G)   The Building Inspector's Office will perform random
inspections and provide recommendations to evaluate the installation,
implementation and maintenance of control measures and management practices
at any project site involved in construction activities. Construction project
sites will be prioritized based on the nature and extent of the construction
activity, topography and the characteristics of soils and receiving water
quality.



   (H)   If after a recommendation is provided to the project site
owner, corrective action is not taken, the city will pursue enforcement
according to § 54.07 of this chapter.



(Ord. CO-04-26, passed 11-22-04)



§ 54.07  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Written notification.  In the event the Frankfort  Building
Inspector's Office or other regulatory agency determines the project is not
in compliance with this chapter, Rule 5 or the Frankfort Storm Water
Standards, the project site owner will be issued a written notification from
the Frankfort Building Inspector's Office. The written notification may be in
the form of a warning letter of noncompliance or violation notice.



   (B)   Penalties.  Following a written notification, the project
site owner shall have five business days from the date given, to correct the
deficiency. In the event the deficiency is not corrected within this period,
a fine of not less than $10 per day nor more than $100 per day per deficiency
may be assessed against the project site owner. The fine shall be determined
by the Frankfort Building Inspector.



   (C)   Stop-Work Order (revocation of Building Permit).  In the
event that any person or firm fails to comply with this chapter or violates
any of the terms hereof, the Frankfort Building Inspector may issue a
stop-work order or may revoke the owner's building permit, in which event all
construction work shall cease until and unless the Frankfort Building
Inspector determines that compliance has been obtained.



   (D)   The city may file a civil suit in any court of competent
jurisdiction against an owner or developer who the city has determined to be
in violation of this chapter. The suit may be to secure a restraining order
or injunction, for damages or for collection of fines imposed.  In the event
the court determines the owner or developer to have been in violation of this
chapter, the violator shall be liable for interest at eight percent per annum
on any amount recovered and for reasonable attorney fees incurred by the city.



(Ord. CO-04-26, passed 11-22-04)



POST-CONSTRUCTION STORM WATER QUALITY RUNOFF CONTROLS



§ 54.15  INTRODUCTION; PURPOSE.



   (A)   Land development projects and associated increases in
impervious cover alter the hydrologic response of local watersheds and
increase storm water runoff rates, runoff volumes, flooding, stream channel
erosion, and sediment transport and deposition.  This storm water runoff
contributes to increased quantities of water-borne pollutants.  Storm water
runoff, soil erosion and nonpoint source pollution can be controlled and
minimized through the regulation of storm water runoff from development sites.



   (B)   The purpose of this subchapter is to establish minimum storm
water management requirements and controls to provide reasonable guidance for
the regulation of storm water runoff for the purpose of protecting local
water resources from degradation and to protect and safeguard the general
health, safety, and welfare of the public residing in watersheds within the
city.  This subchapter seeks to meet that purpose through minimizing
increases in storm water runoff rates and volumes, erosion and nonpoint
source pollution caused by storm water runoff, wherever possible, through
storm water management controls and to ensure that these management controls
are properly maintained.



(Ord. CO-05-08, passed 10-24-04)



§ 54.16  APPLICABILITY.



   (A)   The provisions of this subchapter are in compliance with 327
IAC 15-13 (Rule 13) and apply to all persons meeting the requirements of 327
IAC 15-13-16.  In general, this subchapter requires the post-construction
control of storm water discharges for both new development and
re-development, with a land disturbance greater than or equal to one acre, or
disturbances of less than one acre of land that are part of a larger common
plan of development or sale if the larger common plan will ultimately disturb
one or more acres of land.



   (B)   The requirements of this subchapter do not apply to the
following:



      (1)   Construction of, or modifications to, single-family
structures that are not a part of a larger common plan of development;



      (2)   Single-family residential development consisting of four
or fewer lots;



      (3)   Individual lots within a larger common development plan
that has been previously permitted for storm water management; and



      (4)   Any logging, agricultural, or other activity which is
consistent with an approved soil conservation plan or a timber management
plan prepared or approved by county, state, or federal regulating agencies.



   (C)   This subchapter is not intended to interfere with, abrogate,
or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, stature, or other provision
of law.  The requirements of this subchapter should be considered minimum
requirements, and where any provision of this subchapter imposes restrictions
different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or
other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose
higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be
considered to take precedence.



   (D)   If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph,
subdivision or clause of this subchapter shall be judged invalid by a court
of competent jurisdiction, such order of judgment shall not affect or
invalidate the remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision
or clause of this subchapter.



(Ord. CO-05-08, passed 10-24-04)



§ 54.17  SUBMITTALS, REVIEW AND APPROVAL.



   (A)   The city has developed the City of Frankfort Storm Water
Standards (Storm Water Standards) that provides additional policy, criteria
and information, including specifications and standards, for the proper
implementation of the requirements of this subchapter.  The Storm Water
Standards document was originally adopted by the Common Council, City of
Frankfort, Ordinance No. CO-04-26 on 10-25-2004.  Revisions to the storm
water standards may be updated and expanded at the discretion of the Board of
Public Works and Safety of the city. Post-construction runoff control
measures shall be designed and installed in accordance with Rule 13 and the
storm water standards.  Storm water treatment practices that are designed
and constructed in accordance with these design and sizing criteria will be
presumed to meet the minimum water quality performance standards.  The storm
water standards includes acceptable storm water treatment practices,
including specific design criteria and operation and maintenance requirements
for each storm water practice.  The Indiana Stormwater Quality Manual
produced by the Indiana Department of Natural Resources (IDNR) may be used as
a guidance document for storm water quality treatment measures.



   (B)   A Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) shall be
required that details how runoff and associated water quality impacts
resulting from the development will be controlled or managed. Submittal
requirements for the SWPPP shall be as referenced in 327 IAC 15-5-6.5(a)(8)
and the storm water standards.



   (C)   Where appropriate, storage, infiltration, filtering, or
vegetative practices shall be used to reduce the impact of pollutants in
storm water runoff on receiving waters.  In addition to these practices, the
following requirements shall be utilized:



      (1)   Infiltration practices will not be allowed in wellhead
protection areas.



      (2)   Discharges will not be allowed directly into sinkholes
or fractured bedrock without treatment that results in the discharge meeting
Indiana ground water quality standards as referenced in 327 IAC 2-11.



      (3)   Any storm water practice that is a Class V injection
well must ensure that the discharge from such practices meets Indiana ground
water quality standards as referenced in 327 IAC 2-11.



      (4)   As site conditions allow, the rate at which water flows
through conveyances shall be regulated to reduce outfall scouring and stream
bank erosion.



      (5)   As site conditions allow, a vegetated filter strip of
appropriate width shall be maintained along unvegetated swales and ditches.



      (6)   New gasoline outlets and refueling areas, or outlets and
refueling areas that replace their existing tank systems shall be designed
and installed using appropriate practices to reduce lead, copper, zinc, and
polyaromatic hydrocarbons in storm water runoff.



   (D)   The storm water standards contains requirements for the storm
water application and approval process.  An application for storm water
review shall be submitted to the city through the Building Inspector's Office
on the form provided for that purpose.  A technical review shall be
conducted by the Building Inspector's Office or its designated representative.



   (E)   Approval of the project from the city and an improvement
location permit must be obtained prior to the initiation of any land
disturbing activities.  Technical review fees shall be the responsibility of
the developer and/or owner and shall be paid in full before an improvement
location permit is issued.



   (F)   All storm water treatment practices shall be maintained in
good condition in accordance with operation and maintenance requirements for
each storm water practice per the storm water standards and the terms and
conditions of the storm water management approval.  The owner of the site
must execute a grant of perpetual drainage easement that shall be binding on
all subsequent owners of land served by the storm water management
facility.  The easement shall be granted to the city in accordance with the
terms in the storm water standards.



   (G)   The city requires the submittal of a performance bond prior to
project construction and a maintenance bond after completion of the project
construction in accordance with the terms in the storm water standards.



(Ord. CO-05-08, passed 10-24-04)



§ 54.18  INSPECTION.



   (A)   The city, through its various departments, shall conduct
inspections of the installation of the storm water management system to
ensure compliance with the terms of the storm water standards and the storm
water management approval.



   (B)   The applicant must notify the Office of the Building Inspector
of the city 48 hours in advance of construction of the storm water management
system.  Inspections of the system construction may be conducted by the
departmental staff of the city or their designated representative.  If
required, the applicant shall execute an inspection services agreement with
the city and pay all applicable inspection fees per the terms stated in the
agreement.



   (C)   The city has the authority to conduct post-construction
inspections to ensure the storm water management facility is maintained in
good condition.  Parties responsible for the operation and maintenance of a
storm water management facility shall make and keep records of the
installation and of all maintenance and repairs.  These records shall be
made available to the city upon request and shall be retained for a period of
five years.



   (D)   If the responsible party fails to meet the requirements of the
installation and maintenance conditions per the storm water standards and the
terms and conditions of the storm water management approval, the city shall
pursue enforcement action according to § 54.19.



(Ord. CO-05-08, passed 10-24-04)



§ 54.19  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Written notification.  In the event the city or a regulatory
agency determines the installation or maintenance of the storm water
management facility violates the provisions of this subchapter, Rule 13, the
storm water standards or the terms of the storm water management approval,
the Frankfort Building Inspector shall mail or deliver a written notice of
non-compliance to the property owner at such owner's address as shown by the
records of the Center Township Assessor's Office.



   (B)   Non-compliance during construction. 



      (1)   Upon receipt of a written notice of violation during
construction, persons receiving a notice of violation must halt all
construction activities if the notice is accompanied by a "stop work" order
also issued by the Frankfort Building Inspector's Office.  A "stop work
order" shall be in effect until the City of Frankfort, Building Inspector's
Office confirms that the development activity is in compliance and the
violation has been satisfactorily addressed.  Failure to address a notice of
violation in a timely manner can result in civil or monetary penalties in
accordance with the enforcement measures authorized in this ordinance.



      (2)   Following a written notice of violation during
construction, the property owner shall have 14 days following receipt thereof
to correct the deficiency. In the event the deficiency is not corrected
within this period, the Board of Public Works and Safety, upon recommendation
of the Frankfort Building Inspector, may assess a fine of not less than $25
and not more than $500 per deficiency to the property owner.  Each day such
violation exists shall constitute a separate violation.  The Building
Inspector of the city may also suspend or revoke an improvement location
permit for non-compliance with this subchapter.



      (3)   Maintenance non-compliance after construction.  Upon
receipt of written notice of a maintenance violation, the owner of the
property shall have 30 calendar days from the date of mailing such notice to
correct the deficiency.  In the event the deficiency is not corrected within
this period, the Board of Public Works and Safety of the city, may assess a
fine of not less than $25 and not more than $500 per deficiency.  Each day
such violation exists shall constitute a separate violation.  In the event
the deficiency is not corrected after 60 calendar days from the notice of
maintenance violation, the city may correct a violation by performing all
necessary work to place the facility in compliance.  The city, through its
Board of Public Works and Safety, may assess the owner(s) of the facility for
the cost of repair and remedial work.  The city shall mail and invoice for
its costs incurred in performing the repair and remedial work to the property
owner.  If such invoice is not paid within 30 days of such mailing, the city
may certify such costs to the Clinton County Auditor to be placed on the tax
duplicate for collection as taxes.  The cost of the work and any
administrative costs in connection therewith shall be a lien on the property.



(Ord. CO-05-08, passed 10-24-04)



§ 54.20  APPEALS.



   Any person receiving a notice of violation of this subchapter may
appeal the determination of the authorized enforcement agency.  The notice
of appeal must be filed with the Board of Public Works and Safety for the
city within ten days from the date of the notice.  Hearing on the appeal
before the Board of Public Works shall take place within 15 days from the
date of its receipt of the notice of appeal.  The decision of the Board of
Public Works shall be final.



(Ord. CO-05-08, passed 10-24-04)



§ 54.21  FEE SCHEDULE.



   (A)   There is hereby established the Fee Schedule, Rule 5 and
Post-construction Water Quality (the "Fee Schedule"), which is attached to
Ord. 09-11 as Exhibit A and incorporated by reference as if fully set forth
herein.



   (B)   The Fee Schedule shall become a part of and appendix to the
Frankfort Storm Water Standards that were adopted by the City of Frankfort as
a part of this chapter.



   (C)   The fees set forth in the Fee Schedule shall be charged to
each applicant developer in connection with any land disturbing activity
within the City of Frankfort for which a permit is sought or has been issued
pursuant to 327 IAC 15-5 (Rule 5) and this chapter.



   (D)   Subject to the fees established by the Fee Schedule, the Board
of Public Works and Safety of the City of Frankfort shall continue to have
the authority to revise, amend, update and expand the Storm Water Standards
as previously authorized in this subchapter.



   (E)   The fees collected under the Fee Schedule shall be deposited
into the city's general fund. The Mayor is authorized to utilize any or all
of such designated funds to employ an outside contractor to carry out the
various application, review and inspection tasks as are required by the city
to implement and enforce the provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 09-11, passed 6-22-09)



TITLE VII:  TRAFFIC CODE



   Chapter



      70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



      71.   TRAFFIC RULES



      72.   PARKING REGULATIONS



      73.   DOWNTOWN PARKING



      74.   NON-MOTORIZED VEHICLES



      75.   RAILROADS



         APPENDIX A:  CROSSING REQUIRING SIGNAL OR FLAGMAN



         APPENDIX B:  EXEMPT CROSSINGS



      76.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES



      77.   PARKING SCHEDULES



      78.   MOPEDS



      79.   GOLF CARTS



CHAPTER 70:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   70.01   Definitions



   70.02   Authority to erect traffic-control devices



   70.03   Traffic and parking enforcement on property owned by
Community Schools of Frankfort



 



   70.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Vehicle noise control, see Ch. 95



§ 70.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this Title the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BUSINESS DISTRICT.  That territory contiguous to and including a
highway or street, when 50% or more of the frontage thereon for a distance of
500 feet or more is occupied by buildings in use for business.  (I.C.
9-13-2-18)



   COMMERCIAL VEHICLE.  A truck, tractor, semi-trailer, and a trailer, or
any combination of these vehicles, as defined by I.C. 9-13-2-164, 9-13-2-180,
9-13-2-188.



   DRIVER.  Every person who drives or is in actual control of a
vehicle.  (I.C. 9-13-2-47)



   DRIVEWAY.  A concrete, asphalt or crushed stone passage way for
vehicles that serves to connect a public street or alley to a garage,
structure or approved parking space(s).



   INDIVIDUAL PARKING SPACE.  Any portion of the paved surface of the
street of sufficient length and depth from the sidewalk curb to accommodate a
vehicle to be parked, as specified and marked off by the Police Department of
the city.



   LOCAL DELIVERY.  The operation of commercial vehicles from or to a
point of origin or destination, or when being used for the purpose of pickups
or deliveries of freights, property, and other materials in the city.



   OPERATOR.  Includes every individual who shall operate a vehicle as
the owner thereof, or as the agent, employee, or permittee of the owner.



   PARKING.  The standing of any vehicle upon a street, whether the
vehicle is occupied or not and whether the vehicle is accompanied or not by
an operator, for a period of time in excess of two minutes.



   PARKING METER. or MECHANICAL PARKING TIME INDICATOR.  Any device or
devices which shall indicate thereon the length of time during which a
vehicle may be parked in a particular place, which shall have as a part
thereof a receptacle or chamber for receiving and storing coins of the United
States and a slot or place in which the coins may be deposited, a timing
device or mechanism to indicate the passage of an interval of time during
which parking is permissible and which shall also display an appropriate
signal when the interval of time has elapsed, and a set of brief instructions
as to the operation of the device.



   REGISTERED GROSS WEIGHT.  The weight of a vehicle or combination of
vehicles without load, plus the weight of any load thereon.



   RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.  The territory contiguous to and including a
highway or street when 50% or more of the frontage thereon for a distance of
500 feet or more is zoned pursuant to the master plan of the city for
residential use.



   STREET.  Any public street, alley, avenue, boulevard, highway, or
other public place located within the city and established or dedicated for
the use of vehicles.



   VEHICLE.  Every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is
or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices moved by human
power, or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.  (I.C.
9-13-2-196(a), (b)(1), (2))



('75 Code, Ch. 26)  (Ord. 152, passed 8-10-48; Am. Ord. PO-68-2, passed
8-7-68; Am. ord. CO-05-07, passed 10-11-05)



§ 70.02  AUTHORITY TO ERECT TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.



   The Board of Public Works and Safety of the city is hereby directed,
empowered, and authorized to erect and maintain those traffic-control signals
and signs that the Board may from time to time deem necessary.



('75 Code, §  29.17)  (Ord. 4-188, passed 12-21-59)



Statutory reference:



   Local traffic-control devices, see I.C. 9-21-4



§ 70.03  TRAFFIC AND PARKING ENFORCEMENT ON PROPERTY OWNED BY COMMUNITY
SCHOOLS OF FRANKFORT.



   (A)   Traffic Enforcement Agreement.



      (1)   The Traffic Enforcement Agreement entered into by
Community Schools and by the Mayor of the City of Frankfort, which agreement
is dated November 8, 2011, is hereby in all means approved, as shall be
amended to conform to this section, and the Frankfort Police Department is
authorized to enforce traffic and signage matters on property within the City
of Frankfort that is owned by Community Schools.



      (2)   The Traffic Enforcement Agreement referred to in
division (A)(1) above shall be recorded in the Office of the Recorder of
Clinton County, Indiana, together with a copy of this section.



   (B)   Additional regulations. The additional regulations that are
hereby established and are to be enforced with respect to property owned by
Community Schools are as follows:



      (1)   Exceeding posted speed limit on school property. A
person may not operate a motor vehicle on property owned by Community Schools
of Frankfort in excess of the posted speed limit.



      (2)   Disregarding a stop sign on school property. A person
who operates a motor vehicle shall stop at all intersections where stop signs
are erected at entrances to through roadways on property owned by Community
Schools of Frankfort.



      (3)   Disregarding a do not enter sign on school property. A
person may not operate a motor vehicle on any portion of property owned by
Community Schools of Frankfort that is posted with signage reading “DO NOT
ENTER.”



      (4)   Passing a school bus while loading/unloading on school
property. A person who operates a motor vehicle must stop for a school bus
that is loading or unloading passengers while the school bus lights are
activated and stop arm is extended on property owned by Community Schools of
Frankfort.



      (5)   Failure to yield at through roadway on school property.
A person who operates a motor vehicle on property owned by Community Schools
of Frankfort must yield the right-of-way to oncoming persons or vehicles when
“YIELD RIGHT-OF-WAY” is posted.



      (6)   Failure to yield to pedestrians in a crosswalk on school
property. In the absence of operating traffic control signals, a person who
operates a motor vehicle on property owned by Community Schools of Frankfort
shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping if necessary to yield,
to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within a crosswalk when the pedestrian
is upon the half of the roadway on which the vehicle is traveling or when the
pedestrian is approaching closely from the opposite half of the roadway.



      (7)   Parking in a no parking zone on school property. A
person operating a motor vehicle shall not stop, stand or park such vehicle,
except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or to avoid
conflict with law or directions of a police officer or traffic control device
in any parking space marked as “NO PARKING” on Community Schools of
Frankfort property.



      (8)   Parking in a handicap zone on school property. A person
shall not stop, stand or park a motor vehicle, except when necessary to avoid
conflict with other traffic or to avoid conflict with law or directions of a
police officer or traffic control device in any parking space marked as
“HANDICAP/DISABLED” on Community Schools of Frankfort property without
having an authorized handicap/disabled license plate or placard.  The
exceptions to this division (B)(8) are as follows:



         (1)   A person who has a temporary or permanent physical
disability that requires the use of a wheel chair, a walker, braces or
crutches;



         (2)   A person who has temporarily or permanently lost
the use of one or both legs;



         (3)   A person having notice from a certified physician
or medical officer; and



         (4)   An advanced notice that a nurse is required.



      (9)   Parking in a visitor parking zone on school property. A
person shall not stop, stand or park a motor vehicle, except when necessary
to avoid conflict with other traffic or avoid conflict with law or directions
of a police officer or traffic control device in any parking space marked as
“VISITOR” that is not visiting on official business on Community Schools
of Frankfort property. No employees, staff members or students shall park in
these zones.



      (10)   Parking in emergency vehicle parking zones on school
property. A person shall not stop, stand or park a motor vehicle, except when
necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or avoid conflict with law or
directions of a police officer or traffic control device in any parking zone
marked as “EMERGENCY VEHICLES PARKING ONLY” on Community Schools of
Frankfort property. These parking zones/areas are designated for emergency
response vehicles only.



      (11)   Wrong way on one-way on school property. A motor
vehicle shall be driven upon a roadway designated and sign posted for one-way
traffic only in the direction designated on Community Schools of Frankfort
property.



   (C)   The traffic and parking regulations adopted in division (B)
above, shall become a part of this title of the Municipal Code of the City of
Frankfort.



   (D)   Penalties for violations of such regulations shall be as
provided by § 70.99 and may be paid through the city’s Ordinance Violation
Bureau.



(Ord. 11-16A, passed 11-28-11)



§ 70.99  PENALTY.



   Violations of this Title for which another penalty is not provided
shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $10 nor more than $500. 
Whenever possible under the provisions of the laws of the state, operator's
or chauffeur's licenses of persons convicted of a third violation of this
Title shall be suspended or revoked for whatever period of time within the
discretion of the trial judge is deemed advisable.



('75 Code, §§  27.21, 27.22, 29.99)  (Ord. 155, passed 10-28-48; Am. Ord.
PO-68-4, passed 11-13-68; Am. Ord. PO-71-1, passed 5-5-71; Am. Ord. PO-77-2,
passed 12-21-77)



CHAPTER 71:  TRAFFIC RULES



Section



   71.01   Commercial vehicles prohibited on certain streets; exceptions



   71.02   U-turns



   71.03   Stop signs at dangerous intersections



   71.04   Pedestrian conduct on roadways



Cross-reference:



   Vehicle noise control, see Ch. 95



§ 71.01  COMMERCIAL VEHICLES PROHIBITED ON CERTAIN STREETS; EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   Drivers of commercial vehicles with a registered gross weight
in excess of ten tons or 20,000 pounds (ten tons), are hereby prohibited from
operating or driving the vehicles over any city street or portion of
streets.  However, when these vehicles are being operated or driven for the
purpose of local delivery, the drivers may use and proceed by the shortest
possible route on, over, or across any restricted city street to or from the
nearest commercial vehicle routes as provided in Chapter 76, Schedule I.



('75 Code, § 27.02)



   (B)   The posting of any restricted streets shall be accomplished by
the use of uniform signs reading "10 Ton Limit - Except Local Delivery", and
shall be erected by the Police Chief.  ('75 Code, § 27.04)



(Ord. PO-68-2, passed 8-7-68)  Penalty, see § 70.99



Cross-reference:



   Parking commercial vehicles of certain weight in residential districts
prohibited, see § 72.11



Statutory reference:



   Local authorities may impose weight, size limitations, see I.C. 9-20-1-3



§ 71.02  U-TURNS.



   It shall be unlawful for any motor vehicle or other vehicle to be
operated upon any of the streets of the city in such a manner that a U-turn
is made on any streets adjacent to the public square or upon any of the
streets within one block of the public square.



('75 Code, §  27.20)  (Ord. 155, passed 10-28-48)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.03  STOP SIGNS AT DANGEROUS INTERSECTIONS.



   Stop signs shall be erected at all intersections designated upon the
recommendation of the Police Department and upon the order of the Board of
Public Works and Safety.  It shall be unlawful for the operator of any motor
vehicle or other vehicle operated upon any street upon which stop signs have
been erected in accordance with this section to fail to stop in the street at
the stop sign.



('75 Code, §  29.18)  (Ord. 155, passed 10-28-48)  Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Obedience to official traffic-control devices, see I.C. 9-21-4



§ 71.04  PEDESTRIAN CONDUCT ON ROADWAYS.



   It shall be unlawful for a pedestrian to sit, stand or move within or
upon a roadway, or a median between two roadways, for the purpose of or while
engaging in soliciting, peddling, selling, advertising, donating, or
distributing any product, property, or service, including but not limited to
tickets, handbills, newspaper, or other printed material, to or from an
occupant of a vehicle in a roadway.  It shall also be unlawful to impede the
flow of traffic, obstruct or distract the view of the driver of a vehicle,
and endanger the welfare or safety of any occupant of any vehicle.



(Ord. CO-03-01, passed 2-10-03)



CHAPTER 72:  PARKING REGULATIONS



Section



General Provisions



   72.01   Parking in congested traffic area



   72.02   Parking within marked parking spaces



   72.03   Parking on streets with no marked parking spaces



   72.04   Parking spaces not reserved; exceptions



   72.05   Parking in alleys, on sidewalks



   72.06   Buses, trucks near public square



   72.07   Parking without lights



   72.08   Parking on one side of street



   72.09   Parking longer than two days prohibited



   72.10   Parking on narrow streets



   72.11   Commercial vehicles in residential districts prohibited



   72.12   Violations



   72.13   Parking vehicles facing oncoming traffic



   72.14   Parking during snow emergencies



Loading and Unloading



   72.15   Designated zones; time limit



   72.16   Unauthorized parking prohibited



Parking on Private Property



   72.20   Unauthorized parking prohibited



   72.21   Removal of unauthorized vehicles



   72.22   Towing and storage charges



   72.23   Presumption that owner parked vehicle



Cross-reference:



   Taxicab parking regulations, see §§ 111.20, 111.21



Statutory reference:



   Local authorities may regulate the standing or parking of vehicles, see
I.C. 9-21-16-5



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 72.01  PARKING IN CONGESTED TRAFFIC AREA.



   The Common Council hereby determines that because of the flow of
traffic on streets or portions of streets within the congested traffic area,
as defined in § 73.10, parking therein shall be subject to the provisions of
this Title.  The congested area may be enlarged from time to time as traffic
conditions require by designation as congested traffic areas any other
streets or alleys as Common Council shall designate.



('75 Code, §  29.01)  (Ord. 152, passed 8-10-48; Am. Ord. 161, passed
3-3-52; Am. Ord. 162, passed 5-5- 52)



§ 72.02  PARKING WITHIN MARKED PARKING SPACES.



   (A)   Parking spaces shall be marked upon the streets of the city
only upon the order of the Board of Public Works and Safety.  ('75 Code, §
29.02)



   (B)   All motor vehicles or other vehicles parked upon or in streets
upon which parking spaces have been designated by lines, painted or otherwise
placed upon the streets of the city, shall be parked within a space so that
no part of the vehicle touches any of the lines designating the parking
space, and it shall be unlawful for any vehicle to be parked upon or in any
such street in any other manner.  However, nothing in this section shall
prohibit trucks from parking on any street where parking spaces are parallel
with the curb within the parallel spaces between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and
7:00 a.m.  ('75 Code, § 29.03)



(Ord. 155, passed 10-28-48)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.03  PARKING ON STREETS WITH NO MARKED PARKING SPACES.



   All motor vehicles or other vehicles parked upon or in streets upon
which no parking spaces have been designated shall be parked parallel to the
curb, with the right-hand wheels of the vehicle not further than one foot
from the curb, and on the right side of the street.  It shall be unlawful
for any vehicle to be parked upon or in any such street in any other manner.



('75 Code, §  29.04)  (Ord. 155, passed 10-28-48)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.04  PARKING SPACES NOT RESERVED; EXCEPTIONS.



   No parking spaces shall be reserved for the use of a particular person,
firm, corporation, official, employee, or other legal entity, except that the
Board of Public Works and Safety shall have the power to reserve parking
space for the use of the Police Department for police vehicles bearing
designation thereon as such.  The Board shall also have the power to reserve
spaces for loading and unloading zones as provided in § 72.15.



('75 Code, §  29.05)  (Ord. 155, passed 10-28-48; Am. Ord. 159, passed
3-3-52)



§ 72.05  PARKING IN ALLEYS, ON SIDEWALKS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any motor vehicle or other vehicle to
park in any alley.  However, this section shall not apply to motor vehicles
parking in alleys for a period of not more than 30 minutes for the purpose of
loading or unloading the vehicles.  ('75 Code, § 29.06)



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle or other
vehicle or any part of a vehicle on any sidewalk in the city.  ('75 Code, §
29.07)



   (C)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or
park any motor vehicle on any portion of a lot, lawn or greenspace in any
residential district other than on a drive of approved parking area.  No
person shall operate or park any vehicle over the curb or curb area unless
through a properly designed and designated curb cut.



      (2)   Exception:  parking on any portion of a lot, lawn or
greenspace in a residential district for the purpose of loading or unloading
or washing of the motor vehicle shall not exceed a reasonable amount of time
necessary to accomplish the task.



(Ord. 155, passed 10-28-48; Am. Ord. CO-05-07, passed 10-11-05)  Penalty,
see § 70.99



§ 72.06  BUSES, TRUCKS NEAR PUBLIC SQUARE.



   It shall be unlawful to park any truck or bus of more than 3/4-ton
capacity on any street adjacent to the public square. However, nothing in
this section shall be construed to prohibit trucks or buses from parking upon
these streets for the purpose of loading and unloading only.  ('75 Code,
§  29.08)  (Ord.  155, passed 10-28-48; Am. Ord. 85-22, passed 1-27-86) 
Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.07  PARKING WITHOUT LIGHTS.



   Any automobile parked on any highway in the city in accordance with the
parking regulations of the city, shall not require any lights on the vehicle
while it is so parked if the vehicle is parked at a place where there is
sufficient light so as to disclose and reveal the automobile at a distance of
500 feet.



('75 Code, §  29.09)  (Ord.  155, passed 10-28-48)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.08  PARKING ON ONE SIDE OF STREET.



   It shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle or other vehicle along
the side of any street which has been posted with signs prohibiting parking
on that side.



('75 Code, §  29.12)  (Ord. 155, passed 10-28-48)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.09  PARKING LONGER THAN TWO DAYS PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle or other vehicle on any
street in the city for a period of more than 48 hours continuously.



('75 Code, §  29.14)  (Ord. 155, passed 10-28-48)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.10  PARKING ON NARROW STREETS.



   The Board of Public Works and Safety of the city shall have the power
to restrict parking along one side of any street 28 feet or less in width
from curb to curb, and to cause to be posted thereon signs prohibiting
parking.  These signs shall be posted not less than one sign to each 100
feet if the street in the area thereby restricted.



('75 Code, §  29.19)  (Ord. 155, passed 10-28-48)



§ 72.11  COMMERCIAL VEHICLES IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS PROHIBITED.



   The driver of any commercial vehicle, including a truck or tractor with
a registered gross weight in excess of 7,000 pounds, or any semi-tractor
trailer, or trailer is prohibited from parking the vehicle upon a public
street in a residential district in the city, except in an emergency or
temporarily during those times as the vehicle is being loaded or unloaded.



('75 Code, §  27.03)  (Ord. PO-68-2, passed 8-7-68)  Penalty, see § 70.99



Cross-reference:



   Driving commercial vehicles prohibited on certain streets; exceptions,
see § 71.01



§ 72.12  VIOLATIONS.



   Any person, firm, or corporation who shall violate any of the
provisions of §§ 72.01 through 72.10, upon the determination of any police
officer of the City Police Department that the vehicle impedes the orderly
flow of traffic or constitutes a traffic hazard or a public nuisance, the
officer shall have the authority to tow away the vehicle.



§ 72.13  PARKING VEHICLES FACING ONCOMING TRAFFIC.



   It shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle or other vehicle along
the side of any street so that the vehicle faces oncoming traffic from the
nearest lane of travel.



(Ord. CO-86-11, passed 9-8-86)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.14  PARKING DURING SNOW EMERGENCIES.



   When the Mayor or his or her designee has proclaimed a snow emergency
the following parking regulation will be followed:



   (A)   On odd numbered days parking will be on the odd numbered side
of the street.  On even numbered days, parking will be on the even numbered
side of the street.  If one side of the street is normally marked “no
parking”, the no parking order shall not be enforced during a snow
emergency.  Any snow emergency declared shall run from 7:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.



   (B)   If a car is parked on the wrong side of the street, the
penalty will be that the car is towed at the owner’s expense.



(Ord. CO-02-22, passed 1-27-03)



LOADING AND UNLOADING



§ 72.15  DESIGNATED ZONES; TIME LIMIT.



   (A)   No parking spaces shall be reserved for the use of a
particular person, firm, corporation, official, employee, or other legal
entity.  However, the Board of Public Works and Safety shall have the power
to reserve a parking space or spaces for the loading and unloading of
inter-city buses.  The Board shall also have the power from time to time,
whether in areas posted with parking meters or otherwise, to designate and
reserve loading and unloading space or spaces for trucks for the loading and
unloading of articles of intra-and inter-city commerce.



   (B)   Loading and unloading zones and the parking time limit therein
shall not exceed 30 minutes, to be designated from time to time by the Board
by erecting or causing to be erected proper and suitable signs and warnings
designating this, with regard to the proper flow and safety of traffic,
vehicular and pedestrian, with regard to a fair apportionment of the time for
loading and unloading trucks therein with regard to a convenient location
therefor from the standpoint of all such traffic, and with regard to an
equitable apportionment of loading and unloading distance among the trucks
involved.



('75 Code, §  27.05)  (Ord. 155, passed 10-28-48)



   (C)   There shall be no more than one truck loading and unloading
zone on any side of any street within any block of the city.  ('75 Code, §
27.06)



(Ord.  159, passed 3-3-52)



§ 72.16  UNAUTHORIZED PARKING PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any person
operating any vehicle other than one for which the reservation or designation
is made, as stated in § 72.15, to park the vehicle in or enter the vehicle
into any space or spaces, reserved or designated as provided in § 72.15(A).



('75 Code, §  27.07)  (Ord. 159, passed 3-3-52)  Penalty, see § 70.99



PARKING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY



§ 72.20  UNAUTHORIZED PARKING PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to park any motor vehicle, house
trailer, one-, two-, or three- wheeled trailer, tractor-trailer, or any other
type of motorized or nonmotorized conveyance ordinarily pulled or attached to
a motor vehicle, on any private property, private road, driveway, or parking
lot, without the express or implied consent or authorization of the owner,
holder, occupant, or lessee of the property.  Complaints for the violation
of this section shall be made by the owner, holder, occupant, or lessee of
the property to the Police Department.



('75 Code, §  27.14)  (Ord. PO-68-4, passed 11-13-68)  Penalty, see §
70.99



§ 72.21  REMOVAL OF UNAUTHORIZED VEHICLE.



   (A)   When a complaint is made to the Police Department regarding
unauthorized parking, the investigating officer shall complete an appropriate
complaint form and have it signed by the complainant.  The vehicle shall be
ticketed for a violation of this section of the code and any other applicable
sections.



   (B)   If, in the opinion of the investigating officer, the illegally
parked vehicle is causing an emergency situation by preventing proper ingress
or egress of any foot or vehicular traffic, or by preventing free movement of
traffic, he may direct the vehicle to be removed by a reputable towing firm
to a reputable storage or parking garage.  The investigating officer may
also direct the removal of the vehicle if the vehicle remains illegally
parked on any private property, private road or driveway, or parking lot
after the vehicle is ticketed for unauthorized parking, or if the record
shows that the particular vehicle has had many repeated offenses for
unauthorized parking so as to be considered a habitual nuisance.



('75 Code, §  27.15)  (Ord. PO-68-4, passed 11-13-68)



§ 72.22  TOWING AND STORAGE CHARGES.



   Before the owner or person in charge of any impounded vehicle shall be
permitted to remove it from the custody of the owner, agent, employer, or
lessee of the parking area or garage where the vehicle has been stored, he
will pay any and all towing charges plus storage charges.  He will also read
and adhere to the instructions on the violation ticket placed on the vehicle
by the investigating officer.



('75 Code, §  27.16)  (Ord. PO-68-4, passed 11-13-68)



§ 72.23  PRESUMPTION THAT OWNER PARKED VEHICLE.



   In any proceeding for the violation of §§ 72.20 through 72.22, the
registration plate displayed on the motor vehicle shall constitute in
evidence a prima-facie presumption that the owner of the motor vehicle was
the person who parked or placed the motor vehicle at the place where the
violation occurred.



('75 Code, §  27.17)  (Ord.  PO-68-4, passed 11-13-68)



CHAPTER 73:  DOWNTOWN PARKING



Section



General Provisions



   73.01   On-street parking regulations; purpose



   73.02   Parking prohibited



   73.03   Designation of two-hour on-street parking



   73.04   Time limit for parking in spaces reserved for disabled
persons



   73.05   Parking time limit modification



Off-Street Parking



   73.10   Designation of off-street parking lots



   73.11   Operation of off-street parking lots



   73.12   Off-street parking signs



   73.13   Off-street parking violations



Violations; Enforcement



   73.20   Parking violation; civil infraction; fine



   73.21   Repeat violations within one calendar year



   73.22   Notice on illegally parked vehicle



   73.23   Presumption in reference to illegal parking



   73.24   Enforcement



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 73.01  ON-STREET PARKING REGULATIONS; PURPOSE.



   In addition to other parking, stopping and standing provisions of
Chapter 72 and other provisions of the Municipal Code of the City of
Frankfort, this chapter is enacted to regulate the parking of motor vehicles
in the downtown area of the city. The purpose of this chapter is to designate
specific areas of public streets and lots in the city where the parking of
motor vehicles is limited, prohibited, or regulated as to the time permitted
for such parking, and to impose penalties for the violation of such
regulations. The limitations, prohibitions and motor vehicle parking time
limits provided by this chapter are intended to reduce traffic obstructions,
to provide for the orderly flow of traffic and to encourage economic
development and business success in the downtown area of the city by
providing for limited free on-street parking for customers of stores and
other businesses in the downtown area of the city in order to achieve a rapid
movement of motor vehicles into and out of the downtown area.



(Ord. CO-13-17, passed 3-10-14)



§ 73.02  PARKING PROHIBITED.



   No person shall park a motor vehicle upon any of the streets or
portions of streets adjacent or next to curbs which are painted yellow, or
adjacent or next to curbs or the edges of pavement in areas designated by
signage as “no parking.”  No person shall park a motor vehicle on or
along the sides of streets on which parking has been prohibited under Chapter
77 of the Municipal Code of the City of Frankfort.



(Ord. CO-13-17, passed 3-10-14)



§ 73.03  DESIGNATION OF TWO-HOUR ON-STREET PARKING.



   (A)   Where not otherwise prohibited, motor vehicles may be parked
on the public streets of the City of Frankfort without charge; provided,
however, that between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on all days except
Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays, no person shall park a motor vehicle
for more than two hours in any of the parking spaces located on a public
street in the area of the city bounded by the following description:



      Beginning at the intersection of the south boundary of the
Norfolk and Western Railroad and the west side of North Columbia Street and
running south along the west side of Columbia Street to the north side of
Clinton Street; thence west along the north side of Clinton Street to the
vacated alley lying along the west side of Lot 105 of the Original Plat to
the City of Frankfort; thence south to the alley lying along the west side of
Lot 104 of the said Original Plat to the northwest corner of said Lot 104;
thence east along the south side of Clinton Street to the west side of
Columbia Street; thence south along the west side of Columbia Street to the
north right of way line of State Road 28; thence east along the north
right-of-way line of State Road 28 to a point on the west side of Jackson
Street being the west right-of-way line of State Road 39; thence north along
the west right-of-way line of State Road 39 to a point on the south line of
East Clinton Street; thence east along the south line of East Clinton Street
to a point on the east side of Sycamore Street extended; thence north along
the east side of Sycamore Street to a point on the north side of Washington
Street; thence west along the north side of Washington Street to a point on
the east side of Jackson Street being the east right-of-way line of State
Road 39; thence north along the east line of Jackson Street to the south
boundary of the Norfolk and Western Railroad; thence west along the said
south boundary of the Norfolk and Western Railroad to the point of beginning;
EXCEPTING THEREFROM  those parking spaces lying along the south side of East
Clinton Street between Jackson Street and Sycamore Street extended.



   (B)   For purposes of this chapter,LEGAL HOLIDAYS shall mean such
holidays as are determined by either the City of Frankfort or Clinton County
as non-working holidays for their employees.



   (C)   Motor vehicles parked on public streets and subject to the
two-hour time limit proscribed above may remain parked for longer periods if
an overtime parking permit is displayed as provided in § 73.05.



   (D)   Notwithstanding the provisions set forth above in this
section, the parking provisions and time limits described below shall be
applicable to the following specified parking spaces within that area:



      (1)   Two diagonal parking spaces shall be located on the west
side of the courthouse square and shall be designated by signage as being
reserved for the Clinton County Sheriff’s Department. The two spaces shall
be reserved for the use of such Sheriff’s officials during hours that the
courthouse is open to the public.



      (2)   One diagonal parking space shall be located on the west
side of North Main Street in front of Frankfort Municipal Utilities at 16
North Main, and shall be designated by signage as being reserved for
utilities customers for a 24-hour period.



      (3)   The diagonal parking spaces that are located along the
west side of North Columbia Street between West Washington Street and the
first east-west alley south of  Washington Street are reserved at all times
for the exclusive use of the Frankfort Police Department.



      (4)   The elected judges of the Circuit and Superior Courts of
Clinton County and the elected Prosecutor of Clinton County shall each be
allowed one parking permit to be displayed on their respective vehicles
authorizing permitted parking in the downtown area during such times that
they are performing official duties.



(Ord. CO-13-17, passed 3-10-14)



§ 73.04  TIME LIMIT FOR PARKING IN SPACES RESERVED FOR DISABLED PERSONS.



   It is a parking infraction for motor vehicles that are lawfully parked
in parking spaces designated for handicapped persons to be parked in such
spaces for more than two successive hours between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and
4:00 p.m. except Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays.  Handicapped parking
spaces shall be determined by the Board of Public Works and Safety and shall
be marked appropriately.



(Ord. CO-13-17, passed 3-10-14)



§ 73.05  PARKING TIME LIMIT MODIFICATION.



   (A)   By reason of the changing character of business activities
conducted in the downtown area described in § 73.03, above, and the desire
of merchants to extend or restrict the time permitted for motor vehicle
parking in front of or nearby their business locations, the Board of Public
Works and Safety, upon request of civic or governmental organizations, or
upon request of all business owners whose principal business entrance is
within those designated on-street parking spaces of the parking space or
spaces sought for time extension or restriction, may restrict or prohibit
parking or may extend the time limits allowed for motor vehicles parking at
any designated on-street parking space on streets within the downtown area.



   (B)   Motor vehicles that are parked by a person serving on jury
duty or a person who is a prospective juror in the Circuit or Superior Courts
of Clinton County shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter during
the time that such persons are serving on the jury or jury selection.  A
written notice of such jury duty shall be prominently displayed on the front
windshield or on the dashboard of the motor vehicle whose operator is serving
on jury duty. Such notice shall display the name of the court issuing the
notice and the date of issuance.



(Ord. CO-13-17, passed 3-10-14)



OFF-STREET PARKING



§ 73.10  DESIGNATION OF OFF-STREET PARKING LOTS.



   (A)   The city shall operate and maintain off-street parking for
public use at paved lots located as follows:  Lots 19 and 20 in the Original
Plat of the City of Frankfort; Lot 140 in the Original Plat of the City of
Frankfort; and a city-owned area described as follows:  Beginning at the
intersection of the south right-of-way line of the Norfolk and Western
Railroad with the east line of North Jackson Street; thence south along the
east line of North Jackson Street to the north line of the property located
at 253 N. Jackson Street; thence east along said north property line of 253
N. Jackson Street to the west bank of Prairie Creek; thence north along said
west bank to the south right-of-way line of the Norfolk and Western Railroad;
thence west along said south right-of-way line to the point of beginning.



   (B)   The city shall also maintain off-street parking for public use
at the paved parking area comprising parts of Lots 30 and 31 in the Original
Plat of the City of Frankfort, except for nine parking spaces in that parking
area which shall be reserved for the Frankfort Utility Service Board and its
employees without charge.



(Ord. CO-13-17, passed 3-10-14)



§ 73.11  OPERATION OF OFF-STREET PARKING LOTS.



   (A)   The off-street parking facilities herein created and
established shall be operated by the city and the management and operation
thereof shall be conducted under the direction of the Board of Public Works
and Safety.



   (B)   The method of operation of the off-street parking facilities
herein created and established shall be as follows:



      (1)    Certain designated and marked spaces within the
off-street parking facilities herein created shall be rented on a monthly
basis taking into consideration the availability of other nearby parking
facilities and the demand for permanent parking. The monthly rental amount
shall be determined by resolution of the Board of Public Works and Safety. To
facilitate this provision, the Board of Public Works and Safety is authorized
to provide for the issuance and execution of rental agreements with renters
of parking spaces;



      (2)    Spaces within the off-street parking facilities
described in above in this section which are not rented may be used for
public parking without fee for a period not to exceed two hours.



(Ord. CO-13-17, passed 3-10-14)



§ 73.12  OFF-STREET PARKING SIGNS.



   Signs shall be posted at all off-street parking facilities reflecting
their availability to the public, the restrictions on their use, and
designating those spaces that have been rented as reserved.



(Ord. CO-13-17, passed 3-10-14)



§ 73.13  OFF-STREET PARKING VIOLATIONS.



   Except for Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays, it is a parking
infraction for anyone other than the lessee of a reserved space to park a
motor vehicle in a city-designated off-street parking space that has been
designated as reserved. Further, on all days between the hours of 8:00 a.m.
and 4:00 p.m., except for Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays, it shall be
an infraction to park a motor vehicle for a period in excess of two hours in
any designated off-street parking space that has not been reserved.



(Ord. CO-13-17, passed 3-10-14)



VIOLATIONS; ENFORCEMENT



§ 73.20  PARKING VIOLATION; CIVIL INFRACTION; FINE.



   (A)   The parking of a motor vehicle in an on-street parking space
or in an off-street parking space in excess of the time limits set forth in
this chapter or in an area designated no parking, or in an area reserved for
another person, is a parking infraction and a violation of this chapter.



   (B)   The fine for parking a motor vehicle in violation of any
provision of this chapter is $20 for the first offense within a calendar year
and shall be paid to the Ordinance Violations Bureau of the City of Frankfort
within 30 days of issuance of the notice of violation. If the parking fine is
not paid within such 30-day period, collection of the fine, together with
court costs, will be pursued through the civil court process.



(Ord. CO-13-17, passed 3-10-14)



§ 73.21  REPEAT VIOLATIONS WITHIN ONE CALENDAR YEAR.



   (A)   For persons who commit repeated parking violations of this
chapter within one calendar year, the fine to be paid to the Ordinance
Violations Bureau shall be enhanced.  Upon a second such violation within
the same calendar year, the fine shall be $40. Upon a third or subsequent
such violation within the same calendar year, the fine shall be $100.



   (B)   Each subsequent violation of the posted period of parking time
constitutes another violation.  Calculation of the new period of parking
time begins immediately after a notice of infraction has been issued.



(Ord. CO-13-17, passed 3-10-14)



§ 73.22  NOTICE ON ILLEGALLY PARKED VEHICLE.



   Whenever any motor vehicle without a driver is found parked, angle
parked or stopped in violation of any of the restrictions imposed by this
chapter, the police officer or parking control officer finding such vehicle
shall complete a notice of traffic infraction and affix the same to such
vehicle in a conspicuous place.



(Ord. CO-13-17, passed 3-10-14)



§ 73.23  PRESUMPTION IN REFERENCE TO ILLEGAL PARKING.



   (A)   Any violation of a parking restriction as provided for in this
chapter shall be a violation by the registered owner of such vehicle and by
the driver who parked the vehicle at the location cited, if the driver is
other than the vehicle’s registered owner.



   (B)   In any prosecution charging a violation of any provisions
under this chapter governing the standing or parking of a vehicle, proof that
the particular vehicle described in the complaint was parked in violation of
any such law or regulation, together with proof that the defendant named in
the complaint was at the time of such parking the registered owner of the
vehicle, shall constitute prima facie evidence that the registered owner of
such vehicle was the person who parked or placed such vehicle at the point
where, and for the time during which, such violation occurred.



(Ord. CO-13-17, passed 3-10-14)



§ 73.24  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)    The provisions contained in this chapter apply to all
vehicles, whether they are self-propelled, animal drawn or towed, except for:



      (1)   Emergency vehicles when responding to an emergency call
or in pursuit of an alleged law violator;



      (2)   Highway construction vehicles when engaged in
construction work; and



      (3)   Other vehicles that are exempt from municipal parking
ordinances under applicable law.



   (B)   Any police officer of the City of Frankfort or parking control
officer designated as such by the Board of Public Works and Safety of the
City of Frankfort, who observes the violation of any provision of this
chapter shall attach to the offending vehicle a notice to the owner/operator
thereof that such vehicle has been parked in violation of same and advising
that such person may, within 30 days from the date of such notice, pay to the
Ordinance Violations Bureau of the City of Frankfort, as a fine for and in
full satisfaction of such violation, the sum of $20; that if the violation is
a second or third such offense within the same calendar year, the fine will
be $40 for the second such offense and $100 for the third or subsequent such
offense within the same calendar year; that, upon the failure of the
owner/operator to make such payment within the 30-day period, collection of
the fine, together with court costs, will be pursued through the civil court
process.



   (C)   Whenever a member of the Police Department or other person
charged with the enforcement of this chapter finds that any section or
sections are being violated or have been violated by the owner or operator of
any vehicle, he or she shall notify the owner or operator of such vehicle, in
writing, on a form to be provided by the city, of such violation.



      (1)   The notice shall:



         (a)   Be made in duplicate;



         (b)   Be serially numbered;



         (c)   Show the specific violation charged;



         (d)   Show the registration or state license number of
the vehicle involved;



         (e)   Show the violator’s name, address, and
operator’s license number, if possible to obtain the same; and



         (f)   State any other information which the officer may
then and there discover.



      (2)   One copy of the notice shall be presented to the
violator, owner or operator of such vehicle.  In case such violator,
operator or owner shall not be in possession of the vehicle, the posting of
such notice or the attachment thereof to a conspicuous place on such vehicle
shall be deemed a sufficient notice of such violation. The notice shall
specify the amount of the fine and shall state that the fine shall be paid to
the Ordinance Violations Bureau. The notice shall also provide the address of
the Ordinance Violations Bureau where the fine may be paid in person or by
mail; that if the fine is not timely paid, the fine will be collected,
together with court costs, through the civil court process. The officer
serving such notice shall file the duplicate copy in the office of the
Ordinance Violations Bureau.



   (D)   If a motor vehicle is determined to have been parked
continuously for a period of 48 hours in violation of any provision of this
chapter, the city may authorize such vehicle to be towed to an automobile
salvage yard or to a city owned or leased area with the cost of such tow to
be paid by the vehicle owner in addition to any fines.



   (E)   If it appears from the City Court records that three judgments
concerning a motor vehicle have not been paid before deadlines established by
this chapter, the Clerk of the Court, pursuant to I.C. 9-30-11-3, shall send
a notice to the person who is the registered owner of the motor vehicle
informing such person as follows:



      (1)   That the clerk will send a referral of non-payment to
the Indiana Bureau of Motor Vehicles if the judgments are not paid within 30
days after a notice was mailed.



      (2)   That the referral will result in the suspension of the
motor vehicle’s registration if the judgments are not paid.



   (F)    All fines received by the City Court for violations of this
chapter shall be deposited into the city’s General Fund pursuant to
applicable law.



(Ord. CO-13-17, passed 3-10-14)



CHAPTER 74:  NON-MOTORIZED VEHICLES



Section



General Provisions



   74.01   Definition



License Regulations



   74.05   License required



   74.06   Application; fee



   74.07   Issuance



   74.08   Attachment of license plates



   74.09   Inspection of bicycle



   74.10   Renewal or replacement of license



   74.11   Transfer of ownership of bicycle



Traffic Rules



   74.15   Scope and application



   74.16   Obedience to traffic-control devices



   74.17   Correct method of riding



   74.18   Speed



   74.19   Right-hand side of roadway



   74.20   Emerging from alley or driveway



   74.21   Clinging to vehicles



   74.22   Riding in group



   74.23   Carrying articles



   74.24   Parking



   74.25   Bicycle paths; sidewalks



Equipment



   74.30   Lamps, lights, and reflectors



   74.31   Brakes



 



   74.99   Penalty



Statutory reference:



   Authority to regulate bicycles, see I.C. 9-21-11



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 74.01  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this chapter the term FOOT-PROPELLED VEHICLE shall
include any bicycle, skateboard, scooter or roller skates.



(Ord. CO-91-3, passed 5-13-91)



LICENSE REGULATIONS



§ 74.05  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No person who rides within this City shall ride or propel a bicycle on
any street, on any public path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles,
or on any sidewalk, unless the bicycle has been licensed and a license plate
attached thereto as provided in this subchapter.



(Ord. CO-91-3, passed 5-13-91)  Penalty, see § 74.99



§ 74.06  APPLICATION; FEE.



   Application for a bicycle license shall be made upon a form provided by
the city, and shall be made to the Police Department.  A license fee of $2
shall be paid to the city before each license or replacement thereof is
granted by the city.



(Ord. CO-91-3, passed 5-13-91; Am. Ord. 08-09, passed 11-10-08)



§ 74.07  ISSUANCE.



   (A)   The Juvenile Aid Division, upon receiving proper application,
is hereby authorized to issue a bicycle license which shall be effective
until the license is mutilated, the bicycle is destroyed, or ownership of the
bicycle is transferred.  The Juvenile Aid Division shall not issue a license
for any bicycle when he knows, or has reasonable ground to believe, that the
applicant is not the owner or entitled to the possession of the bicycle.



   (B)   The Juvenile Aid Division shall cause a record to be kept of
the number of each license, the date the license is issued, the name and
address of the person to who it is issued, and the number of the frame of the
bicycle for which the license is issued.  He shall also keep a record of all
bicycle license fees collected by him.



(Ord. CO-91-3, passed 5-13-91)



§ 74.08  ATTACHMENT OF LICENSE PLATES.



   The Juvenile Aid Division upon issuing a bicycle license shall also
issue a license plate bearing the license number assigned to the bicycle and
the name of the city thereon.  The Juvenile Aid Divison shall cause the
license plate to be firmly attached to the bicycle for which it has been
issued, upon that part of the frame extending from the seat to the sprocket
housing.  No person shall remove a license plate from a bicycle during the
period for which issued except upon the transfer of ownership, or in the
event the bicycle is dismantled or is no longer operative.



(Ord. CO-91-3, passed 5-13-91)



§ 74.09  INSPECTION OF BICYCLE.



   The Juvenile Aid Division may cause each bicycle to be inspected before
issuing a license for it, and shall refuse to issue a license for any bicycle
which, after an inspection, is determined to be in an unsafe mechanical
condition and not properly equipped in compliance with the provisions of this
chapter.



(Ord. CO-91-3, passed 5-13-91)



§ 74.10  RENEWAL OR REPLACEMENT OF LICENSE.



   Upon the mutilation, destruction, or loss of any bicycle license, the
same may be replaced upon proper application for replacement or renewal and
the payment of the same fee that was paid when the license was originally
issued.



(Ord. CO-91-3, passed 5-13-91)



§ 74.11  TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OF BICYCLE.



   Upon the sale or transfer of ownership of any licensed bicycle, the
license shall become void and the new owner shall apply for a new license as
provided in § 74.08.



(Ord. CO-91-3, passed 5-13-91)



TRAFFIC RULES



§ 74.15  SCOPE AND APPLICATION.



   (A)   No person shall do any act forbidden, or fail to perform any
act required in this chapter.  The parent of any child and the guardian of
any ward shall not authorize or knowingly permit his child or ward to violate
any of the provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   These regulations applicable to foot-propelled vehicles shall
apply whenever a foot-propelled vehicle is operated on any street or any
public path set aside for the exclusive use of any f00t-propelled vehicle
subject to any exceptions stated herein.



   (C)   Every person riding a foot-propelled vehicle upon any public
highway or street in the city shall be subject to the provisions of the
traffic rules and ordinances of this city applicable to the driver of a
motorized vehicle. However, special regulations in this chapter, and those
provisions of the traffic rules and ordinances which by their nature can have
no application shall not apply to foot-propelled vehicles.



(Ord. CO-91-3, passed 5-13-91)  Penalty, see § 74.99



§ 74.16  OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.



   (A)   Any person operating a foot-propelled vehicle shall obey the
instructions of official traffic signals, signs, and other control devices
applicable to motorized vehicles, unless otherwise directed by a traffic
officer.



   (B)   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no
right, left or "U" turns are permitted, no person operating a foot-propelled
vehicle shall disobey the direction of the sign. However, where the person
dismounts from the foot-propelled vehicle to make the turn, he shall then
obey the regulations applicable to pedestrians.



(Ord. CO-91-3, passed 5-13-91)  Penalty, see § 74.99



§ 74.17  CORRECT METHOD OF RIDING.



   (A)   A person riding a bicycle shall not ride other than upon or
astride the permanent and regular seat attached thereto, nor carry any other
person upon the bicycle other than upon a firmly attached and regular seat
thereon.  No person shall ride a bicycle other than as authorized herein.



   (B)   No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time
than the number for which it is designed and equipped.



(Ord. CO-91-3, passed 5-13-91)  Penalty, see § 74.99



§ 74.18  SPEED.



   No person shall operate a foot-propelled vehicle at a speed greater
than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions then existing.



(Ord. CO-91-3, passed 5-13-91)  Penalty, see § 74.99



§ 74.19  RIGHT-HAND SIDE OF ROADWAY.



   Every person operating a foot-propelled vehicle upon the highway or
street shall ride as near to the right-hand side of the highway or street as
practicable, exercising due care when passing a standing vehicle or one
proceeding in the same direction.



(Ord. CO-91-3, passed 5-13-91)  Penalty, see § 74.99



§ 74.20  EMERGING FROM ALLEY OR DRIVEWAY.



   The operator of a foot-propelled vehicle emerging from an alley,
driveway or building shall, upon approaching a sidewalk or sidewalk area
extending across any alley or driveway, yield the right-of-way to all
pedestrians approaching on the sidewalk or sidewalk area, and upon entering
the highway or street shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles
approaching on the roadway.



(Ord. CO-91-3, passed 5-13-91)  Penalty, see § 74.99



§ 74.21  CLINGING TO VEHICLES.



   No person riding a foot-propelled vehicle shall attach themselves or
their vehicle onto any motorized vehicle.



(Ord. CO-91-3, passed 5-13-91)  Penalty, see § 74.99



§ 74.22  RIDING IN GROUP.



   Persons operating foot-propelled vehicles upon a highway or street
shall not ride more than two abreast except on paths or parts of highways or
streets set aside for the exclusive use of foot-propelled vehicles.



(Ord. CO-91-3, passed 5-13-91)  Penalty, see § 74.99



§ 74.23  CARRYING ARTICLES.



   No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle, or
article which prevents the operator of the bicycle from keeping both hands on
the handlebars of the bicycle simultaneously.



(Ord. CO-91-3, passed 5-13-91)  Penalty, see § 74.99



§ 74.24  PARKING.



   No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon the
roadway against the curb, upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the bicycle,
against the building, or at the curb.  All foot-propelled vehicles shall be
parked in a manner affording the least obstruction to pedestrian traffic.



(Ord. CO-91-3, passed 5-13-91)  Penalty, see § 74.99



§ 74.25  BICYCLE PATHS; SIDEWALKS.



   No person shall ride or operate a foot-propelled vehicle between the
hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. upon any sidewalk within the city in the
area bounded by Walnut Street on the south, Morrison Street on the north,
Clay Street on the east, and Columbia Street, between Morrison and Washington
Street and Taylor Street between Washington and Walnut Street, on the west,
nor in front of any public building, nor upon any public parking lot or
pedestrian concourse within this designated area.  Any type of
foot-propelled vehicle may be restricted or prohibited upon any privately
owned sidewalk or property upon conspicuous- posting of said restrictions or
prohibitions by the owners or agents of said property.  Otherwise, when any
person is riding or operating a foot-propelled vehicle upon a sidewalk, such
person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give an
audible signal a reasonable time before overtaking or passing such pedestrian.



(Ord. CO-91-3, passed 5-13-91)  Penalty, see § 74.99



EQUIPMENT



§ 74.30  LAMPS, LIGHTS, AND REFLECTORS.



   Every bicycle, when in use between dusk and dawn, shall be equipped
with either a lamp or light on the front end which emits a white light
visible for a distance of at least 500 feet, and with a red reflector on the
rear of the bicycle which shall be visible for a distance of at least 500
feet.



(Ord. CO-91-3, passed 5-13-91)  Penalty, see § 74.99



§ 74.31  BRAKES.



   Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will enable the
operator to make the braked wheel skid on dry, level, clean pavement.



(Ord. CO-91-3, passed 5-13-91)  Penalty, see § 74.99



§ 74.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be
subject to a civil penalty of $15; $30 for any second violation committed
within 30 days of any prior violation of this chapter and $50 for any third
or subsequent violation committed within one year of any prior violations of
this chapter. At the option of the ordinance violator, the fine for the first
violation may be waived upon the offender's completion of four hours of
community service, the fine for any second violation committed within 30 days
of any prior violation of this chapter may be waived, at the option of the
violator, upon completion of eight hours of community service.



   (B)   In addition, any police officer who observes a person
violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall confiscate the
foot-propelled vehicle of the person in violation of the provisions of this
chapter and retain the same for any period not less than one day nor more
than 14 days.  If the confiscated foot-propelled vehicle was being used by
an individual under 18 years of age, the minor must be accompanied by his
parent or guardian to retrieve the foot-propelled vehicle.



(Ord. CO-91-3, passed 5-13-91)



CHAPTER 75:  RAILROADS



Section



General Provisions



   75.01   Speed limits



   75.02   Hopping trains while in motion



   75.03   Interference with railroad equipment



Railroad Crossings



   75.10   Automatic signals



   75.11   Installation, maintenance of signal crossings



 



   75.99   Penalty



   Appendix A:  Crossing requiring signal or flagman



   Appendix B:  Exempt crossings



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 75.01  SPEED LIMITS.



   Any railroad locomotives and railroad trains operating in or through
the city shall not be operated at a speed greater than 35 miles per hour.



('75 Code, §  45.05)  (Ord. 158, passed 2-18-52)  Penalty, see § 75.99



§ 75.02  HOPPING TRAINS WHILE IN MOTION.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, except employees of railroad
companies, to get on or off, or attempt to get on or off, any locomotive car
or cars while it is in motion, at any point within the corporate limits of
the city.



('75 Code, §  45.10)  (Ord. ll, passed 2-16-1876)  Penalty, see § 75.99



§ 75.03  INTERFERENCE WITH RAILROAD EQUIPMENT.



   Any person who is not a railroad employee, who shall unlock or break
any lock, padlock, or any other fastening whereby any car, hand car, or
switch is fastened; change or turn any switch; or in any manner place
obstructions on any railroad track within the corporate limits of the city,
shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this section.



('75 Code, §  45.11)  (Ord. ll, passed 2-16-1876)  Penalty, see § 75.99



RAILROAD CROSSINGS



§ 75.10  AUTOMATIC SIGNALS.



   (A)   Whenever any railroad running into or through the city is
ordered by a city ordinance to maintain any flashing light signals or a
crossing watchman at any street crossing in the city, the railroad may
install an automatic signal at the crossing.



   (B)   Any automatic signal erected by any railroad need not give
warning of the approach of any motor car on the railroad, provided that the
person or persons operating the motor car shall keep the car under control at
all times, and grant the right-of-way to any vehicular or pedestrian traffic
crossing the railroad at all street crossings in the city.



('75 Code, §  45.01)  (Ord. 163, passed 8-18-52)  Penalty, see § 75.99



§ 75.11  INSTALLATION, MAINTENANCE OF SIGNAL CROSSINGS.



   It shall be the duty of the railroad companies named in Appendix A at
the end of this chapter, and their successors and assigns, to install and
maintain at the railroad crossings listed in Appendix A, standard electric
signaling devices for the warning and protection of persons crossing the
railroads at those points.  All of the signals referred to herein shall be
maintained and operated at all times so that protection is given at each of
the crossings for 24 hours a day. In the event any of the signals are out of
operation, the railroad company is hereby required to protect all of the
crossings by a watchman or otherwise during the time the signals are not in
operation.



('75 Code, §  45.03)  (Ord. 79, passed 6-4-26)  Penalty, see § 75.99



§ 75.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter, for which
another penalty is not provided, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding
$300.  Every day any violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense.  ('75 Code, § l.08)



   (B)   Any person, firm, or corporation operating or causing to be
operated a railroad locomotive or railroad train at a speed greater than 35
miles per hour in or through the city shall be guilty of a violation of §
75.01, and may be fined in any sum not exceeding $100.



('75 Code, §  45.06)  (Ord. 158, passed 2-18-52)



   (C)   Any person, firm, or corporation violating the provisions of
§ 75.02 (A) shall be fined any sum not exceeding $100.



('75 Code, §  45.09)  (Ord. 146, passed 10-14-43)



   (D)   Any person found guilty and convicted of a violation of § 
75.04 shall be fined in any sum not less than $10 nor more than $500.  ('75
Code, §  45.12)  (Ord. 11, passed 2-16-1876; Am. Ord. PO-77-2, passed
12-21-77)



   (E)   Any person or persons violating the terms and provisions of
§§ 75.10 and 75.11 shall be subject to a fine not exceeding $100. ('75
Code, §  45.04)  (Ord. 163, passed 8-18-52)



APPENDIX A:  CROSSING REQUIRING SIGNAL OR FLAGMAN



Section



   1.   Crossings requiring electric signals or safety gates



   2.   Signal crossings to be erected by the Pennsylvania Railroad
(now the Penn Central Transportation Company)



§ 1  CROSSINGS REQUIRING ELECTRIC SIGNALS OR SAFETY GATES.



 

Street
 
Railroad Company
 
Ord. No.
 
Date




Bunnell
 
New York, Chicago, and St. Louis Railroad Company (now the Norfolk and
Western Railway Company)
 
3-135
 
12-3-25


East
 
Toledo, St. Louis, and Kansas City Railroad and the Lake Erie and Western
Railroad (now the Norfolk and Western Railway Company)
 
1-187
 
5-1-1896


Columbia
 
 
 


Main
 
 
 


Jackson
 
 
 


Clay
 
 
 


Washington Avenue
 
 
 


Williams
 
 
 


Hoke Avenue
 
 
 


Kelley Avenue
 
 
 


Maish Road
 
 
 




 



§ 2  SIGNAL CROSSINGS TO BE ERECTED BY THE PENNSYLVANIA RAILROAD (NOW THE
PENN CENTRAL TRANSPORTATION COMPANY).



   The Penn Central Transportation Company shall erect signals at the
following crossings.



      Barner Street



      Clinton Street



      Green Street



      Jefferson Street



      Morrison Street



      Walnut Street



      Washington Street



(Ord. No. 3-152, passed 6-17-26)



APPENDIX B:  EXEMPT CROSSINGS



   The following railroad crossings in the city are exempt from the
provisions of § 75.02 (A) by order of the Public Service Commission of
Indiana in Cause No. 33183 on May 25, 1973.



 

Crossing
 
Railroad Company
 
Ord. No.
 
Date




Armstrong Street and the Crawfordsville Secondary Track
 
Penn Central Transportation
 
 


O'Neil Street and the Frankfort District Main Track
 
Norfolk and Western Railway Company
 
 


O'Neil Street and the Marion District Main Track
 
Norfolk and Western Railway Company
 
 


Prairie Avenue and the Crawfordsville Secondary Track
 
Penn Central Transportation Company
 
 


Rossville Avenue
 
Norfolk and Western Railway Company
 
 


West Boone Street at its intersection with Fifth Street
 
Louisville and Nashville Railroad Company
 
 


West Paris Street
 
Penn Central Transportation Company
 
 


West South Street at its intersection with Fifth Street
 
Louisville and Nashville Railroad Company
 
 


West Wabash Street at its intersection with Fifth Street
 
Louisville and Nashville Railroad Company
 
 




 



CHAPTER 76:  TRAFFIC SCHEDULES



Schedule



   I.   Through commercial vehicle routes



   II.   One-way streets and alleys



   III.   Preferential streets



SCHEDULE I:  THROUGH COMMERCIAL VEHICLE ROUTES.



   (A)   Drivers of commercial vehicles with a registered gross weight
in excess of ten tons (20,000 pounds), except those vehicles having a point
of origin or a point of destination, or pickups or deliveries in this city,
are hereby prohibited from operating or driving the vehicles over any city
streets or portions of streets, except those through commercial routes as
specified below.



 

Street
 
Portion
 
Ord. No.
 
Date




E. Kyger
 
From N. Jackson to N. Main
 
PO-68-2
 
8-7-68


E. Wabash
 
From Maish Road to Hoke Avenue
 
PO-68-2
 
8-7-68


E. Walnut
 
From Hoke Avenue to Main Street
 
PO-68-2
 
8-7-68


Hoke Avenue
 
From E. Wabash to E. Walnut
 
PO-68-2
 
8-7-68


McKinley Avenue (or S.R. 28)
 
From W. Walnut (or S.R. 28) to the west city limits
 
PO-68-2
 
8-7-68


N. Jackson Street
 
From E. Clinton to E. Kyger
 
PO-68-2
 
8-7-68


Rossville Avenue
 
From W. Kyger Street to the city limits
 
PO-68-2
 
8-7-68


S. Jackson
 
From the south city limits to E. Clinton
 
PO-68-2
 
8-7-68


W. Kyger
 
From N. Main to Rossville Avenue
 
PO-68-2
 
8-7-68


 
 
 




 



   (B)   The posting of any restricted streets shall be accomplished by
the use of uniform signs reading "10 Ton Limit-Except Local Delivery", and
shall be erected by the Police Chief.



Penalty, see § 70.99



SCHEDULE II:  ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS.



   It shall be unlawful for any motor vehicle or other vehicle to be
operated in such a manner that it travels in the directions specified below
on the following streets or alleys, or portions thereof.  Any person, firm,
or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of this schedule, upon
the determination of any police officer of the City Police Department that
the vehicle impedes the orderly flow of traffic or constitutes a traffic
hazard or a public nuisance, the officer shall have the authority to tow away
the vehicle.



 

Street or Alley
 
Direction
 
Ord. No.
 
Date


Any alley terminating upon the public square
 
Within one block of the public square, toward the public square
 
155
 
10-28-48


The first alley west of and paralleling the west side of the public square
 
South, between Clinton and Washington Streets
 
155
 
10-28-48


The first alley south of and paralleling the south side of the public square
 
East, between Jackson and Main Streets
 
155
 
10-28-48


The first alley north of and paralleling the north side of the public square
 
West, between Main and Jackson Streets
 
155
 
10-28-48


The first alley east of and paralleling the east side of the public square
 
North, between Washington and Clinton Streets
 
155
 
10-28-48



 



Penalty, see § 70.99



SCHEDULE III:  PREFERENTIAL STREETS.



   The following streets shall hereafter be preferential streets. It shall
be unlawful to cross these streets or to enter upon them from any
intersecting street, alley, or private driveway with any motor vehicle
without the vehicle being brought to a stop within 15 feet of a line made by
a continuation of the curb lines of the preferential streets across
intersecting streets, alleys, or private driveways. Any person, firm, or
corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of this schedule, upon
the determination of any police officer of the City Police Department that
the vehicle impedes the orderly flow of traffic or constitutes a traffic
hazard or a public nuisance, the officer shall have the authority to tow away
the vehicle.



 

Street
 
Ord. No.
 
Date


Clinton Street
 
155
 
10-28-48


Columbia Street
 
155
 
10-28-48


Jackson Street
 
155
 
10-28-48


Main Street
 
155
 
10-28-48


Washington Street
 
155
 
10-28-48



 



Penalty, see § 70.99



CHAPTER 77:  PARKING SCHEDULES



Schedule



   I.   Prohibited parking



SCHEDULE I:  PROHIBITED PARKING.



   Parking is prohibited at all times on the following streets or portions
thereof, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in
compliance with the direction of a police officer or traffic signal.  Any
person, firm, or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of this
schedule, upon the determination of any police officer of the City Police
Department that the vehicle impedes the orderly flow of traffic or
constitutes a traffic hazard or a public nuisance, the officer shall have the
authority to tow away the vehicle.



 

Street
 
Portion
 
Side
 
Ord. No.
 
Date




Clinton Drive
 
Between Crescent Drive and Maish Road
 
South
 
PO-71-1
 
5-5-71


East Morrison
 
Between North Jackson and North Clay
 
North
 
 


East Walnut Street
 
Between the bridge spanning Prairie Creek and the intersection of South Clay
Street
 
North
 
155
 
10-28-48


Jackson Street
 
Bounded on the north by the south line of East Walnut Street and bounded on
the south by a line projected east and west from a point 285 feet south of
the south line of East Walnut Street
 
East half
 
175
 
11-5-62


Sims
 
Between Washington Avenue and McClurg Street
 
East
 
 


Walnut
 
From Hoke Avenue east to the end of Walnut Street
 
North
 
PO-71-1
 
5-5-71


West Morrison
 
Between Myrtle Avenue and North Jackson
 
South
 
 




 



Penalty, see § 70.99



CHAPTER 78:  MOPEDS



Section



General Provisions



   78.01   Definition



   78.02   Operation with consent of owner



License Regulations



   78.15   License required



   78.16   Application for registration and license



   78.17   Mechanical examination; fee; issuance of license; attachment
of plate or sticker



   78.18   Duration of license



   78.19   Record of license



   78.20   Transfer of ownership



Administration and Enforcement



   78.35   Loss or destruction of plate or sticker



   78.36   Inspections



   78.37   Chief of Police to administer enforcement; suspension or
revocation of license; impoundment



 



   78.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 78.01  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   MOPED.  A vehicle with two tandem wheels, or three wheels, with solid
or pneumatic tires, having a steering bar or wheel, a seat, and pedals so
that the vehicle is capable of being propelled by motor or human power, or by
both, and when powered by an engine having a rating of no more than l.5 brake
horse power and a cylinder capacity not exceeding 50 cubic centimeters, an
automatic transmission, and a maximum design speed of no more than 25 miles
per hour on a flat surface.



(Ord. CO-86-12, passed 8-11-86)



§ 78.02  OPERATION WITH CONSENT OF OWNER.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to use or operate any moped within
the city without the consent of the owner.



(Ord. CO-86-12, passed 8-11-86) Penalty, see § 78.99



LICENSE REGULATIONS



§ 78.15  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a moped upon any street,
sidewalk, or any other public place in the city, without having first
registered the moped and secured a license.  The license shall authorize the
operation of the motorized bicycle upon the streets, alleys, and public
highways of the city provided that no such vehicle shall carry anyone other
than the operator.



(Ord. CO-86-12, passed 8-11-86) Penalty, see § 78.99



§ 78.16  APPLICATION FOR REGISTRATION AND LICENSE.



   (A)   Application for registration and license for a moped shall be
made by the owner in writing, in duplicate, upon blank forms furnished by the
Police Department.



   (B)   The application shall be signed by the owner and if the owner
is a person under 18 years of age, the signature shall be witnessed by a
parent of the owner; or if no parent is living, then by the legal guardian of
the owner.  The application shall state the full name and address of the
owner of the moped, the name of the manufacturer, the serial number of the
frame thereof, the approximate date when the owner obtained the title
thereto, and if not new when obtained, the name and address of the person
from whom it was obtained.



(Ord. CO-86-12, passed 8-11-86)



§ 78.17  MECHANICAL EXAMINATION; FEE; ISSUANCE OF LICENSE; ATTACHMENT OF
PLATE OR STICKER.



   The Chief of Police or some person authorized by him or her shall
examine the moped and if he or she finds the mechanical condition thereof
such that it can be safely operated and finds that the statements made in the
application are true, and after a license fee of $10 has been paid by the
applicant, he or she shall issue a license plate or sticker which shall
contain the words "Frankfort, Indiana," the number of the license, and the
year of issuance.  The registration card and license plate or sticker shall
have the same number.  The license plate or sticker shall be attached to the
moped on the rear fender.



(Ord. CO-86-12, passed 8-11-86; Am. Ord. 08-10, passed 11-10-08)



§ 78.18  DURATION OF LICENSE.



   The license so issued shall be effective for one year.



(Ord. CO-86-12, passed 8-11-86)



§ 78.19  RECORD OF LICENSE.



   After the issuance of the registration card and plate or sticker, the
Police Department shall endorse upon the application and the duplicate the
date of issuance and the number thereof.  The original application and the
duplicate shall be kept on file in the office of the Police Department.



(Ord. CO-86-12, passed 8-11-86)



§ 78.20  TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP.



   (A)   When any moped has been registered and licensed as herein
provided, and is sold or is otherwise disposed of or destroyed, the licensee
shall immediately surrender to the Chief of Police the registration card and
the license plate or sticker issued therefor, with the name and address of
the new owner, if any, written on the face of the registration card.  The
Chief of Police shall immediately make proper endorsements thereon on his
records and deliver the card and plate or sticker to the City Clerk-Treasurer
who shall immediately make proper endorsements on his or her records, retain
the card and plate or sticker and issue a new card and plate or sticker to
the new owner for a charge of $5.



   (B)   The number of any license surrendered as provided in this
section shall not be reissued.



(Ord. CO-86-12, passed 8-11-86)



ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT



§ 78.35  LOSS OR DESTRUCTION OF PLATE OR STICKER.



   (A)   The licensee shall report immediately to Chief of Police the
loss or destruction of the license plate or sticker of the licensee and the
circumstances surrounding the loss or destruction thereof. With the approval
of the Chief of Police a duplicate license plate or sticker will be issued
upon payment of a fee of $5.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person willfully or maliciously
to remove, destroy, mutilate, or alter the serial number of any moped
licensed hereunder; or to remove, destroy, mutilate, or alter any
registration is in force.  The Chief of Police is authorized to stamp
numbers on the frame of the moped in a legible manner for identification
purposes upon which no serial number can be found or upon which the serial
number is illegible or insufficient for identification purposes.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person residing in the city or
any dealer in mopeds operating in the city to purchase, receive in trade, or
otherwise acquire any moped from which the serial number on the frame has
been removed, destroyed, mutilated, or altered without first reporting the
same to the Chief of Police.



(Ord. CO-86-12, passed 8-11-86)



§ 78.36  INSPECTIONS.



   Any member of the Police Department is authorized to inspect any moped
at any reasonable time for the purpose of making a check of the license plate
or sticker and license serial number and for the purpose of determining the
mechanical condition of the moped.



(Ord. CO-86-12, passed 8-11-86)



§ 78.37  CHIEF OF POLICE TO ADMINISTER ENFORCEMENT; SUSPENSION OR
REVOCATION OF LICENSE; IMPOUNDMENT.



   (A)   The Chief of Police shall enforce the provisions of this
chapter.



   (B)   The Chief may revoke or suspend for a period of 30 days, any
moped license for any violation of any provision of this chapter or any
applicable provision of the statutes relating to traffic. In addition, the
Chief may impound the moped of any such violator for a period not exceeding
30 days.



(Ord. CO-86-12, passed 8-11-86)



§ 78.99  PENALTY.



   Violations of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine of not less
than $10 and no more than $500.  Whenever possible under the provisions of
the laws of the state, operator's or chauffeur's licenses of persons
convicted of a third violation of this chapter shall be suspended or revoked
for whatever period of time, within the discretion of the trial judge, is
deemed advisable.



(Ord. CO-86-12, passed 8-11-86)



CHAPTER 79:  GOLF CARTS



Section



   79.01   Definition; scope



   79.02   Minimum age to operate



   79.03   Daytime operation



   79.04   Registration



   79.05   Prohibited operation



   79.06   Rules of operation



   79.07   Seating



   79.08   Equipment



   79.09   Operation during special events



   79.10   Exemptions



 



   79.99   Penalty



§ 79.01  DEFINITION; SCOPE.



   (A)   Definition. For the purposes of this chapter, the following
definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      GOLF CART. Has the meaning as defined in I.C. 9-13-2-69.7, as
amended, which defines a golf cart to mean “a four-wheeled motor vehicle
originally and specifically designed and intended to transport one or more
individuals and golf clubs for the purpose of playing the game of golf on a
golf course.”



   (B)   Scope. The requirements and restrictions imposed by this
chapter as to the operation of golf carts shall refer only to the operation
of golf carts on streets and alleys within the jurisdiction of the city.



(Ord. 12-04A, passed 4-9-12)



§ 79.02  MINIMUM AGE TO OPERATE.



   Only a licensed driver, age 18 or older, shall be allowed to operate a
golf cart in the city on public streets or alleys within the city.



(Ord. 12-04A, passed 4-9-12)  Penalty, see § 79.99



§ 79.03  DAYTIME OPERATION.



   Golf carts shall only be operated on public streets and alleys within
the city during the period of time from sunrise to sunset year around.



(Ord. 12-04A, passed 4-9-12)  Penalty, see § 79.99



§ 79.04  REGISTRATION.



   (A)   Any golf cart operating on a public street or alley within the
city must be registered with the city through the Frankfort Police Department
prior to use within the city. The license registration shall be effective for
one year.



   (B)   At the time of registration, the owner shall present the golf
cart to the Frankfort Police Department for inspection.



   (C)   If the golf cart passes inspection, the owner shall pay a
registration fee to the Police Department of $50 annually and shall provide
proof of liability insurance/financial responsibility in an amount not less
than the minimum required by Indiana law for motor vehicles, at which time a
registration sticker will be issued. Proof of insurance and the registration
shall be maintained in the golf cart at all times and the registration
sticker shall be displayed on the rear driver side of the golf cart at all
times.



   (D)   All registration fees collected pursuant to this chapter shall
be deposited into the Police Equipment Fund maintained by the city.



(Ord. 12-04A, passed 4-9-12; Am. Ord. 14-01, passed 2-24-14)  Penalty, see
§ 79.99



§ 79.05  PROHIBITED OPERATION.



   (A)   No person shall operate a golf cart on Highway 28, on Highway
39/US Highway 421 or on Highway 75/38, except to cross such highways in a
perpendicular manner.



   (B)   Golf carts shall not be operated on sidewalks.



(Ord. 12-04A, passed 4-9-12)  Penalty, see § 79.99



§ 79.06  RULES OF OPERATION.



   (A)   Persons operating golf carts shall observe and obey all rules
of traffic, state laws, federal laws, and city ordinances.



   (B)   A person shall not operate a golf cart in a reckless or
dangerous manner.



(Ord. 12-04A, passed 4-9-12)  Penalty, see § 79.99



§ 79.07  SEATING.



   (A)   Golf carts shall be equipped with factory seating for all
occupants, with only one person seated in each seat.



   (B)   All persons in the golf cart shall remain seated at all times
the golf cart is operated.



   (C)   Children under the age of three years shall not be permitted
to ride on the golf cart.



(Ord. 12-04A, passed 4-9-12)  Penalty, see § 79.99



§ 79.08  EQUIPMENT.



   Golf carts shall be equipped with headlamps, front and rear turn signal
lamps, tail lamps, stop lamps, brakes, seat belts on rear seats, a rear-view
mirror, and a triangular slow moving vehicle emblem mounted at the rear of
the golf cart and as near as practicable to the center of mass and at an
approximate height not less than three feet and not more than five feet from
level ground or pavement surface.



(Ord. 12-04A, passed 4-9-12)  Penalty, see § 79.99



§ 79.09  OPERATION DURING SPECIAL EVENTS.



   (A)   The Board of Public Works and Safety may designate special
events, such as the annual Hot Dog Festival, in which golf carts may be
operated in compliance with this chapter with exceptions.



   (B)   If the golf cart used during special events does not meet the
requirements of § 79.08, the permitted hours as outlined in § 79.03 shall
be daylight hours only.



   (C)   During such special events, a registration fee of $10 per golf
cart used shall be paid to the city through the City Police Department for
deposit into the Police Equipment Fund. Such special event registrations
shall be valid for a period not to exceed one week.



   (D)   All other requirements and terms of this chapter shall apply.



(Ord. 12-04A, passed 4-9-12)  Penalty, see § 79.99



§ 79.10  EXEMPTIONS.



   The Frankfort Utility Service Department, the Street Department, and
the Public Safety entities are exempt from the provisions of the chapter.



(Ord. 12-04A, passed 4-9-12)



§ 79.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter
shall, upon a first finding of such violation, be subject to a fine not to
exceed $50, and upon a second or subsequent finding of such violation, be
subject to a fine not to exceed $100.



   (B)   Additionally, or alternatively, any operator of a golf cart
found to have committed a moving traffic offense as defined under state law,
shall be subject to fines and court costs as established by the State of
Indiana.



   (C)   Each violation shall constitute a separate offense and be
subject to a separate fine.



   (D)   If two or more violations of this chapter occur within the
same calendar year with respect to either an operator or a particular golf
cart, the registration of the golf cart involved in the most recent violation
shall be suspended and the owner or operator of the golf cart shall not be
eligible for another registration for a period of one year from the date of
such most recent violation.



(Ord. 12-04A, passed 4-9-12)



TITLE IX:  GENERAL REGULATIONS



   Chapter



      90.   ANIMALS



      91.   CIVIL EMERGENCIES



      92.   EQUAL OPPORTUNITY, FAIR HOUSING POLICY



      93.   FIRE PROTECTION CODE



      94.   SKATEBOARD PARK



      95.   NOISE CONTROL



      96.   NUISANCES



      97.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



      98.   TRASH COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL



      99.   ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION



CHAPTER 90:  ANIMALS



Section



General Provisions



   90.01   Definitions



   90.02   Animal care standards



   90.03   At large prohibited; penalties



   90.04   Noisy or odorous animals as nuisance



   90.05   Vehicles striking animals



   90.06   Interference with authorized officials



   90.07   Right of entry



   90.08   Animal shelter



   90.09   Powers of Humane Officer and other authorized personnel



   90.10   Additional powers



   90.11   Enforcement



Licenses and Immunizations



   90.15   Animal license and vaccination required



   90.16   License application and fee



   90.17   License exceptions



   90.18   Tags and collar



Dangerous Animals



   90.25   Keeping of dangerous animals prohibited; penalty



   90.26   Destroying dangerous animals



Livestock



   90.35   Running at large



   90.36   Livestock in city prohibited; exception



   90.37   Disposition of livestock in violation



Impoundment



   90.47   Notice to owners



   90.48   Redemption by owner



   90.49   (Reserved)



   90.50   Disposition of deceased or rabid animals



 



   90.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Leading or riding animal on sidewalks prohibited, see § 97.04



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 90.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ANIMAL.  Any living, non-human vertebrate.



   ANIMAL SHELTER.  The facility operated and maintained by the Clinton
County Humane Society, Inc.  for the humane restraining and impounding of
animals seized under the authority of this chapter.



   AT LARGE.  Elsewhere than premises under the ownership, control or
possession of the owner and either not restrained by a leash, or not under
the immediate and complete physical control of a person capable of
controlling the animal.



   CAT.  Any domestic member of the feline family of animals.



   DANGEROUS ANIMAL.  Any animal found at large which has:



      (1)   Caused serious injury to a person without being provoked
by that person; or



      (2)   Caused serious injury to another domestic animal while
at a place other than owner's or keeper's property;



      (3)   Committed a third violation of § 90.03(C) within a
12-month period.



   DOG.  Animals of the Canis familiaris species, and hybrids of a Canis
familiaris and any other member of the Canis genus, including wolves.



   EXPOSED TO RABIES.  The situation that exists when an animal has been
bitten by or has otherwise been in contact with any other animal known to be,
or reasonably suspected of being, infected with rabies.



   HUMANE OFFICER. The Executive Director of the Humane Society of Clinton
County, Inc. and any employee of said organization to whom the Executive
Director has delegated authority to enforce the provisions of this chapter.



   HUMANE SOCIETY or HUMANE SOCIETY OF CLINTON COUNTY.  A not-for-profit
corporation organized under the laws of the State of Indiana, with its
principal office at Frankfort, Indiana, whose duties include the
apprehension, care and disposition of at large animals.  Herein referred to
as the HUMANE SOCIETY.



   OWNER.  Any person, firm or corporation owning or having the care,
possession or control of any animal.



   POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS ANIMAL.   Any animal that:



      (1)   Causes injury to a person or domestic animal which is
less severe than a serious injury; or



      (2)   Chases or menaces a person or domestic animal without
provocation; or



      (3)   Has been determined by the Humane Society to have been
at large on more than three  separate occasions in a 12-month period



   PROVOKE. The infliction of bodily harm on the animal or another person,
or conduct that constitutes a substantial step toward the infliction of
bodily harm on the animal or another person.



   SERIOUS INJURY. Any injury which results in a broken bone, lacerations
severe enough to require sutures, or to render cosmetic surgery necessary or
appropriate, or death.



('75 Code, § 11.01)  (Ord. PO-72-1, passed 6-21-72; Am. Ord. CO-98-6,
passed 7-27-98; Am. Ord. CO-18-11A, passed 11-24-08; Am. Ord. 17-10, passed
8-14-17)



§ 90.02  ANIMAL CARE STANDARDS.



   (A)   Every owner of an animal within this city shall provide at all
times that the animal or animals:



      (1)   Are kept in a clean, sanitary, and healthy manner; and



      (2)    Have proper and adequate food, water, shelter, and
ventilation, including shelters that are protected from excessive heat and
cold, a minimum square footage of 32 square feet in order to allow the animal
to exercise and to move about freely.



   (B)   Animals confined through use of rope, chain or cable must have
unobstructed freedom of movement of a minimum of ten feet in an arc of 180
degrees.



   (C)   Every un-neutered female dog or cat in heat shall be confined
in a secure enclosure in a manner that the female cannot come into contact
with another animal except for planned breeding purposes.



   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any owner to beat, cruelly ill-treat,
mutilate, torment, overload, overwork, or otherwise abuse an animal, or
cause, instigate or permit any dogfight or other combat between animals and
humans.



   (E)   If diseased or injured, receive proper care, and if diseased,
are segregated from other animals so as to prevent transmittal of the disease.



   (F)   Are maintained in compliance with all applicable federal,
state and local laws and with all regulations in regard to animal care and
control that are adopted from time to time by the Clinton County Board of
Health and the State of Indiana.



('75 Code, § 11.05)  (Ord. PO-72-l, passed 6-21-72; Am. Ord. CO-98-6,
passed 7-27-98; Am. Ord. 17-10, passed 8-14-17)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.03  AT LARGE PROHIBITED; PENALTIES.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any owner to allow, suffer, or permit
an animal to be at large within the limits of the city.



   (B)   Except as provided in divisions (C) and (D) below, the first
violation in any 12-month period shall subject the owner to a fine of $50, a
second violation in the same 12-month period shall subject the owner to a
fine of $75, and a third violation in the same 12-month period shall subject
the owner to a fine of $100.



   (C)   (1)   If, while at large, any animal:



         (a)   Causes injury to a person or domestic animal which
is less severe than a serious injury; or



         (b)   Chases or menaces a person or domestic animal
without provocation; or



         (c)   Has been determined by the Humane Society to have
been at large more than three separate occasions in a 12-month period;



      (2)   Then the animal is declared to be a potentially
dangerous animal and the owner shall be subject to the following fines:



         (a)   First violation:  $150;



         (b)   Second violation:  $300;



         (c)   Third violation:  $500.



   (D)   If, while at large, any animal causes serious injury to a
human being, then the animal's owner shall be subject to a fine of $500 and
the animal shall be declared dangerous.



('75 Code, §  11.07)  (Ord. PO-72-1, passed 6-21-72; Am. Ord. CO-08-11A,
passed 11-24-08)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.04  NOISY OR ODOROUS ANIMALS AS NUISANCE.



   The keeping of any animal, bird, fowl, or reptile which, by causing
frequent or continued noises or odors, shall disturb the comfort, repose, or
safety of persons in any dwelling house or residence shall constitute a
public nuisance and shall be unlawful.



('75 Code, §  42.02)  Penalty, see § 90.99



Cross-reference:



   Abatement of nuisances, see § 96.07



§ 90.05  VEHICLES STRIKING ANIMALS.



   Any person operating a motor vehicle which strikes a domestic animal
within the limits of this city shall promptly report the occurrence to the
Humane Society, or to the local law enforcement agency  with a description
of the animal, the location where the occurrence took place, and an estimate
of the condition of the animal.



('75 Code, §  11.09)  (Ord. PO-72-1, passed 6-21-72; Am. Ord. CO-98-6,
passed 7-27-98)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.06  INTERFERENCE WITH AUTHORIZED OFFICIALS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder, molest, or interfere
with any authorized official in the performance of any duty described in this
chapter.



('75 Code, §  11.08)  (Ord. PO-72-1 passed 6-21-72)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.07  RIGHT OF ENTRY.



   An employee of the Humane Society, or any law enforcement officer is an
authorized agent of the city with authority to enter upon any property within
the city when in pursuit of any animal which the authorized agent has
reasonable cause to believe is in violation of this chapter.  However, the
agent is not authorized to enter any privately-owned enclosure without the
consent of the possessor, unless the agent has other legal authorization.



('75 Code, §  11.12)  (Ord. PO-72-1, passed 6-21-72; Am. Ord. 98-15,
passed 8-24-98)



§ 90.08  ANIMAL SHELTER. 



   The animal shelter shall be operated and maintained by the Humane
Society under the management and control of the Board of Directors.  The
Board shall have the power to adopt rules and regulations for the operation
of the Animal Shelter and for the purpose of implementing the provisions of
this chapter; which such rules and regulations shall be effective upon
approval by the Common Council.



(Ord. CO-98-6, passed 7-27-98)



§ 90.09  POWERS OF HUMANE OFFICER AND OTHER AUTHORIZED PERSONNEL.



   The Humane Officer, any other law enforcement officer and authorized
personnel of the Humane Society shall have the following powers:



   (A)   To destroy any dangerous animal found at large which cannot be
safely captured and impounded by ordinary means, except that every reasonable
effort shall be made to capture rather than destroy an animal which has
bitten or is suspected of having bitten a person or which appears to have
rabies.  If such an animal cannot be captured and is destroyed, the
authorized agent shall attempt to preserve the animal's head intact for
examination;



   (B)   To confine and destroy any animal showing clinical symptoms of
rabies for laboratory diagnosis;



   (C)   To confine any animal suspected of having rabies;



   (D)   To confine any animal that has bitten or otherwise exposed a
person to rabies;



   (E)   To destroy any animal that has bitten or otherwise exposed a
person to rabies; and



   (F)   To carry out any order for confinement or destruction of any
animal issued by the County Health Office, State Veterinarian, or by any
court having jurisdiction in Clinton County, Indiana.



(Ord. CO-98-6, passed 7-27-98; Am. Ord. CO-08-11A, passed 11-24-08)



§ 90.10  ADDITIONAL POWERS.



   The Humane Officer and authorized personnel of the Humane Society and
any other law enforcement officer shall have the power to seize and impound:



   (A)   Any animal at large not conforming to the definition of “At
Large”;



   (B)   Any animal which has bitten or is suspected of having bitten a
person ow which appears to have rabies, wherever such animal may be found,
and any animal shall be impounded for not less than ten days;



   (C)   Any animal not confined, as provided in § 90.02(C);



   (D)   Any animal not inoculated, licensed and tagged as provided in
Indiana law; or



   (E)   Any animal upon order of the court to do so following a
conviction of any person for violating any provision of this chapter.



(Ord. CO-98-6, passed 7-27-98)



§ 90.11  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   The Humane Officer shall keep a record of all animals
impounded in the animal shelter, which record shall show the date of
impoundment, the reason therefor, the name and address of the person bringing
the animal to the shelter, and the species, sex, color, breed, and any
identifying collars, tags or marks of the animal impounded.



   (B)   It shall be a violation of this chapter to interfere with the
Humane Officer, an employee of the Humane Society, or any law enforcement
officer in the performance of his duties hereunder.



   (C)   Upon information sufficient to establish a violation of the
provisions of this chapter, the Humane Officer, as an authorized agent of and
on behalf of the City of Frankfort, or any law enforcement officer,  may
issue to the person committing the violation or to the owner or persons
having custody or control of any animal involved in the violation either:



      (1)   An official warning,  which shall state the name of the
person to whom the warning is being issued, the nature of the violation, the
date of the violation and any other pertinent information concerning the
violation.  The official warning shall also state that it is only a warning
and is not a notice to appear to answer to any violation; or



      (2)   A complaint and summons, which shall state the name of
the person to whom the notice is being issued, the nature of the violation,
the specific section of this chapter which has been violated, the date of the
violation, and any other information which is pertinent to the violation and
its disposition.  The summons shall additionally instruct the person to whom
the notice is being issued as to the date, time and place before whom he or
she shall appear and/or respond to the complaint and the procedures for
admitting or denying a violation. The complaint and summons shall be
delivered to the respondent either in person or via certified mail, return
receipt requested, with return of service filed.



(Ord. CO-98-6, passed 7-27-98; Am. Ord. 17-10, passed 8-14-17)



LICENSES AND IMMUNIZATIONS



§ 90.15  ANIMAL LICENSE AND VACCINATION REQUIRED.



   (A)   All animals kept, harbored, or maintained by their owners in
the city shall be licensed by their owners each year not later than May 10,
and shall be vaccinated for rabies not later than May 10 of every year, if
the animal is more than six months of age.  ('75 Code,§  11.02)  (Ord.
PO-68-1, passed 6-19-68)



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any owner to allow, suffer, or permit
an animal to be within the limits of this city when the animal does not have
a current city license tag and a current rabies vaccination tag as required
in division (A) above and § 90.16.  ('75 Code, § 11.06)



(Ord. PO-72-1, passed 6-21-72)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.16  LICENSE APPLICATION AND FEE.



   (A)   All animal licenses shall be valid until, but not including,
May 10 of the year following their issuance, and shall be issued by the
Clerk-Treasurer or a person designated by him upon payment of a license fee
of $1 for each animal and presentation of a tag, hereinafter referred to as
the "rabies vaccination tag," showing the animal to have been vaccinated for
rabies within the current year or the immediately preceding year.



   (B)   The owner shall state at the time of making application for
the license, upon forms provided for this purpose, the owner's name and
address, and the animal's name, breed, color, and sex.



('75 Code, §  11.02)  (Ord. PO-68-1, passed 6-19-68; Am. Ord. PO-72-1,
passed 6-21-72)



§ 90.17  LICENSE EXCEPTIONS.



   The provisions of §§ 90.15 and 90.16 shall not apply to any dog show,
law enforcement dogs, nor to any seeing-eye dogs trained to assist blind
persons when the dogs are actually used for such purposes, nor to dogs kept
in kennels licensed by the state while the dogs are actually in the kennels.



('75 Code, §  11.03)  (Ord. PO-72-1, passed 6-21-72)



§ 90.18  TAGS AND COLLAR.



   (A)   Upon payment of the license fee and presentation of the rabies
vaccination tag or certificate, as provided in § 90.16, the Clerk-Treasurer,
or a person designated by him, shall issue to the owner a license certificate
and metallic or other tag of durable material for each animal so licensed. 
The shape of the tag shall be changed each year and shall have stamped
thereon the year for which it was issued and the number corresponding to the
serial number of the certificate.



   (B)   The owner shall provide each animal with a collar to which the
license tag and rabies vaccination tag shall be affixed, and shall see that
the collar and tags are worn by the animal so licensed at all times.



   (C)   In case an animal license tag is destroyed or lost, a
duplicate tag shall be issued upon presentation of the license certificate or
a receipt showing payment for a certificate for the current year along with
the rabies vaccination tag, and upon payment of $.50 for the duplicate. 
Animal licenses, certificates, and rabies vaccination tags shall not be
transferable from one animal to another, and no refunds shall be made on any
license fee because of the death of the animal or any other reason.



('75 Code, §  11.04)  (Ord. PO-72-1, passed 6-21-72)



DANGEROUS ANIMALS



§ 90.25  KEEPING OF DANGEROUS ANIMALS PROHIBITED; PENALTY.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to harbor, keep, or shelter within
the city any dangerous animal, whether or not the animal is caged or
otherwise restrained.  The fine to the animal's owner for any violation of
this section shall be $500.



('75 Code, §  11.11)  (Am. Ord. CO-08-11A, passed 1-24-08)  Penalty, see
§ 90.99



§ 90.26  DESTROYING DANGEROUS ANIMALS.



   Employees of the Humane Society and any law enforcement officers are
authorized agents of the city with the authority to kill any dangerous animal
found at large which cannot be safely captured and  impounded by ordinary
means.  Any dangerous animal that is captured shall be immediately impounded
and held for a period of ten  days to conduct appropriate disease testing
and then euthanized by the Humane Society.



('75 Code, §  11.10)  (Ord. PO-72-1, passed 6-21-72; Am. Ord. CO-08-11A,
passed 1-24-08)



LIVESTOCK



§ 90.35  RUNNING AT LARGE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation, being the
owner or owners, or having the care, custody or control of any cow, calf,
heifer, bull, or bullock; any hog, boar, sow, barrow, or pig; any horse,
mare, mule, or jackass; or any goat, sheep, or lamb; or any animal of any of
these species to suffer or permit the animal to run at large or be at large
on any of the streets, alleys, lands, or public grounds or unenclosed grounds
within the corporate limits of the city.



('75 Code, §  41.01)  (Ord. 28, passed 1-4-1899)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.36  LIVESTOCK IN CITY PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to keep any
cow, calf, heifer, bull, steer, hog, boar, sow, barrow, pig, horse, pony,
mule, jackass, goat, sheep, lamb, or any other animal of these species at any
time within the corporate limits of the city. Except for mobile
transportation along city streets and also confinement or for show in the
county fairgrounds.



('75 Code, §  41.04)  (Ord. 85-5, passed 5-28-85)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.37  DISPOSITION OF LIVESTOCK IN VIOLATION.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Humane Society to impound any
animal of the species mentioned in § 90.36(A) found running at large within
the corporate limits of the city.  When the animal is impounded, the Humane
Society shall give written notification of the impoundment to the owner if he
is known, or publish notice of the impoundment, giving a description of the
animal and the location where impounded.  ('75 Code, § 41.02)



   (B)   The owner of any impounded animal may redeem the animal by
showing proof of ownership and by paying the charges incurred in feeding and
caring for the animal as well as any charge incurred in advertising the
impoundment.  If the owner does not redeem the animal within five days, the
Chief of Police shall sell the animal at an auction to the highest bidder,
deducting expenses and maintaining the residue of the proceeds of sale for
the owner upon proof of ownership.



('75 Code, §  41.03)  (Ord. 28, passed 1-4-1899)



IMPOUNDMENT



§ 90.47  NOTICE TO OWNERS.



   In the event that an impounded animal is wearing a license tag, the
Humane Society will make a reasonable effort to contact the animal owner.



('75 Code, § 11-15)  (Ord. PO-72-1, passed 6-21-72; Am. Ord. CO-98-6,
passed 7-27-98)



§ 90.48  REDEMPTION BY OWNER.



   (A)   Any healthy animal seized or impounded for being at large may
be redeemed by the owner or other person, as authorized herein, at any time
prior to the disposition of the animal under § 90.49(B), upon showing that
the animal has a current license and rabies vaccination tag, and upon the
payment to the Humane Society the following charges:



      (1)   A processing fee;



      (2)   A vaccination charge; and



      (3)   A boarding charge per day of the animal stay, any
additional charges for service including:



 

SERVICE
 
CHARGE


Injections
 
$ 20.00


Impoundment Fee
 
$ 20.00


Boarding (per day)
 
$ 10.00



 



   (B)   Any animal seized or impounded for any reason who appears to
any duly licensed veterinarian to have any infectious or contagious disease,
other than rabies, may be destroyed forthwith.



   (C)   Any animal impounded pursuant to § 90.09 shall be confined at
the animal shelter or, at the discretion of the impounding officer, at the
owner’s premises in a secure place not accessible to the public.  The
Humane Office shall have continuing authority and discretion to remove any
privately confined animal to the Animal Shelter at any time during a ten day
period.  The animal may be redeemed by the owner or other person as provided
herein, upon showing that the animal has a current licence tag and rabies
vaccination tag, and by payment to the Clinton County Humane Society of the
applicable fee for the confinement period.



('75 Code, §  11.16)  (Ord. PO-72-1, passed 6-21-72; Am. Ord. CO-98-6,
passed 7-27-98)



§ 90.49  (RESERVED).



§ 90.50  DISPOSITION OF DISEASED OR RABID ANIMALS.



   (A)   Any animal impounded, for any reason, who appears to any
duly-licensed veterinarian to have any infectious or contagious disease,
other than rabies, may be destroyed forthwith.



   (B)   Any animal apprehended and impounded for having bitten a
person, being suspected of having bitten a person, or appearing to have
rabies, shall not be redeemed by the owner within ten days, but instead shall
be kept under observation in a veterinarian's office or hospital for ten days
at the owner's expense, unless the animal shall sooner die.  At the
expiration of the ten day period the animal may be redeemed by the owner or
some other person as provided in § 90.10(A), upon showing that the animal
has a current city license tag and rabies vaccination tag, a paid receipt of
all medical expenses created by the animal, and by payment of fees and
charges subject to § 90.49.



('75 Code, §  11.16)  (Ord. PO-72-1, passed 6-21-72; Am. Ord. CO-98-6,
passed 7-27-98)



§ 90.99.  PENALTY.



   (A)   Except as provided in §§ 90.03 and 90.25, any person who is
found to have violated a provision of this chapter shall be assessed the
following civil penalties:



      (1)   First offense:  $25;



      (2)   Second offense within 12 months of same or other
provision of this chapter:  $50;



      (3)   Third and subsequent offenses within 12 months of same
or other provision of this chapter: $100.



   (B)   If more than one citation is issued then each citation shall
be subject to individual penalties set forth in division (A) above.



   (C)   Each day that the violation occurs shall count as a separate
violation resulting in additional fines.



(Ord. CO-98-6, passed 7-27-98; Am. Ord. CO-08-11A, passed 11-24-08)



CHAPTER 91:  CIVIL EMERGENCIES



Section



   91.01   Definitions



   91.02   Proclamation by Mayor



   91.03   Emergency powers of Mayor, Police Chief



   91.04   Imposition of curfew



 



   91.99   Penalty



§ 91.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CIVIL EMERGENCY.  Includes the following.



      (1)   A riot or unlawful assembly characterized by the use of
actual force or violence, or any threat to use force if accompanied by
immediate power to execute force by three or more persons acting together
without authority of law.



      (2)   Any natural disaster or man-made calamity including
flood, conflagration, cyclone, tornado, earthquake, heavy snowfall or
explosion within the corporate limits of this city resulting in the death or
injury of persons or the destruction of property to such an extent that
extraordinary measures must be taken to protect the public health, safety,
and welfare.



('75 Code, § 34.01)



   CURFEW.  A prohibition against any person walking, running, loitering,
standing, or motoring upon any street, alley, highway, public property, or
vacant premises within the corporate limits of this city during the hours in
which a CURFEW has been imposed, excepting persons officially designated to
duty with reference to the "civil emergency."  ('75 Code, §  34.02) 
(Ord. PO-70-1, passed 4-1-70)



§ 91.02  PROCLAMATION BY MAYOR.



   When in the judgment of the Mayor of this city a civil emergency, as
defined in § 91.01, is deemed to exist, he shall forthwith proclaim in
writing its existence.  In case of the absence of the Mayor from the city,
the Chief of Police is hereby authorized to act in his stead.



('75 Code, § 34.03)



§ 91.03  EMERGENCY POWERS OF MAYOR, POLICE CHIEF.



   (A)   During the period of a declared state of emergency, the Mayor
or the Chief of Police, as provided in § 91.02, shall have the power to
invoke any or all of the following provisions.



      (1)   No person shall consume any alcoholic beverages in a
public street or place which is publicly owned, or in any motor vehicle
driven or parked thereon which is within a duly-designated restricted area.



      (2)   No person shall carry or possess any rock, bottle, club,
brick, or weapon, who uses or intends to use it unlawfully against the person
or property of another.



      (3)   No person shall make, carry, possess, or use any type of
Molotov Cocktail, gasoline or petroleum base fire bomb, or other incendiary
missile.



      (4)   No person shall enter any area designated as a
restricted area unless in the performance of official duties or with written
permission from the Mayor, his duly-designated representative, or the Chief
of Police, or unless the person shall prove residence therein.



      (5)   The removal of any or all motor vehicles from city
streets or alleys, or the designation of specified areas for the parking of
motor vehicles.



('75 Code, § 34.04)



   (B)   After proclamation of a civil emergency, the Mayor or the
Chief of Police as provided in § 91.02, may also in the interest of public
safety and welfare make any or all of the following orders.



      (1)   Order the closing of all retail liquor stores.



      (2)   Order the closing of all taverns.



      (3)   Order the closing of all private clubs or portions
thereof wherein the consumption of intoxicating liquor or beer or both is
permitted.



      (4)   Order the discontinuance of the sale of beer.



      (5)   Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing, or
giving away gasoline or other liquid flammable or combustible products in any
container other than a gasoline tank property affixed to a motor vehicle.



      (6)   Order the closing of gasoline stations and other
establishments, the chief activity of which is the sale, distribution, or
dispensing of liquid flammable or combustible products.



      (7)   Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing,
dispensing, or giving away of firearms, ammunition, or both.



      (8)   Issue any orders as are imminently necessary for the
protection of life and property.



('75 Code, § 34.06)



(Ord. PO-70-1, passed 4-1-70)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.04  IMPOSITION OF CURFEW.



   After a proclamation of a civil emergency by the Mayor or Chief of
Police, as provided in § 91.02, he may order a general curfew applicable to
those geographical areas of this city or to the city as a whole, as he deems
advisable and applicable during those hours of the day or night as he deems
necessary in the interest of the public safety and welfare.



('75 Code, §  34.05)  (Ord. PO-70-1, passed 4-1-70)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.99  PENALTY.



   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter or order of
the Mayor or Chief of Police shall be fined not less than $10 nor more than
$500.  ('75 Code, §  34.07)  (Ord. PO-70-1, passed 4-1-70; Am. Ord.
PO-77-2, passed 12-21-77)



CHAPTER 92:  EQUAL OPPORTUNITY, FAIR HOUSING POLICY



Section



General Provisions



   92.01   City policy



   92.02   Authority of State Civil Rights Commission



Fair Housing



   92.15   Policy statement



   92.16   Definitions



   92.17   Unlawful practice



   92.18   Discrimination in the sale or rental of housing



   92.19   Discrimination in residential real estate-related
transactions



   92.20   Discrimination in the provision of brokerage services



   92.21   Interference, coercion or intimidation



   92.22   Prevention of intimidation in fair housing cases



   92.23   Equal access to housing in HUD programs



   92.24   Exemptions



   92.25   Administrative enforcement



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 92.01  CITY POLICY.



   It is the public policy of the city to support and encourage equal
education and employment opportunities, equal access to and use of all public
conveniences and accommodations, and equal opportunity for acquisition of
real property in accordance with the state civil rights law as set out in
I.C. 22-9-1-1 et seq., a copy of which is on file for public inspection in
the office of the Clerk-Treasurer.



(Ord. CO-79-02, passed 1-3-79)



§ 92.02  AUTHORITY OF STATE CIVIL RIGHTS COMMISSION.



   The city designates the State Civil Rights Commission as the agency
appropriated to implement the purposes and objectives of I.C. 22-9-1-1 et
seq. and to enforce the provisions thereof.



(Ord. CO-79-02, passed 1-3-79)



FAIR HOUSING



§ 92.15  POLICY STATEMENT.



   It shall be the policy of the City of Frankfort to provide, within
constitutional limitation, for fair housing throughout its corporate limits
as provided for under the federal Civil Rights Act of 1968, as amended, the
federal Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, as amended, and I.C.
22-9.5-1 et seq.



(Ord. 15-05, passed 8-24-15)



§ 92.16  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AGGRIEVED PERSON. Includes any person who:



      (1)   Claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing
practice; or



      (2)   Believes that such person will be injured by a
discriminatory housing practice that is about to occur.  (I.C. 22-9.5-2-2)



   COMMISSION. The Indiana Civil Rights Commission created pursuant to
I.C. 22-9-1-4 et seq. (I.C. 22-9.5-2-3)



   COMPLAINANT. A person, including the Commission, who files a complaint
under I.C. 22-9.5-6. (I.C. 22-9.5-2-4)



   DISCRIMINATORY HOUSING PRACTICE. Act that is unlawful under §§ 92.18,
92.19, 92.20 or 92.21 or I.C. 22-9.5-5.



   DWELLING. Any building, structure, or part of a building or structure
that is occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as, a residence by
one or more families; or any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease
for the construction or location of a building, structure, or part of a
building or structure that is occupied as, or designed or intended for
occupancy as a residence by one or more families (I.C. 22-9.5-2-8)



   FAMILIAL STATUS.



      (1)   One or more individuals who have not attained the age of
18 years being domiciled with a parent or another person having legal custody
of such individual or the written permission of such parent or other person.



      (2)   The protections afforded against discrimination on the
basis of FAMILIAL STATUS shall apply to any person who is pregnant or is in
the process of securing legal custody of any individual who has not attained
the age of 18 years.



   FAMILY. Includes a single individual (I.C. 22-9.5-2-9), with the status
of such family being further defined in this section under FAMILIAL STATUS.



   HANDICAP.



      (1)   With respect to a person:



         (a)   A physical or mental impairment which
substantially limits one or more of such person’s major life activities;



         (b)   A record of having such an impairment; or



         (c)   Being regarded as having such an impairment;



         (d)   An impairment described or defined pursuant to the
federal Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990;



         (e)   Any other impairment defined under I.C.
22-9.5-2-10.



      (2)   HANDICAP shall not include current illegal use of or
addictions to a controlled substance as defined in Section 802 of Title 21 of
the United States Code (I.C. 22-9.5-2-10(b)); nor does HANDICAP include an
individual solely because that individual is a transvestite (I.C.
22-9.5-2-10(c)).



   PERSON. Includes one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships,
associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies,
joint-stock companies, trusts, non-incorporated organizations, trustees,
trustees in cases under Title 11 of the United States Code, receivers, and
fiduciaries. (I.C. 22-9.5-2-11)



   TO RENT. Includes to lease, to sublease, to let and otherwise to grant
for a consideration the rights to occupy the premises owned by the occupant.
(I.C. 22-9.5-2-13)



(Ord. 15-05, passed 8-24-15)



§ 92.17  UNLAWFUL PRACTICE.



   Subject to the provisions of division (B) below, § 92.23 and I.C.
22-9.5-3, the prohibitions against discrimination in the sale or rental of
housing set forth in I.C. 22-9.5-5-1 and in § 92.18 shall apply to:



   (A)   All dwellings except as exempted by division (B) and I.C.
22-9.5-3.



   (B)   Other than the provisions of division (C) of this section,
nothing in § 92.18 shall apply to:



      (1)   Any single-family house sold or rented by an owner where
the private individual owner does not own more than three such single-family
houses at any one time; provided that in the sale of such single-family house
by a private individual owner not residing in the house at the time of sale
or exemption shall apply only to one such sale within any 24-month period. 
The private individual owner may not own any interest in, nor have owned or
reserved on his or her behalf, title to or any right to all or a portion of
the proceeds from the sale or rental of more than three such single-family
houses at any one time. The sale or rental of any such single-family house
shall be exempted from application of this section only if such house is sold
or rented:



         (a)   Without the use in any manner of the sales or
rental facilities or services of any real estate broker, agent or salesman,
or any person in the business of selling or renting dwellings, or of any
employee or agent of any such broker, agent or salesman, or person; and



         (b)   Without the publication, posting or mailing, after
notice of advertisement or written notice in violation of § 92.18(A)(3), but
nothing in this provision shall prohibit the use of attorneys, escrow agents,
abstracters, title companies and other such professional assistance as
necessary to perfect or transfer this title; or



      (2)   Rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters
occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than four families living
independently of each other, if the owner actually maintains and occupies one
of such living quarters as his or her residence.



   (C)   For the purposes of division (B) above, a person shall be
deemed to be in the business of selling or renting dwellings if:



      (1)   They have, within the preceding 12 months, participated
as principal in three or more transactions involving the sale or rental of
any dwelling or any interest therein, or



      (2)   They have, within the preceding 12 months, participated
as agent, other than in the sale of his or her own personal residence, in
providing sales or rental facilities or services in two or more transactions
involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein, or



      (3)   They are the owner of any dwelling unit designed or
intended for occupancy by, or occupied by, five or more families.



(Ord. 15-05, passed 8-24-15)



§ 92.18  DISCRIMINATION IN THE SALE OR RENTAL OF HOUSING.



   (A)   As made applicable by § 92.17 and except as exempted by §
92.17(B) and § 92.23, it shall be unlawful:



      (1)   To refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona
fide offer, or to refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise
make unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any person because of race, color,
religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national origin.



      (2)   To discriminate against any person in the terms,
conditions, or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling or in the provision
of services of facilities in connection therewith, because of race, color,
religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national origin.



      (3)   To make, print, or publish, or cause to be made,
printed, or published any notice, statement or advertisement, with respect to
the sale or rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation,
or discrimination based on race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial
status or national origin, or an intention to make any such preference,
limitation or discrimination. To represent to any person because of race,
color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national origin that any
dwelling is not available for inspection, sale or rental when such dwelling
is in fact so available.



      (4)   For profit, to induce or attempt to induct any person to
sell or rent any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or
perspective entry into the neighborhood of a person or persons of a
particular race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national
origin.



      (5)   To discriminate in the sale or rental, or to otherwise
make unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any buyer or renter because of a
handicap of:



         (a)   That buyer or renter;



         (b)   A person residing in or intending to reside in
that dwelling after it is so sold, rented, or made available; or



         (c)   Any person associated with that person.



      (6)   To discriminate against any person in the terms,
conditions, or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the
provision of services or facilities in connection with such dwelling, because
of a handicap of:



         (a)   That person; or



         (b)   A person residing in or intending to reside in
that dwelling after it is so sold, rented, or made available; or



         (c)   Any person associated with that person.



      (7)   For purposes of this division (A)(7), discrimination
includes:



         (a)   A refusal to permit, at the expense of the
handicapped person, reasonable modifications of existing premises occupied or
to be occupied by such person if such modifications may be necessary to
afford such person full enjoyment of the premises except that, in the case of
a rental, the landlord may where it is reasonable to do so condition
permission for a modification on the renter agreeing to restore the interior
of the premises to the condition that existed before the modifications,
reasonable wear and tear excepted;



         (b)   A refusal to make reasonable accommodations in
rules, policies, practices, or services when such accommodations may be
necessary to afford such person equal opportunity to use and enjoy a
dwelling; or



         (c)   In connection with the design and construction of
covered multi-family dwellings for first occupancy after the date that is 30
months after September 13, 1998, a failure to design and construct those
dwellings in such a manner that:



            1.   The public use and common use portions of
such dwellings are readily accessible to and usable by handicapped persons;



            2.   All the doors designed to allow passage into
and within all premises within such dwellings are sufficiently wide to allow
passage by handicapped persons in wheelchairs; and



            3.   All premises within such dwellings contain
the following features of adaptive design:



               A.   An accessible route into and through
the dwelling;



               B.   Light switches, electrical outlets,
thermostats, and other environmental controls in accessible locations;



               C.   Reinforcements in bathrooms such that
an individual in a wheelchair can maneuver about the space.



   (B)   Compliance with the appropriate requirements of the Americans
with Disabilities Act of 1990 and of the American National Standard for
Buildings and Facilities providing accessibility an usability for physically
handicapped people (commonly cited as AANSI  A117.1) suffices to satisfy the
requirements of division (A)(7)(c)3.C.



   (C)   Nothing in this section requires that a dwelling be made
available to an individual whose tenancy would constitute a direct threat to
the health of safety of other individuals of whose tenancy would result in
substantial physical damage to the property of others.



(Ord. 15-05, passed 8-24-15)



§ 92.19  DISCRIMINATION IN RESIDENTIAL REAL ESTATE-RELATED TRANSACTIONS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person or other entity whose
business includes engaging in residential real estate-related transactions to
discriminate against any person in making available such a transaction, or in
the terms or conditions of such a transaction, because of race, color,
religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin.



   (B)   As used in this section, the term RESIDENTIAL REAL
ESTATE-RELATED TRANSACTION means any of the following:



      (1)   The making or purchasing of loans or providing other
financial assistance:



         (a)   For purchasing, constructing, improving,
repairing, or maintaining a dwelling; or



         (b)   Secured by residential real estate.



      (2)   The selling, brokering, or appraising of residential
real property.



   (C)   Nothing in this chapter prohibits a person engaged in the
business of furnishing appraisals of real property to take into consideration
factors other than race, color, religion, national origin, sex, handicap, or
familial status.



(Ord. 15-05, passed 8-24-15)



§ 92.20  DISCRIMINATION IN THE PROVISION OF BROKERAGE SERVICE.



   It shall be unlawful to deny any person access to or membership or
participation in any multiple-listing service, real estate brokers’
organization or other service, organization, or facility relating to the
business of selling or renting dwellings, or to discriminate against him or
her in the terms or conditions of such access, membership, or participation,
on account of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status or
national origin.



(Ord. 15-05, passed 8-24-15)



§ 92.21  INTERFERENCE, COERCION OR INTIMIDATION.



   It shall be unlawful to coerce, intimidate, threaten, or interfere with
any person in the exercise or enjoyment of, or on account of his or her
having exercised or enjoyed, or on account of his or her having aided or
encouraged any other person in the exercise or enjoyment of, any right
granted or protected by §§ 92.17, 92.18, 92.19 or 92.20.



(Ord. 15-05, passed 8-24-15)



§ 92.22  PREVENTION OF INTIMIDATION IN FAIR HOUSING CASES.



   Whoever, whether or not acting under code or law, by force or threat of
force willfully injures, intimidates or interferes with, or attempt to
injure, intimidate or interfere with:



   (A)   Any person because of his or her race, color, religion, sex,
handicap, familial status, or national origin and because he or she is or has
been selling, purchasing, renting, financing, occupying, or contracting or
negotiating for the sale, purchase, rental, financing or occupation of any
dwelling, or applying for or participating in any service, organization, or
facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings; or



   (B)   Any person because he or she is or has been, or in order to
intimidate such person or any other person or any class of persons from:



      (1)   Participating, without discrimination on account of
race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin, in
any of the activities, services, organizations or facilities described in
division (A); or



      (2)   Affording another person or class of persons opportunity
or protection so to participate; or



   (C)   Any citizen because he or she is or has been, or in order to
discourage such citizen or any other citizen from lawfully aiding or
encouraging other persons to participate, without discrimination on account
of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin,
in any of the activities, services, organizations or facilities described in
division (A), or participating lawfully in speech or peaceful assembly
opposing any denial of the opportunity to participate;



shall be fined according to local, state and federal law; and if bodily
injury results shall be fined not more than $10,000 or imprisoned not more
than ten years, or both; and if death results shall be subject to
imprisonment for any term of years or for life.



(Ord. 15-05, passed 8-24-15)



§ 92.23  EQUAL ACCESS TO HOUSING IN HUD PROGRAMS.



   Pursuant to 24 CFR Part 5.403 and 24 CFR Part 574.3 the definition of
FAMILY is revised to include families regardless of the actual or perceived
sexual orientation, gender identity, or marital status of its members.



(Ord. 15-05, passed 8-24-15)



§ 92.24  EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   Exemptions defined or set forth under I.C. 22-9.5-3 et seq.
shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter to include those
activities or organizations set forth under division (B) and (C) of this
section.



   (B)   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a religious
organization, association, or society, or any nonprofit institution or
organization operated, supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a
religious organization, association, or society, from limiting the sale,
rental or occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates for other than a
commercial purpose to persons of the same religion, or from giving preference
to such persons, unless membership in such religion is restricted on account
of race, color or national origin. Nor shall anything in this chapter
prohibit a private club not in fact open to the public, which as an incident
to its primary purpose or purposes provides lodgings which it owns or
operates for other than a commercial purpose, from limiting the rental or
occupancy of such lodging to its members or from giving preference to its
members.



   (C)   Nothing in this chapter regarding familial status shall apply
with respect to housing for older persons. As used in this section, HOUSING
FOR OLDER PERSONS means housing:



      (1)   Provided under any state or federal program that the
Secretary of the Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development or the
state Civil Rights Commission determines is specifically designed and
operated to assist elderly person (as defined in the state or federal
program); or



      (2)   Intended for, and solely occupied by, person 62 years of
age or older; or



      (3)   Intended and operated for occupancy by at least one
person 55 years of age or older per unit.



(Ord. 15-05, passed 8-24-15)



§ 92.25  ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   The authority and responsibility for properly administering
this chapter and referral of complaints hereunder to the Commissioner as set
forth in division (B) hereof shall be vested in the chief elected official of
the city.



   (B)   Notwithstanding the provisions of I.C. 22-9.5-4-8, the city,
because of lack of financial and other resources necessary to fully
administer enforcement proceedings and possible civil actions under this
chapter, herein elects to refer all formal complaints of violation of the
provisions of this chapter by complainants to the Indiana Civil Rights
Commission for administrative enforcement actions pursuant to I.C. 22-9.5-6
and the chief elected official of the city shall refer all complaints to the
Commission as provided for under division (A) of this section to the
Commission for purposes of investigation, resolution and appropriate relief
as provided for under I.C. 22-9.5-6.



   (C)   All executive departments and agencies of the city shall
administer their departments, programs and activities relating to housing and
urban development in a manner affirmatively to further the purposes of this
chapter and shall cooperate with the chief elected official and the
Commission to further such purposes.



   (D)   The chief elected official of the city, or the chief elected
official’s designee, shall provide information on remedies available to any
aggrieved person or complainant requesting such information.



(Ord. 15-05, passed 8-24-15)



CHAPTER 93:  FIRE PROTECTION CODE



Section



General Provisions



   93.001   Title and purpose



   93.002   Definitions



   93.003   Applicability



   93.004   Minimum standards



Codes and Standards



   93.010   Fire Prevention Code



   93.011   Life Safety Code



   93.012   Enforcement of Codes



   93.013   Modifications



Administration and Enforcement



   93.020   Fire Prevention and Investigation Divisions, established
and jurisdiction



   93.021   Organization of the Frankfort Fire Prevention and
Investigation Divisions



Fire Zone Boundaries and Maps



   93.030   Fire Zone One



   93.031   Fire Zone Two



   93.032   Fire Zone Three



   93.033   Fire Zone Four



   93.034   Fire Zone Five



   93.035   Fire Zone Six



Open and Unlawful Burning



   93.045   Unlawful burning



   93.046   Burning on asphalt streets



   93.047   Burning during certain hours prohibited



   93.048   Unattended fires



   93.049   Burning of garbage prohibited



   93.050   Open burning and recreational fires



   93.051   Burn bans



Inspections and Investigations



   93.060   Right to enter buildings and premises



   93.061   Fire inspections



   93.062   Reinspection



   93.063   Records and reports



   93.064   Enforcement



   93.065   Legal assistance



   93.066   Law enforcement assistance



Rapid Access System



   93.075   Purpose



   93.076   Application



   93.077   Identifying numbers for structures



   93.078   Coordinated enforcement



Enforcement Procedures



   93.085   Notice of violation



   93.086   Determination of violation



   93.087   Conveyance of inspection report



   93.088   Imminent danger



   93.089   Duty to correct violations



   93.090   Variances



   93.091   Orders to correct violations



   93.092   Order forbidding occupancy



   93.093   Appeal from orders



   93.094   Remedies



Emergency Operations



   93.100   Authority at fires and emergencies



   93.101   Emergency lines and limits



   93.102   Unlawful interference with fire protection equipment,
barriers, devices, signs and seals



General Requirements for Fire Safety of Buildings



   93.110   Fire suppression and detection systems



   93.111   Suppression and detection systems plan review



   93.112   Notification of alarm



   93.113   Portable fire extinguishers and where required



   93.114   Servicing of portable fire extinguishers



   93.115   Requirements for commercial kitchen exhaust equipment and
fire protection equipment



   93.116   Required water supply for fire protection



   93.117   Fire hydrants



   93.118   Marking of fire protection equipment, fire hydrants and
access roads



   93.119   Fire protection in recreational vehicles, mobile homes and
manufactured housing parks, sale and storage lots



   93.120   Smoke detector requirements for dwellings



   93.121   Means of egress illumination and signs



   93.122   Exit doors, stairways and elevator signs



   93.123   Obstruction of the means of egress



   93.124   Inspection of fire escapes



   93.125   Smoking



   93.126   Underground storage tanks and notification



Emergency Vehicle Lanes



   93.135   Intent



   93.136   Emergency lane standards



   93.137   Compliance



   93.138   Enforcement



   93.139   Exceptions



Fairs and Festivals/Amusement Operations



   93.150   Tents, canopies and membrane structures



   93.151   Halloween amusements defined



   93.152   Permit application; permit and fees required



   93.153   Amusement inspections



   93.154   Permit issuance and transferability



   93.155   Appeal from denial of permit



   93.156   Permit period



   93.157   Display of permit required



Fire Reporting Systems



   93.170   Scope of division



   93.171   Monitoring of fire alarm systems



   93.172   Notification upon fire alarm activation



   93.173   Faulty alarms



Fireworks



   93.180   Definitions



   93.181   Certificate of insurance and additional requirements



   93.182   Sales of consumer fireworks



   93.183   Restrictions as to dates and times



   93.184   Restrictions as to location



   93.185   Enforcement



   93.186   Seizure and forfeiture of consumer fireworks



Prohibited Acts



   93.195   False alarms



   93.196   Driving over fire hose



   93.197   Following emergency vehicles too closely



   93.198   Failure to yield



 



   93.999   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 93.001  TITLE AND PURPOSE.



   (A)   This chapter shall be known as the “City of Frankfort Fire
Protection Code.”



   (B)   The purpose of this chapter is to prescribe regulations
consistent with nationally recognized standards for the protection of life,
environment, and property from the hazards of fire and explosion, from the
hazards arising from the storage, handling and use of hazardous materials,
from conditions hazardous to life or property in the use of occupancy of new
or existing buildings and premises, and to establish appropriate
administrative procedures for the enforcement of this chapter.



(Ord. CO-03-05, passed 8-25-03; Am. Ord. 14-08, passed 8-11-14)



§ 93.002  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CLASS 1 STRUCTURE. Buildings and structures as defined in the 675 IAC
12-6.



   CLASS 2 STRUCTURE. Buildings  and structure as defined in the 675 IAC
12- 6.



   COMMISSION. The Indiana Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission
created pursuant to I.C. 22-12-2.



   EMERGENCY VEHICLE. A vehicle such as a fire truck, ambulance or police
car, with properly trained personnel, responding to an urgent need for
assistance.



   FIRE DEPARTMENT. The Frankfort Fire Department and the fire prevention
or protection services within the boundaries of the Frankfort Fire Protection
Area.



   FIRE DISTRICT. The normal fire protection district both incorporated
and unincorporated covered by the Franklin Fire Department.



   FIRE INSPECTOR. The administrative head of a Fire Prevention/Code
Enforcement Division.



   FIRE OFFICIAL. The Fire Chief or his or her designee.



   FIRE PREVENTION DIVISION.  The Fire Prevention Division established by
this chapter for the Frankfort Fire Department.



   HAZARDOUS CONDITION.  The presence of a structural condition,
equipment, utility connection, material which constitutes or poses a
recognized threat of fire or other injury to persons or property.



   KEY BOX. “Listed” box, size and style, approved by the Fire
Official that meets the requirements and uses the same security key code
adopted by the Fire Department.



   KEY SWITCH. A UL type switch, approved by the Fire Official that
operates from the approved security key code utilized by the Fire Department.



   PRIVATE DWELLING.  A building used exclusively as the personal
residence of one or two families.



   PROTECTION DISTRICTS. Those areas within the city or township assigned
to or contracted for service by the Franklin Fire Department.



   RESPONSIBLE PARTY. The person(s) charged with the responsibility for
the occupancy, building or business owner.



   SECURITY CAP. A Fire Department connection (FDC) plug and cap approved
for use in the city by the Fire Official utilizing two and one-half inch
National Standard Thread Pattern.



   SECURITY PADLOCK. A padlock approved by the Fire Official, that
utilizes the approved key code utilized by the Fire Department.



(Ord. CO-03-05, passed 8-25-03; Am. Ord. 14-08, passed 8-11-14)



§ 93.003  APPLICABILITY.



   (A)   The provisions of this chapter shall be supplemental to the
Indiana Fire Code, as adopted by the Commission at 675 IAC 22.



   (B)   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to maintenance of
fire prevention and life safety features as herein described.



   (C)   When any provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict
with any rule of the Commission, the rule of the Commission shall prevail.



   (D)   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to existing
conditions, as well as to the conditions arising after the adoption thereof.
Buildings, systems, uses, processes, and equipment in existence on the
effective date of this chapter shall be permitted to continue so long as they
are maintained in a condition that is equivalent to the quality and fire
resistive characteristics that existed when the building was constructed,
altered, added to or repaired.



(Ord. CO-03-05, passed 8-25-03; Am. Ord. 14-08, passed 8-11-14)



§ 93.004  MINIMUM STANDARDS.



   (A)   All fire safety rules of the Commission as set out in 675 IAC
22 to Clinton County are hereby incorporated in this chapter, and shall
include later amendments to that article as the same are published in the
Indiana Register or the Indiana Administrative Code with effective dates as
fixed therein.



   (B)   Any special processes or procedures not addressed shall be
subject to applications found in Fire Safety Standards recognized by 675 IAC
22, and the Jurisdictional Fire Chief.



   (C)   Any special processes or procedures not addressed shall be
subject to applications found in the current editions of the National Fire
Protection Association standards or other recognized fire safety standards,
subject to the rules of the Commission.



   (D)   A current copy of these standards shall be available in the
Office of the Fire Prevention Bureau for inquiry and review by the public
during normal business hours.



(Ord. CO-03-05, passed 8-25-03; Am. Ord. 14-08, passed 8-11-14)



CODES AND STANDARDS



§ 93.010  FIRE PREVENTION CODE.



   (A)   For the purpose of prescribing regulations to protect lives
and property from the hazards of fire and explosion, the most current edition
of the Indiana Fire Code adopted by the Commission by I.C. 22-13-2-2, is
hereby adopted by the city including any amendments and appendices thereto.
The provisions of the Fire Prevention Code shall be controlling within the
corporate limits of the city, and the fire protection zones outside the city
with whom the city has protection contracts.



   (B)   There shall be maintained in the following offices copies of
the Fire Prevention Code:



      (1)   One in the office of City Clerk-Treasurer.



      (2)   One in the office of the City Engineer.



      (3)   One in the office of the Chief of the Fire Department.



(Ord. 14-08, passed 8-11-14)



§ 93.011  LIFE SAFETY CODE.



   (A)   For the purposes of prescribing regulations to protect lives
and property from the hazards of fire and explosion, the most current edition
of the Life Safety Code, N.F.P.A 101 is hereby adopted. The provisions of the
Life Safety Code shall be controlling within the corporate limits of the
city, and the fire protection zones outside the city with whom the city has
fire protection contracts.



   (B)   There shall be maintained in the following offices copies of
the Life Safety Code:



      (1)   One in the office of City Clerk-Treasurer.



      (2)   One in the office of the City Engineer.



      (3)   One in the office of the Chief of the Fire Department.



(Ord. 14-08, passed 8-11-14)



§ 93.012  ENFORCEMENT OF CODES.



   (A)   The Fire Prevention Code and Life Safety Code shall be
enforced by the Fire Prevention Division Captain, by authority of the Fire
Chief, or any other officer of the Fire Department designated by the Chief of
the Fire Department.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person properly served with an
order or citation under provisions of the Codes to fail to comply with such
order or citations.



(Ord. 14-08, passed 8-11-14)  Penalty, see § 93.999



§ 93.013  MODIFICATIONS.



   Subject to the rules of the Commission, the Chief of the Fire
Department shall have the authority to waive or to modify any of the
provisions of the Fire Prevention Code and Life Safety Code upon an
application in writing by the owner, lessee, or duly authorized agent
thereof, when such modification or waiver is and provided that the spirit of
the Codes shall be observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice
done. A written statement of such modification or waiver, when granted or
allowed, and the decision of the Chief of the Fire Department, shall
thereupon be entered upon the records of the Fire Department and signed
copies shall be furnished to the applicant.



(Ord. 14-08, passed 8-11-14)



ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT



§ 93.020  FIRE PREVENTION AND INVESTIGATION DIVISIONS, ESTABLISHED AND
JURISDICTION.



   (A)   As authorized by I.C. 36-8-17, there is hereby established a
Division of Fire Prevention and a Division of Fire Investigation within the
Frankfort Fire Department.



   (B)   The Fire Chief shall appoint the head of these Divisions and
their title will be Division Captain of Inspections and Division Captain of
Investigations, with approval of the Board of Works and Public Safety.



      (1)   The Division Captains of the Inspection Division and
Investigation Division established within the Frankfort Fire Department shall
be respectively responsible for the enforcement of codes, laws, statutes and
regulations for safeguarding property from fire and explosion and for finding
the origin and cause of fires that have occurred. They shall have
jurisdiction within the Frankfort Fire Department’s coverage area; and



      (2)   Each township that contracts fire protection coverage
with the Frankfort Fire Department.



(Ord. CO-03-05, passed 8-25-03; Am. Ord. 14-08, passed 8-11-14)



§ 93.021  ORGANIZATION OF THE FRANKFORT FIRE PREVENTION AND INVESTIGATION
DIVISIONS.



   (A)   The Inspection Division and Investigation Division of the
Frankfort Fire Department shall be under the supervision of the Fire Chief
pursuant to the applicable personnel rules of the Fire Department.



   (B)   The Fire Chief shall appoint the head of the Fire Inspection
Division and the Investigation Division henceforth called by the title of
Fire Inspector and Fire Investigator, holding the rank of Division Captain,
with the approval of the Board of Public Works and Safety of the City of
Frankfort.



   (C)   The Fire Inspector shall have the following minimum
qualifications:



      (1)   Fire years’ service.



      (2)   Substantial knowledge of building construction,
principles of fire, fire tactics, and basic electricity.



   (D)   The Inspector and Investigator shall become certified by the
Indiana Department of Fire and Building Services, as Fire Inspector I and
Fire Investigator sometime within the first year of service after appointment.



   (E)   The appointees shall maintain a minimum of 16 hours of formal
training in relation to the area of responsibility every year of service
after appointment.



   (F)   The appointees shall be paid a salary set forth per the Chief
in the salary ordinance.



   (G)   The Fire Chief may detail such members of the Fire Department
as inspectors as shall be deemed necessary from time to time.



(Ord. CO-03-05, passed 8-25-03; Am. Ord. 14-08, passed 8-11-14)



FIRE ZONE BOUNDARIES AND MAPS



§ 93.030  FIRE ZONE ONE.



   In the City of Frankfort, Indiana and contracted fire protection areas:



   Beginning at the intersection of the center lines of West Morrison St.
and Rossville Ave, (40° 17’ 00.62” north and 86° 31’ 11.56” west),
then west to the intersection of the center lines of W. Morrison St. and
Blinn Ave.  From this point, continue north northwest on Blinn Ave. to the
intersection of the center lines of Blinn Ave and County Road 0 n/s, then
west to the intersection of the center lines of County Road 0 n/s and County
Road 200 west.  Continue south on County Road 200 west to the intersection
of the center lines of County Road 200 west and Armstrong Road, then east to
the intersection of the center lines of Armstrong Road and West Armstrong
St.  Then continue east on West Armstrong St. to the intersection of the
center lines of West Armstrong St. and 8th St.  Then north on 8th St. to the
intersection of the center lines of 8th St. and West South St., continue the
east on West South St. to the intersection of the center lines of West South
St. and 7th St.  Then north on 7th St. to the intersection of the center
lines of 7th St. and West Wabash St., continue east on the center line of
West Wabash then onto East Wabash St. (and on an assumed line in the blocks
where a physical street does not exist) to the intersection of the center
lines of East Wabash St. and South Clay St.  Then north on South Clay St.
and North Clay St. to the intersection of the center lines of North Clay St.
and East Morrison St.  From this point, continue west on East Morrison St.,
to the intersection of the center line of  East Morrison and the center of
the Morrison St. bridge over Prairie Creek., then north along an assumed line
to the intersection of the center lines of North Prairie St. and East Barner
St.  Then west on East Barner St. and West Barner St. to the intersection of
the center lines of West Barner St. and Hubbell St.  Then north on Hubbell
St. to the intersection of the center lines of Hubbell St. and West Paris
St., continue west on Paris (and along an assumed line where a physical
street does not exist), to the intersection of the center lines of West Paris
St. and  Rossville Ave.  From this point continue South on Rossville Ave.,
to the point of the beginning, the intersection of the center lines of West
Morrison St. and Rossville Ave., (40° 17’ 00.62” north and 86° 31’
11.56” west).



(Ord. 14-08, passed 8-11-14)



§ 93.031  FIRE ZONE TWO.



   In the City of Frankfort, Indiana and contracted fire protection areas:



   Beginning at the intersection of the center lines of North Williams
Road and the Norfolk & Southern Railroad (40º 16’ 57.68” north and 86º
30’ 05.00” west), then east and northeast along the center line of the
Norfolk & Southern Railroad to the intersection of the center lines of  the
Norfolk & Southern Railroad and North Kelley Ave.  Then north to a point on
the center line of North Kelley Ave. and 150’ south of the center line of
Washington Ave. (40º 17’ 13.18” north and 86º 29’ 39.71” west).
Then east to the center line of Goder Dr., and a point 222’ south of the
center line of Washington Ave. (40º 17’ 13.18” north and 86º 29’
37.13” west), then north 40’along the center line of Goder Dr. to a point
182’ south of the center line of Washington Ave. (40º 17’ 13.62” north
and 86º 29’ 37.13” west).  From that point, east 400” to a point just
east of the end of a stone driveway (40º 17’ 13.62” north and 86º 29’
38.22” west), then north 480’ to the center line of Washington Ave. (40º
17’ 17.49” north and 86º 29’ 32.00” west), then southwest to the
intersection of the center lines of Washington Ave. and Crawford St.  Then
north to a point where Crawford St. and Street Department Dr. would intersect
if they both continued (40º 17’ 21.66” north and 86º 29’ 40.04”
west), from this point, west to the intersection of the center lines of
Street Department Drive and Burlington Ave.  From this intersection, south
to the intersection of the center lines of Burlington Ave. and Washington
Ave., then southwest to the intersection of the center lines of Washington
Ave. and North Williams St.  Then south to the point of beginning, the
intersection of the center lines of North Williams Road and the Norfolk &
Southern Railroad (40º 16’ 57.68” north and 86º 30’ 05.00” west).



(Ord. 14-08, passed 8-11-14)



§ 93.032  FIRE ZONE THREE.



   In the City of Frankfort, Indiana and contracted fire protection areas:



   Beginning at the intersection of the center lines of South Hoke Ave.
and Maiden Lane (40º 16’ 26.49” north and 86º29’ 47.11” west), then
east 1445’ to a point (40º 16’ 26.66” north and 86º 29’
29.18”west).  Then south 590’ to the northwest corner of lot 14 in the
Rogers Estates Addition, then due east to the centerline of South Maish Road
and a point 140’ north of the intersection of the center lines of South
Maish Road and Haven Ave. Then north along the center line of South Maish
Road to a point 205’ south of the intersection of the center lines of South
Maish Road and East Wabash Street, then east 710’ to a point on the center
line of Hot Dog Street, 205’ south of the intersection of the center lines
of Hot Dog St. and East Wabash St.  Then south, and turning slightly
southeast 450’ along the center line of Hot Dog St., to point (40º 16’
38.77” north and 86º 29’ 03.94” west), then east 560’ to the west
property line of lot 1 in the Clinton Plaza Addition (40º 16’ 38.39”
north and 86º 28’ 56.89” west), then south 390’ to the southwest
corner of the same lot.  Then east 1715’ to the southeast corner of a
parcel of land (40º 16’ 35.08” north and 86º 28’ 34.66” west), then
north 910’ to the center line of East Wabash St. (40º 16’ 43.74” north
and 86º 28’ 34.03” west).  Then west on the center line of East Wabash
St., to a point directly south of the east property line of Wal Mart
subdivision out lot 1, then north along the east property line of this
parcel, to a point where this line would intersect the center line of the
Norfolk & Southern railroad tracks.  Then west along the center line of the
railroad tracks, 1600’ to point (40º 17’ 10.02” north and 86º 28’
59.25” west), then north to the southeast corner of Lot 42 in Section 2 of
Twin Haven Estates subdivision.  Then west 1035’ to the center line of
North Maish Road at a point 145’ south of the intersection of the center
lines of North Maish Road and Redbud Blvd., then north 500’ to a point
where the center line of North Maish Road and the south property line of Lot
2 in the Chestnut Ridge Addition would intersect.  Then east 370’ to the
southeast corner of Lot 1 in the Chestnut Ridge Subdivision., then north
along the east property line of this parcel of land to a point where the
property line would intersect the center line of Washington Ave.  Then
southwest 1025’ along the center line of Washington Ave to a point where
the center line of Washington Ave and the east boundary of Lot 42 in the
Maplewood Addition would intersect, then south 840’ to the northeast corner
of Lot 31 in the Maplewood Addition.  Then east to the center line of North
Maish Road at a point 140’ north of the intersection of the center lines of
North Maish Road and Mapleleaf Street.  From there south along the center
line of North Maish Road and South Maish Road to a point 140’ south of the
intersection of the center lines of South Maish Road and Clinton Drive, then
west to the northeast corner of lot 274 in the second section of the East
Park Addition, then south along the east property line of lot 274 would
intersect the center line of East Walnut Street. Then west along the center
line of East Walnut St. to the intersection of this line and the center line
of South Crescent Dr.  Then south on Crescent Dr. to a point 170’ south of
the intersection of the center lines of Crescent Dr. and East Walnut St. 
Then west and down the center line of the alley running east and west between
East Walnut and East Wabash Streets, to the northwest corner of lot 1 in
Kelley’s Addition, then south to the center line of East Wabash Street
160’ west of the intersection of the center lines of East Wabash St. and
South Hoke Ave., from there, west 75’ to a point on the center line of East
Wabash Street that is 125’ east of the intersection of the center lines of
East Wabash Street and Coulter Street.  Then south, 1040’ through a
utility access area to a point (40º 16’ 34.11” north and 86º 29’
50.48” west), then east to the center line of South Hoke Ave., then south
along the center line of South Hoke Ave., to the point of beginning, the
intersection of the center lines of South Hoke Ave. and Maiden Lane (40º
16’ 26.49” north and 86º 29’ 47.11” west).



(Ord. 14-08, passed 8-11-14)



§ 93.033  FIRE ZONE FOUR.



   In the City of Frankfort, Indiana and contracted fire protection areas:



   Beginning at the intersection of the center lines of South Jackson
Street and Hackett Street (40º16’14.47” north and 86º 30’ 37.95”
west), then west to the center lines of Hackett St. and the first alley west
of Oak Street. Then south along the center line of said alley to the
intersection of its center line with the center line of White Street, then
west to the intersection of the center lines of White St. and 1st St. From
this point approximately 325º northwest along the centerline of the
abandoned Monon Railroad to the intersection of that line with the centerline
of West Freeman Street, then west to the intersection of the center lines of
West Freeman St. and 5th St.  Then north to the intersection of the center
lines of 5th St. and Edmonds St., then west along the center line of Edmonds
to a dead end in the road then continuing along an assumed line for 815’ to
a point (40º 16’ 26.34” north and 86º 31’ 23.94”west).  Then south
810’ to the center line of West Freeman St. at a point (40º 16’ 18.37”
north and 86º 31’ 24.13”west), then east 585’ on the center line of
Freeman St. to a point (40º 16’ 13.37” north and 86º 31’ 16.55”
west).  Then south 500’ to a point (40º 16’ 13.27” north and 86º
31’ 16.52” west), then east to a point on the centerline of  Krug Road,
145’ south of the intersection of the center lines of Krug Road and Norris
Way.  Then south 2640’ on the center line of Krug Road to a point (40º
15’ 47.20” north and 86º 31’ 12.16” west), then east 2600’ to the
centerline of South Jackson St. at a point (40º 15’ 47.20” north and
86º 30’ 38.55” west).  Then south 280’ on the center line of South
Jackson St. to a point (40º 15’ 44.77” north and 86º 30’ 38.47”
west), then east 1460’ to a point (40º 15’ 44.65” north and 86º 30’
19.68” west).  Then north 735’ to a point on the center line of East
Kelley Road, 185’ west of the intersection of the center lines of East
Kelley Road and Alhambra Ave. Then east to the intersection of the center
lines of East Kelley Road and Alhambra Ave.  Then north 1875’ to the
intersection of the center lines of Alhambra Ave. and Fairground St., then
west 520’ to the intersection of the center lines of Fairground St. and
South Prairie St.  Then north 955’ to the intersection of the center lines
of South Prairie St. and Hackett St. Then west 340’ to the point of the
beginning, (40º 16’ 14.47” north and 86º 30’ 37.95” west), the
intersection of the center lines of South Jackson St. and Hackett St.



(Ord. 14-08, passed 8-11-14)



§ 93.034  FIRE ZONE FIVE.



   In the City of Frankfort, Indiana and contracted fire protection areas:



   Beginning at the intersection of the center lines of North Main Street
and Avery Street (40º 17’ 35.18” north and 86º 30’ 43.72” west),
then north to the intersection of North Main St. and Main Dr., then
counterclockwise around Main Dr. to where its center line intersects Service
Drive.  Then west on Service Dr. to the intersection of the center lines of
Service Dr. and Delphi Avenue, then south on Delphi Ave. to a point on its
center line that is 135’ south of the intersection of the centerlines of
Delphi Ave. and Union Road.  Then west 440’ to a point on the center line
of the CSX railroad (40º 17’ 47.25” north and 86º 30’ 57.31” west),
then south 360’along the center line of the CSX railroad to a point (40º
17’ 44.05” north and 86º 31’ 02.90” west).  Then west 3050’ to
the center line of Rossville Ave. (40º 17’ 42.75” north and 86º 31’
42.44” west), then west southwest 254º to a point (40º 17’
40.05”north and 86º 31’ 53.27” west).  Then south 1575’ to the
intersection of this line with the extended center line of West Kyger St.
(40º 17’ 24.37” north and 86º 31’ 51.67” west), then east to the
intersection of the center lines of West Kyger St. and Walsh Ave.  Then
north to the center line of the west dead end of Willow St., then east to the
intersection of the center lines of Willow St. and Rossville Ave. Then
southeast on Rossville Ave. to the intersection of the center lines of
Rossville Ave. and West Kyger St., then south to the intersection of the
center lines of Rossville Ave. and West Palmer St., then east to the
intersection of the center lines of West Palmer and the CSX Railroad
tracks.  Then north on the CSX tracks to where its center line would
intersect with and extension of the center line of Avery St. (40º 17’
35.04” north and 86º 31’ 02.54” west), the east to the point of
beginning, the intersection of the center lines of North Main Street and
Avery Street (40º 17’ 35.18” north and 86º 30’ 43.72” west).



(Ord. 14-08, passed 8-11-14)



§ 93.035  FIRE ZONE SIX.



   In the City of Frankfort, Indiana and contracted fire protection areas:



   Beginning at the intersection of the center lines of County Road 0 n/s
and County Road 200 West (40º 17’ 10.63” north and 86º 32’ 36.07”
west) then north 750’ to a point on the center line of County Road 200 West
(40º 17’ 17.91” north and 86º 32’ 36.03” west).  Then west 450’
to a point (40º 17’ 17.91” north and 86º 32’ 41.87” west), then
north 750’ to a point (40º 17’ 25.31” north and 86º 32’ 41.87”
west).  Then west 8000’ to a point (40º 17’ 26.04” north and 86º
34.18.39” west), then south 1500’ to a point on the center line of County
Road 0 n/s (40º 17’ 11.37” north and 86º 34’ 18.39” west).  Then
west 2350’ on the center line of County Road 0 n/s to a point (40º 17’
11.55” north and 86º 34’ 48.72” west), then south to a point on the
center line of State Road 28 West (40º 16’ 42.78” north and 86º 34’
48.49” west).  Then east 1250’ on the center line of State Road 28 to a
point (40º 16’ 46.74” north and 86º 34’ 36.25” west), then south
1260’ to a point (40º 16’ 32.24” north and 86º 34’ 32.53”
west).  Then east 1100’ to a point on the center line of County Road 350
West (40º 16’ 32.13” north and 86º 34’ 19.16” west), then south to
the intersection of the center lines of County Road 350 West and County Road
200 South.  Then east to the intersection of the center lines of County Road
200 West and Armstrong Road, then northeast to the intersection of the center
lines of Armstrong Road and County Road 200 West. Then north to the point to
beginning, the intersection of the center lines of County Road 0 n/s and
County Road 200 West (40º 17’ 10.63” north and 86º 32’ 36.07” west).



(Ord. 14-08, passed 8-11-14)



OPEN AND UNLAWFUL BURNING



§ 93.045  UNLAWFUL BURNING.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided under the rules of the Commission
or I.C. 22-11-14, it shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, or
entity to kindle or burn any litter, trash, rubbish, sweepings, leaves,
paper, wood, or other combustible materials openly or in any container other
than a heating unit properly installed for the purpose of heating a building,
or to cause the storage of explosives, or blasting agents; however, this
prohibition shall not apply to wholesale and retail stocks of small arms
ammunition, fuse lighters, fuse igniters, and safety fuses in quantities
involving less than 50 pounds of explosive material; anywhere inside the
boundaries of Fire Zones 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6.



   (B)   This section shall not apply to any person residing in a
residential type structure in the Fire Zones, provided the residential type
structure was in existence before the date of adoption of this chapter.



(Ord. 14-08, passed 8-11-14)  Penalty, see § 93.999



§ 93.046  BURNING ON ASPHALT STREETS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to kindle and
burn any fire of any substance, kind, or character whatsoever upon any of the
streets, alleys, or sidewalks of the city which have been constructed of, or
improved with, any type of asphalt material.



(Ord. 14-08, passed 8-11-14)  Penalty, see § 93.999



§ 93.047  BURNING DURING CERTAIN HOURS PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, or entity to
create any fire in the city for the purpose of burning any leaves, trash,
rubbish, sweepings, paper, or other combustible material, or permit or suffer
the fire to burn except in a regularly-installed furnace or heating unit
installed for the purpose of heating a building, less than two hours after
sunup or later than one hour before sunset in the evening.



(Ord. 14-08, passed 8-11-14)  Penalty, see § 93.999



§ 93.048  UNATTENDED FIRES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to create any fire or let, permit,
or suffer the fire to burn unattended within the city, when the fire has been
created for the purpose of disposing of any leaves, trash, sweepings,
rubbish, paper, or other combustible material, and the fire has been created
in any other place than a regularly-installed furnace or heating unit for the
purpose of heating a building.



(Ord. 14-08, passed 8-11-14)  Penalty, see § 93.999



§ 93.049  BURNING OF GARBAGE PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to engage in
the outdoor burning of garbage within the corporate limits of the city.



(Ord. 14-08, passed 8-11-14)  Penalty, see § 93.999



§ 93.050  OPEN BURNING AND RECREATIONAL FIRES.



   (A)   Open burning, cooking, and recreational fires are permitted in
residential occupancies under the following conditions:



      (1)   Only clean natural growth wood, charcoal, natural gas,
propane, alcohol type fuel (sterno) or other approved fuel is used.



      (2)   The fire is at least 50 feet from any structure for any
burning that is not a recreational fire.  Recreational fires shall be at
least 25 feet from any structure.



      (3)   The fire is in a non-combustible enclosure.



      (4)   The fire is attended at all times by a responsible
person.



      (5)   An adequate means of extinguishment is present.



      (6)   The physical dimensions of the fire does not exceed
three feet across and two feet high.



      (7)   No complaints are received by the Fire Department.



   (B)   Cooking on any flame-producing device is prohibited on decks,
balconies, under roof overhangs.



   (C)   No burning shall be conducted during unfavorable weather
conditions, drought, temperature inversion or windy conditions.  If sparks,
embers or brands capable of starting a secondary fire are being carried
aloft, a metal screen with openings no larger than one-quarter inch must be
provided or the fire must be extinguished.



(Ord. 14-08, passed 8-11-14)  Penalty, see § 93.999



§ 93.051  BURN BANS.



   (A)   During times of drought, high winds or any conditions that
could contribute to a fire being spread, a burn ban may be enacted for the
area protected by the Frankfort Fire Department.



   (B)   Any burn ban will be a joint decision by the Mayor, Fire Chief
or his or her designee and Fire Inspector and will remain in effect until
conditions are favorable for burning without the risk of fire spreading.



(Ord. 14-08, passed 8-11-14)  Penalty, see § 93.999



INSPECTIONS AND INVESTIGATIONS



§ 93.060  RIGHT TO ENTER BUILDINGS AND PREMISES.



   (A)   Pursuant to I.C. 36-8-17, authorized personnel of the Fire
Department or Division may, at all reasonable hours, enter any structure
(except private dwellings) within its jurisdiction for the purpose of
conducting inspections or investigations pursuant to this chapter. The right
to enter shall extend to new structures under construction as well as to
existing structures being renovated or remodeled.



   (B)   An inspector or investigator may be required by the owner or
occupant to produce satisfactory proof of his or her authority or identity.



   (C)   If an inspector or investigator is denied access, the Fire
Prevention Division Captain may apply to a court of competent jurisdiction
for an order allowing inspection or investigation.



(Ord. CO-03-05, passed 8-25-03; Am. Ord. 14-08, passed 8-11-14)



§ 93.061  FIRE INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   The Fire Department shall perform inspections under the
administrative supervision of the Fire Chief pursuant to I.C. 36-8-17-8.



   (B)   The Fire Department may, as often as may be reasonably
necessary:



      (1)   Inspect every place and public way, except the interiors
of private dwellings; and



      (2)   Inspect, upon receipt of a complaint, any building or
premises, except interiors of private dwellings.



(Ord. CO-03-05, passed 8-25-03; Am. Ord. 14-08, passed 8-11-14)



§ 93.062  REINSPECTIONS.



   If during the initial inspection, a violation is found that warrants a
follow-up inspection, the first reinspection is at no cost. Should a third
inspection be necessary because of a violation not being corrected, a $75
dollar charge will apply, and subsequent visits for the same violation will
increase $75 per visit.



(Ord. 14-08, passed 8-11-14)



§ 93.063  RECORDS AND REPORTS.



   (A)   The Fire Department shall keep a record of all fires and the
facts concerning them, including statistics as to the extent of fires and the
losses sustained. The reports shall be prepared as an annual summary and
submitted to the Fire Chief. The annual summary, together with
recommendations for change, shall be submitted, when requested, to the Board
of Public Works and Safety.



   (B)   The Fire Department shall maintain files containing reports of
all properties that have been inspected, all orders issued, of all complaints
and fires investigated, and the location of all buildings containing
hazardous occupancies.



(Ord. CO-03-05, passed 8-25-03; Am. Ord. 14-08, passed 8-11-14)



§ 93.064  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   It shall be the responsibility of the Fire Department to
enforce all provisions of this chapter within its jurisdiction.



   (B)   A Fire Department shall have such other powers and duties as
may be conferred from time to time by law or ordinance.



(Ord. CO-03-05, passed 8-25-03; Am. Ord. 14-08, passed 8-11-14)



§ 93.065  LEGAL ASSISTANCE.



   A bureau may obtain the services of legal council for legal assistance
in connection with the enforcement of this chapter.



(Ord. CO-03-05, passed 8-25-03; Am. Ord. 14-08, passed 8-11-14)



§ 93.066  LAW ENFORCEMENT ASSISTANCE.



   The Chief of the Frankfort Police Department or the County Sheriff may,
upon request of the Chief of the Frankfort Fire Department or Bureau, assign
such available law enforcement officers as may be necessary to assist the
Department or Bureau in the enforcement of this chapter.



(Ord. CO-03-05, passed 8-25-03; Am. Ord. 14-08, passed 8-11-14)



RAPID ACCESS SYSTEM



§ 93.075  PURPOSE.



   (A)   The purpose of this subchapter is to provide for the
installation of listed rapid entry key boxes, hazardous materials cabinets,
key switches, security padlocks, and fire sprinkler security connection caps,
for use by the Fire Department to gain access to a structure that poses a
safety threat due to alarm or any other action as deemed necessary by the
Fire Chief or his or her designee.



   (B)   Many properties are equipped with automatic alarm systems
and/or sprinkler/standpipe systems, and these automatic systems may cause the
fire companies of the Frankfort Fire Department to be summoned at a time when
the building or business is not occupied or when then occupant is not
available to provide entry for the Fire Department; and



   (C)   The city wishes to prevent damage from forceful entry into
structures and provide swift entry into structures by the Fire Department; and



   (D)   The Indiana Fire Code provides that any Fire Department may
require certain occupancies to maintain a rapid access system as prescribed
by the Fire Department: the Frankfort Fire Department finds a need to
establish such a rapid entry system for the City of Frankfort, and any areas
covered by the Frankfort Fire Department.



(Ord. CO-03-05, passed 8-25-03; Am. Ord. 14-08, passed 8-11-14)



§ 93.076  APPLICATION.



   (A)   Mandatory key boxes for fire suppression and standpipe
systems. When a building within the Fire District is protected by a fire
sprinkler or standpipe system and/or access to or within a building, or an
area within that building, sprinkler/standpipe isolation valves, and/or
access to or within a building, or an area within that building, is unduly
difficult because of secured openings and where immediate access is necessary
for life saving or firefighting purposes, it shall be equipped with a key
box, to be installed at a location approved by the Fire Official.



   (B)   Mandatory key boxes for automatic alarm systems. When a
building is protected by an automatic alarm system and/or access to or within
a building, or an area within that building, is unduly difficult because of
secured openings, and where immediate access is necessary for life saving or
firefighting purposes, it shall be equipped with a key box, to be installed
at a location approved by the Fire Official.



   (C)   Mandatory storage cabinet. Except as otherwise permitted under
the rules of the Commission, in occupancies storing or dispensing hazardous
materials a hazardous materials cabinet may be required. This cabinet will
serve to store MSDS and other information as required.



   (D)   Automatic gates. When a property is accessed through a gate or
cross arm that impedes ingress through required fire lanes by means of a key
or swipe card, it shall be equipped with a key switch to be installed at a
location approved by the Fire Official.



   (E)   Security padlock. When a property is protected by a locked
fence or gate and where immediate access to the property is necessary for
life saving and firefighting purposes, it shall be equipped with a security
padlock to be installed at a location approved by the Fire Official. It shall
then be the responsibility of the responsible party to see that the fence or
gate is secured properly so that the security padlock is accessible.



   (F)   Construction sites. When a construction site is to be secured
by a locked fence or gate, that site will fall under division (E), during the
duration of construction or until the fence or gate is removed. The security
padlock will be obtained by placing a security deposit with the
Clerk-Treasurer in an amount set to cover replacement of security padlock
should it be lost or damaged. Once the deposit has been made, a Fire Official
will come to the construction site and explain the use of the security
padlock to any persons needing knowledge of its operation, and secure the
security padlock. It shall then be the responsibility of the construction
company to see that the fence or gate is secured properly so that the
security padlock is accessible.



   (G)   Security of Fire Department connections.  When a building is
protected by an automatic sprinkler and/or standpipe system and the Fire
Department connection is subject to vandalism, the Fire Official may require
that a security cap be installed.



   (H)   Non-applicability to particular dwellings. This chapter shall
not apply to owner occupied one and two family dwellings. Owners of single
and two family occupancies are encouraged to participate voluntarily
utilizing a residential security box. The key lock box shall be located not
less than four feet and not more than six feet above final grade.



   (I)   Key box contents. The key boxes shall contain, but not be
limited to, the following items as designated by the Fire Official:



      (1)   Labeled keys to locked points of egress, whether in
interior or exterior of such buildings;



      (2)   Labeled keys to the locked mechanical rooms;



      (3)   Labeled keys to any fence or secured areas not covered
in divisions (D), (E), or (F);



      (4)   Labeled keys to any other areas that may be required by
the Fire Official;



      (5)   A card containing the emergency contact people and phone
numbers for each occupancy;



      (6)   Floor plans of the rooms within the building may also be
required, showing locations of shut offs;



      (7)   Hazardous materials MSDSs as required; and



      (8)   Any codes used to disable alarms system.



   (J)   Alert decals.  Alert decals, approved by the Fire Official,
to alert fire companies of the presence of security features covered by this
chapter, will be displayed on any outside doors or windows as designated by
the Fire Official.



   (K)   Compliance. All newly constructed buildings, not yet occupied
or buildings currently under construction and all buildings or businesses
applying for a certificate of occupancy, and/or building permits, or vacated
building will be required to comply with this chapter. The cost of purchasing
and installing along with any cost associated with implementation of the
program at a specific property will be borne by the responsible party.



   (L)   Non-compliance. Non-compliance with this chapter will subject
the responsible party to citation and mandatory appearance in municipal
court. Continued non-compliance may result in revocation of certificate of
occupancy by Building Official.  A minimum fine of $100 up to $500 per day.



(Ord. CO-03-05, passed 8-25-03; Am. Ord. 14-08, passed 8-11-14)  Penalty,
see § 93.999



§ 93.077  IDENTIFYING NUMBERS FOR STRUCTURES.



   (A)   Identifying numbers.



      (1)   Identifying numbers are commonly referred to as house
numbers or addresses.



      (2)   An example is “301 East Clinton St.”



   (B)   Divisional streets. Main Street is the divisional street
between east and west, Clinton Street is the divisional street between north
and south.  In the case of a physical street not existing, an assumed line
will continue, providing a divisional line, where the street would have been,
extending to the corporate limits.



   (C)   Numbers required. The owner of any structure fronting any
street within the city is required to place or cause to be placed in a
conspicuous place, the assigned number of the structure plainly indicated by
appropriate figures of the size and material specified hereafter.  It shall
be unlawful for any person to take down alter, destroy, or conceal any number
assigned to any structure, or substitute an erroneous or improper number on a
structure.



   (D)   Assigning of numbers. The assigning of numbers shall be the
responsibility of the City Engineer or his or her assigned representative.
All numbers assigned by the City Engineer shall coincide to the existing
coordinate or Lyman numbering system for the city.



   (E)   Type, size, and placement. ll numbers placed upon a structure
shall be of a durable, weather resistant material such as metal or plastic,
of a size not less than three inches in height by two inches in width. Half
numbers or letters must also conform to the provisions as previously
outlined.  The number shall be plainly visible, secured to the structure at
eye level, not to exceed six feet in height from the porch or step level. The
figures shall be secured to the structure on the outside front in the
vicinity of and not to exceed two feet in distance on a horizontal plane from
the front entrance door.  In the case a front entrance door does not exist
the number must be plainly visible in some conspicuous place on the outside
front, at the required height, from the foundation.  If the number becomes
defaced, removed, destroyed, or so worn as not to be plainly visible, the
owner of the structure shall replace the number.  Script writing or letters
in lieu of numbers is prohibited. Businesses or any structure accessible to
the public, with a rear door shall also mark that door in the same fashion as
required for the front entrance.



(Ord. 14-08, passed 8-11-14)  Penalty, see § 93.999



§ 93.078  COORDINATED ENFORCEMENT.



   Whenever it shall be the responsibility of more than one official to
enforce the provisions of this chapter, it shall be the duty of the
enforcement officials to coordinate their inspections and administrative
orders so far as is possible, so that the owners and occupants of the
buildings shall not be subjected to numerous inspections, nor to multiple or
conflicting orders.



(Ord. CO-03-05, passed 8-25-03; Am. Ord. 14-08, passed 8-11-14)



ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES



§ 93.085  NOTICE OF VIOLATION.



   Under I.C. 36-8-17-9, the enforcement of 675 IAC, this chapter, or any
other provision of this chapter, which is within the jurisdiction of the Fire
Department, the Fire Inspection Division may seek the correction of any
violation or the elimination of any hazardous condition, by the methods
specified in this division or by any other appropriate remedy or procedure
provided by law.



(Ord. CO-03-05, passed 8-25-03; Am. Ord. 14-08, passed 8-11-14)



§ 93.086  DETERMINATION OF VIOLATION.



   Whenever a duly authorized inspector or investigator of the Fire
Inspection Division determines by inspection that a violation of this chapter
or a hazardous condition exists upon any premises within the Inspection
Division’s jurisdiction, the person making such determination shall issue
such orders as may be necessary for the enforcement of the fire safety laws
and ordinances governing the same and for safeguarding of life, environment
and property from fire and explosion.



(Ord. CO-03-05, passed 8-25-03; Am. Ord. 14-08, passed 8-11-14)



§ 93.087  CONVEYANCE OF INSPECTION REPORT.



   A copy of the inspection report with violation and safety
recommendations shall be served upon the owner, operator, occupant or other
person responsible for the building or property. Service of such report shall
be by personal service, by electronic mail or fax transmission, or by mailing
a copy thereof to the owner or occupant by first class mail to the owner’s
or occupant’s last know address pursuant to I.C. 4-21.5-3.



(Ord. CO-03-05, passed 8-25-03; Am. Ord. 14-08, passed 8-11-14)



§ 93.088  IMMINENT DANGER.



   The Fire Inspector may order the operation or use stopped, or the
evacuation, of any premises, building or vehicle or portion thereof under
I.C. 36-8-17-9 when it is determined that conduct or conditions of the
property:



   (A)   Present a clear and immediate hazard of death or serious
bodily injury to any person other than a trespasser;



   (B)   Are prohibited without a permit, registration, certification,
release, authorization, variance, exemption, or other license required under
I.C. 22-14 or another statute administered by the Department of Fire and
Building Services and the license has not been issued; or



   (C)   Will conceal a violation of law.



(Ord. CO-03-05, passed 8-25-03; Am. Ord. 14-08, passed 8-11-14)



§ 93.089  DUTY TO CORRECT VIOLATIONS.



   In the event of imminent danger as defined in § 93.088  above, the
owner or person in control of any premises or building upon which a violation
or hazard exists shall:



   (A)   Cease and correct the violation;



   (B)   Protect persons and property from the hazards of the violation
and correct the violation; or



   (C)   Require persons to leave the area that is affected by a
violation and prohibit persons from entering the area until the violation is
corrected.



(Ord. CO-03-05, passed 8-25-03; Am. Ord. 14-08, passed 8-11-14)  Penalty,
see § 93.999



§ 93.090  VARIANCES.



   (A)   An owner or occupant requesting a variance from state adopted
fire and building laws as set forth by I.C. 22-13-2-11 shall apply for such
with the Commission in accordance with the 675 IAC 12-5.



   (B)   An owner or occupant requesting a variance from the provisions
of this chapter that are not part of the rules of the Commission as set forth
by I.C. 22-13-2-11 shall apply in writing to the Fire Inspector. The granting
of a variance shall be considered only upon the written application of the
owner of the property, stating that:



      (1)   Practical difficulties have been encountered in the
implementation of specific requirements of this chapter;



      (2)   Compliance with specific requirements of this chapter
will cause unnecessary hardship to the owner; and



      (3)   The owner desires to take advantage of new methods or
equipment which are recognized as adequate for the purpose for which they are
to be substituted.



   (C)   A variance may be granted only if the Fire Inspector
determines in writing that:



      (1)   The requested use or modification will conform with
fundamental requirements for safety; and



      (2)    The granting of the variance does not increase the risk
of fire or danger to the public. A copy of any variance granted shall be
retained by the Fire Prevention Division.



   (D)   A variance shall be enforced in the same manner as an order
issued under this chapter.



   (E)   Whenever the Bureau learns that an owner is in violation of
the terms of a variance issued pursuant to this section, the Fire Inspector
may order compliance as provided in a variance or with this code.



(Ord. CO-03-05, passed 8-25-03; Am. Ord. 14-08, passed 8-11-14)



§ 93.091  ORDERS TO CORRECT VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   If an owner or occupant fails to comply with an inspection
report issued pursuant to this chapter or a variance issued pursuant to this
chapter, the Fire Prevention Division may issue an order to compel compliance
with the provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   The failure of the Fire Prevention Division to inspect or to
issue an order in accordance with this chapter shall not constitute approval
of any violation or noncompliance with the provisions of this chapter.



   (C)   Any order issued pursuant to this section shall be served upon
the owner, operator, occupant or other person responsible for the building or
property.  Service of such order shall be by personal service, or by
affixing a copy thereof in a conspicuous place at the entrance of the
building or premises and by mailing a copy thereof to the owner or occupant
by first class mail to the owner’s or occupant’s last known address
pursuant to I.C. 4-21.5-3.



(Ord. CO-03-05, passed 8-25-03; Am. Ord. 14-08, passed 8-11-14)  Penalty,
see § 93.999



§ 93.092  ORDER FORBIDDING OCCUPANCY.



   (A)   The Fire Chief or his or her authorized representative is
empowered to issue an order forbidding the occupancy of any structure or part
of any structure, in accordance with I.C. 36-8-17-9.



   (B)   The Fire Chief or his or her authorized representative, is
empowered to issue an order forbidding continued construction of a building
or structure when the building, structure or property under development is in
violation of state or local fire prevention codes and continued work will:



      (1)   Conceal a violation of law;



      (2)   Be inaccessible to servicing Fire Department apparatus;
or



      (3)   Provide insufficient water supply as required by this
chapter.



   (C)   The order forbidding occupancy or continued construction shall
be in writing, specifying whether it is applicable to the entire structure,
part of structure, or the property under development. The order shall state
the reason for issuance and the conditions under which the structure, part of
structure or property may be occupied or construction continued. The order
shall be posted on the structure in a conspicuous location and if
conveniently possible, shall be given to the owner of the property or his or
her agent and to any other responsible person supervising work on the
premises.



(Ord. CO-03-05, passed 8-25-03; Am. Ord. 14-08, passed 8-11-14)



§ 93.093  APPEAL FROM ORDERS.



   An owner or occupant who remains aggrieved by the decision issued
pursuant to this chapter and the matter involves a rule of the Commission,
may appeal the decision to the Commission as set forth by I.C. 36-8-17.



(Ord. CO-03-05, passed 8-25-03; Am. Ord. 14-08, passed 8-11-14)



§ 93.094  REMEDIES.



   Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter or who shall
fail to comply with any order issued under this chapter, or who shall fail to
comply with or to obtain any permit required hereunder, shall be subject to
the penalties prescribed in this chapter.  After each ten days a violation
continues, it shall constitute an additional violation, provided however that
the penalty for any violation shall not exceed $2,500.



(Ord. CO-03-05, passed 8-25-03; Am. Ord. 14-08, passed 8-11-14)



EMERGENCY OPERATIONS



§ 93.100  AUTHORITY AT FIRES AND EMERGENCIES.



   The Fire Chief, or his or her designated representative, at any fire,
explosion, or other emergency which poses imminent threat to life,
environment, or property, shall have the authority to direct operations as
may be necessary to control, extinguish, perform special operations, and
investigate the existence of hazardous conditions in connection with such
fire, explosion, or other emergency, or to take other action reasonably
necessary to contain, mitigate, or eliminate the emergency.



(Ord. CO-03-05, passed 8-25-03; Am. Ord. 14-08, passed 8-11-14)



§ 93.101  EMERGENCY LINES AND LIMITS.



   (A)   The Fire Chief, the Incident Commander, or any law enforcement
officer may establish emergency lines and limits and barricade or guard from
the general public such emergency lines and limits. The Fire Chief, the
Incident Commander, or law enforcement officer may create an area in which
only firefighters, law enforcement officers and those having a direct
interest in any property threatened by the fire, explosion, or other
emergency, or other people or agencies at the discretion of the Incident
Commander shall be admitted.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to cross such
emergency lines or limits.



(Ord. CO-03-05, passed 8-25-03; Am. Ord. 14-08, passed 8-11-14)  Penalty,
see § 93.999



§ 93.102  UNLAWFUL INTERFERENCE WITH FIRE PROTECTION EQUIPMENT, BARRIERS,
DEVICES, SIGNS AND SEALS.



   It shall be unlawful for a person to do or permit to be done any of the
following acts:



   (A)   Key box access and fire equipment keys.  To make or cause or
permit to be made or have in his or her possession any key for any key box
emergency access system, Fire Department equipment, house or building used by
the Fire Department, except upon the written order of the Fire Chief, or to
fail or refuse to surrender possession of any such key upon demand of the
Fire Chief;



   (B)   Tampering with fire protection system.  To tamper, molest,
destroy or remove or in any manner interfere with, damage or disturb any part
of the fire protection system, apparatus, equipment or devices;



   (C)   Damaging fire hose.  To drive any motor vehicle or railroad
locomotive over any fire hose laid in any street in the vicinity of any fire
or while in use for any other purpose, or in any other way interfere with the
use of or damage such hose; or



   (D)   Opening fire hydrants.  To use or operate any public or
private hydrants or valves connected to a water system intended for fire
suppression purposes without written permission from the water utility or the
servicing Fire Department. Notwithstanding the provisions of this division
(D), employees of the water utility who are authorized, members of the
servicing Fire Department, owners of private fire hydrants, and members of a
duly recognized facility fire brigade may operate hydrants and valves as part
of their assigned duties.



(Ord. CO-03-05, passed 8-25-03; Am. Ord. 14-08, passed 8-11-14)  Penalty,
see § 93.999



GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR FIRE SAFETY OF BUILDINGS



§ 93.110  FIRE SUPPRESSION AND DETECTION SYSTEMS.



   In the event a set of plans and specifications for fire protection
systems, including fire alarm system, automatic sprinkler system, standpipe
systems, and other special types of fire extinguishing or detecting systems
and appurtenances thereto is created, then such documents shall be submitted
to the Fire Department for information purposes.



(Ord. CO-03-05, passed 8-25-03; Am. Ord. 14-08, passed 8-11-14)



§ 93.111  SUPPRESSION AND DETECTION SYSTEMS PLAN REVIEW.



   (A)   Where required by Chapter 9 of the Indiana Fire Code, fire
detection and fire suppression systems shall be installed and maintained to
be in compliance with the rules of the Commission.



   (B)   Prior to the installation of a fire detection or fire
suppression system, plans shall be submitted to the Frankfort Fire Department
and Frankfort Building Services Department for approval. A plan review fee of
$25 will be charged for reviewing the plans.



(Ord. 14-08, passed 8-11-14)  Penalty, see § 93.999



§ 93.112  NOTIFICATION OF ALARM.



   Activation of a detection or suppression system or tampering with the
system shall cause an alarm to be transmitted to a constantly attended alarm
receiving station, who will notify the Frankfort Fire Department through
Clinton County Central Dispatch.



(Ord. 14-08, passed 8-11-14)



§ 93.113  PORTABLE FIRE EXTINGUISHERS AND WHERE REQUIRED.



   (A)   Except for private dwellings, portable fire extinguishers
shall be installed and maintained in all occupancies built and placed in
service after January 1, 2004, as set forth in NFPA Standard No. 10,
currently adopted by the Commission.



   (B)   Notwithstanding other provisions of this chapter, portable
fire extinguisher equipment required for Class 1 residential apartment
buildings shall be as follows:



      (1)   A minimum 2-A, 10BC Rated Dry Chemical Extinguisher
shall be placed at intervals of 75 feet travel distance on each floor level
in all common areas of all apartments. The requirements of this division
(B)(1) are satisfied if each individual apartment shall have a minimum 2-A,
10BC Rated Dry Chemical Extinguisher installed in the unit; and



      (2)    Each laundry room and storage area shall have a minimum
2-A, 10BC Rated Dry Chemical Extinguisher. Each clubhouse and maintenance
building or room shall have a minimum 2-A, 10BC Rated Dry Chemical
Extinguisher placed at intervals of 75 feet travel distance. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of this division (B)(2), laundry rooms and
storage areas contiguous to the common corridors which have proper
extinguishers placed at intervals of 75 feet travel distance are exempt from
this division (B)(2).



      (3)   Any facility that performs a cooking process that
produces grease laden vapors, shall have, in addition to an exhaust hood
suppression system, at least one “K” class (potassium acetate, wet
chemical) portable fire extinguisher.



(Ord. CO-03-05, passed 8-25-03; Am. Ord. 14-08, passed 8-11-14)  Penalty,
see § 93.999



§ 93.114  SERVICING OF PORTABLE FIRE EXTINGUISHERS.



   Portable fire extinguishers which are required shall be serviced and
maintained as set forth in the rules of the Commission.



(Ord. CO-03-05, passed 8-25-03; Am. Ord. 14-08, passed 8-11-14)



§ 93.115  REQUIREMENTS FOR COMMERCIAL KITCHEN EXHAUST EQUIPMENT AND FIRE
PROTECTION EQUIPMENT.



   Any new installation of kitchen fire suppression equipment shall be
inspected by the Fire Prevention Division having jurisdiction prior to the
kitchen cooking equipment being placed in-service. The installing company
shall:



   (A)   Be installed as intended by the manufacturer;



   (B)   Notify the Fire Prevention Division at least 24 hours in
advance of the system being completed for system testing; and



   (C)   File with the Fire Prevention Division a form stating that the
system has been inspected, signed by both the Fire Inspector and the
installation company’s representative. This form is to be kept on file in
the Fire Prevention Division.



(Ord. CO-03-05, passed 8-25-03; Am. Ord. 14-08, passed 8-11-14)  Penalty,
see § 93.999



§ 93.116  REQUIRED WATER SUPPLY FOR FIRE PROTECTION.



   (A)   All Class 1 structures or portions of Class 1 structures
hereafter constructed shall be provided with a water supply capable of
providing the required fire flow, for fire-fighting purposes for a minimum
period of two hours. The water supply shall be from a source as set forth in
§ 903.2 of 675 IAC 22.



   (B)   In setting the requirements for fire flow, the Fire and/or the
Prevention Chief shall use Appendix B as a guide. Notwithstanding the
provisions of this division, a reduction in required fire flow of 75% is
allowed when the building is provided with an approved automatic sprinkler
system. The resulting fire flow shall not be less than 1,000 GPM at 20 PSI
residual.



   (C)   An owner or occupant who seeks a variance from an order issued
under this section may file a variance with the Indiana Fire Prevention and
Building Safety Commission as set forth in I.C. 36-8-17.



   (D)   Water supply for firefighting, minimum requirements are as
follows:



      (1)   Four inch.  Used only for wall hydrants and must be
connected to sprinkler system main supply;



      (2)   Six inch.  Used only when looped. In high hazardous
applications loop must be fed from two locations;



      (3)   Eight inch.  May be dead ended based on occupancy and
fire load, with pre- construction site inspection;



      (4)   Ten inch.  May be dead ended; or



      (5)   Twelve inch.  May be dead ended.



   (E)   Distance between sprinkler connection and supply hydrant no
more than 25 feet, unless authorized by the Frankfort Fire Department Chief
and with the following standards:



      (1)   Hydrants.  No more than 500 feet apart, hydrant will be
color coded for flow, in accordance with NFPA 291 (see table below).



 


CLASS

 

COLOR

 

FLOW



CLASS AA
 
LIGHT BLUE
 

1,500 GPM



CLASS A
 
GREEN
 

1,000 - 1,499 GPM



CLASS B
 
ORANGE
 

500-999 GPM



CLASS C
 
RED
 

LESS THAN 500 GPM




 



      (2)   Hydrant threads.  Open clockwise or right, close
counter clockwise or left National Fire Thread.



      (3)   Sprinkler connection.  Will be remote from building
unless otherwise authorized by the Fire Department Chief and the installation
will be subject to approval and inspection by the authority having
jurisdiction.  The sprinkler hook up will be Stortz one-quarter turn
connection, four inches in diameter,  with the following conditions:



         (a)   Must be accessible and unobstructed;



         (b)   Connection shall be three to five inches above
finish grade level (see figure below).



         (c)   Shall be turned downward at a 45 degree angle (see
figure below).



   [No figure provided to codifier.]



(Ord. CO-03-05, passed 8-25-03; Am. Ord. 14-08, passed 8-11-14)  Penalty,
see § 93.999



§ 93.117  FIRE HYDRANTS.



   (A)   All private fire hydrants and water mains shall be installed
and maintained as set forth in the most recent edition of NFPA Standard No.
24. The Fire Inspector, in determining location and spacing of hydrants,
shall use Appendix C as a guide.



   (B)   The proposed location of private fire hydrants to supply the
required fire flow shall be approved by the servicing Fire Department prior
to construction of any Class 1 structure.



   (C)   Whenever the provisions of this chapter require the
installation of a fire hydrant; whether on public or private property, such
hydrant shall meet the following specifications:



      (1)   It shall be equipped with a five and one-quarter inch
main valve opening;



      (2)   It shall be constructed with two two and one-half inch
hose nozzles, and shall be National Standard Thread (NST).



      (3)    It shall be equipped with one four and one-half inch
steamer nozzle with six “V” threads per inch;



      (4)   It shall be constructed to be opened by turning
clockwise a National Standard Pentagon Operating Nut;



      (5)   The source of water supply shall be buried a minimum of
five feet below the ground level at the hydrant; and



      (6)   The hydrant shall be constructed with a break-off
feature to prevent the hydrant from leaking when damaged by collision.



   (D)   Nonfunctional hydrants shall not be located within 20 feet of
any waterline easement.



   (E)   All privately owned fire hydrants shall be painted red.



   (F)   Only approved hydrant wrenches shall be used to open or close
a fire hydrant.



(Ord. CO-03-05, passed 8-25-03; Am. Ord. 14-08, passed 8-11-14)  Penalty,
see § 93.999



§ 93.118  MARKING OF FIRE PROTECTION EQUIPMENT, FIRE HYDRANTS AND ACCESS
ROADS.



   (A)   Fire protection equipment and fire hydrants shall be clearly
identified in a manner approved by the servicing Fire Department to prevent
obstruction by parking and other obstructions.



   (B)   Fire access roads shall be identified as fire lanes and the
provisions set forth in this section  shall apply.



(Ord. CO-03-05, passed 8-25-03; Am. Ord. 14-08, passed 8-11-14)  Penalty,
see § 93.999



§ 93.119  FIRE PROTECTION IN RECREATIONAL VEHICLES, MOBILE HOMES AND
MANUFACTURED HOUSING PARKS, SALE AND STORAGE LOTS.



   Recreational vehicle, mobile home and manufactured housing parks, sales
lots and storage lots, hereafter constructed or added to, shall provide and
maintain fire hydrants and access roads in accordance with 675 IAC 22, §§
902 and 903.



(CO-03-05, passed 8-25-03; Am. Ord. 14-08, passed 8-11-14)  Penalty, see §
93.999



§ 93.120  SMOKE DETECTOR REQUIREMENTS FOR DWELLING UNITS.



   (A)   A SMOKE DETECTOR shall be defined for the purposes of this
section as a device, which detects visible or invisible products of
combustion.



   (B)   Each smoke detector shall detect abnormal quantities of smoke
and products of combustion that can occur in a dwelling, shall properly
operate in the normal environmental conditions of a household, and shall be
in compliance with ANSI/US 268 - Standard for Safety Smoke Detectors for Fire
Protective Signaling Systems, or ANSI/US 217-Standard for Safety Single and
Multiple Station Smoke Detectors.



   (C)   All dwelling units within the city shall be equipped with a
minimum of one functional, properly located, labeled and listed smoke
detector as described in NFPA Standard No. 72. Smoke detectors shall be
installed outside of each separate sleeping area in the immediate vicinity of
the bedrooms and on each additional story of the family living unit,
including basements and excluding crawl spaces and unfinished attics. In
family living units with one or more split-levels where there is an
intervening door between one level and the adjacent lower level, a smoke
detector shall be installed on the lower level. In new construction, a smoke
detector also shall be installed in each sleeping room, where more than one
smoke detector is required; detectors shall be arranged so that operation of
any smoke detector causes the alarm in all smoke detectors within the
dwelling to sound.



   (D)   All equipment shall be installed in accordance with the
manufacturer’s installation requirements and recommendations. If the method
of installation is not specified by the manufacturer, the smoke detector
shall be installed on the ceiling at least four inches from the wall or on a
wall with the top of the detector not less than four inches nor more than 12
inches below the ceiling. Smoke detectors in rooms with ceiling slopes
greater than one foot in eight feet horizontally shall be located at the high
side of the room.



   (E)   Smoke detectors required by 676 IAC 13 or 675 IAC 14 shall
have power supply as specified by the respective code. All other residential
smoke detectors may be powered by an AC power source or a battery. If the
detector is solely AC powered and the manufacturer does not supply
installation specifications, it shall be directly attached to a junction box
with power supplied either from a dedicated branch circuit or the unswitched
portion of a branch circuit also used for power and lighting, such
installation shall be in accordance with 675 IAC 17.



   (F)   Where smoke alarms exist in dwelling units, the warranty for
the alarm shall be with the manufacturer.



   (G)   It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with or remove
any smoke detector, except when it is necessary for maintenance or inspection
purposes. Any smoke detector removed for repair, replacement or local
remodeling shall be reinstalled or replaced so that it is in place and
operable.



      (1)   Rental dwelling units. Each owner or manager or rental
agent of the owner is responsible for the installation of required smoke
detectors and the repair or replacement of a required smoke detector within
two business days after the owner, manager or rental agent is given written
notification of the need to repair or replace the smoke detector. Residents
shall inspect and test the smoke detectors at least monthly and replace the
battery if necessary in accordance with manufacturer’s instructions.



      (2)   Owner dwelling units. Each owner is responsible for the
installation of required smoke detectors and the repair or replacement of a
required smoke detector within two business days of finding it inoperable. An
owner shall inspect and test the smoke detectors for power in accordance with
manufacturer’s instructions at least monthly.



   (H)   A person, company, or corporation violating I.C. 22-11-18-3.5
or I.C. 32-31-7-5 or the provisions of this section shall be subject to
penalties as specified in I.C. 12-8. Each day such violation is permitted to
continue may be deemed to constitute a separate offense, provided however the
aggregate penalty for any violation shall not exceed $2,500.



(Ord. CO-03-05, passed 8-25-03; Am. Ord. 14-08, passed 8-11-14)  Penalty,
see § 93.999



§ 93.121  MEANS OF EGRESS ILLUMINATION AND SIGNS.



   (A)   Means of egress illumination shall be provided and maintained
in accordance with 676 IAC 13. Means of egress shall be illuminated and exit
signs shall be maintained when the building or structure is occupied.



   (B)   Any replacement of exit signs in existing buildings or
structures or installation of additional exit signs shall meet the
requirements of 675 IAC 12-4-9.



   (C)   Equipment providing emergency power for means of egress
illumination and exit signs shall be maintained in an operable condition.



(Ord. CO-03-05, passed 8-25-03; Am. Ord. 14-08, passed 8-11-14)  Penalty,
see § 93.999



§ 93.122  EXIT DOORS, STAIRWAYS AND ELEVATOR SIGNS.



   (A)   Exit doors shall be readily distinguishable from adjacent
construction and shall be easily recognizable as an exit door. Exit doors
shall be as set forth in the applicable rules of the Commission or its
predecessor agencies.



   (B)   Stairway identification signs shall be located at each floor
level in all buildings as set forth in the applicable rules of the Commission
or its predecessor agencies.



   (C)   Instructions for operation of elevators under fire and other
emergency conditions shall be as set forth in the applicable rules of the
Commission or its predecessor agencies.



(Ord. CO-03-05, passed 8-25-03; Am. Ord. 14-08, passed 8-11-14)  Penalty,
see § 93.999



§ 93.123  OBSTRUCTION OF THE MEANS OF EGRESS.



   (A)   Obstructions, including storage, shall not be placed in the
required width of a means of egress, except projections as allowed by the 675
IAC 13. Means of egress shall not be obstructed in any manner and shall
remain free of any material or matter where its presence would obstruct or
render the means of egress hazardous.



   (B)   Any member of a Police or Fire Department who shall discover
any fire escape or means of egress encumbered or obstructed in any manner
shall report such condition to the appropriate Fire Prevention Bureau and the
Bureau shall immediately notify the owner or occupant to remove such
encumbrance or obstacle.



(Ord. CO-03-05, passed 8-25-03; Am. Ord. 14-08, passed 8-11-14)  Penalty,
see § 93.999



§ 93.124  INSPECTION OF FIRE ESCAPES.



   Exterior fire escapes shall comply with the requirements as set forth
in 675 IAC 22. Certification by a professional engineer licensed in the state
to show compliance with this section shall be filed with the Fire Prevention
Division upon order of the Fire Prevention Chief having jurisdiction over the
premises.



(Ord. CO-03-05, passed 8-25-03; Am. Ord. 14-08, passed 8-11-14)



§ 93.125  SMOKING.



   (A)   As used in this chapter, smoke and smoking mean and include
the carrying of a lighted pipe, cigar, cigarette or tobacco in any form.



   (B)   No person shall smoke or carry a lighted match or lighter
within eight inches of the entrance of the following locations:



      (1)   Public assemblies;



      (2)   Educational occupancies;



      (3)   Institutional occupancies;



      (4)   Retail selling establishments;



      (5)   Buildings, except residential occupancies, which contain
explosives or combustible materials, any of which would be thereby exposed to
ignition; or



      (6)   When the Fire Prevention Chief designates as a “NO
SMOKING AREA” because of the fire dangers which the smoking could cause.
Provided, however, the owner of the above-enumerated places may designate
areas where smoking is permissible if such smoking room or area has been
approved by the Fire Inspector.



   (C)   No person shall smoke in any elevator.



   (D)   The owner or occupant shall post approved “NO SMOKING”
signs in each building, structure, room or place in which smoking is
prohibited. Signs shall be conspicuously and suitably located and shall be
maintained. However, this division does not apply to buildings or structures
which are smoke-free environments and are posted as such at all public and
employee entrances, and where no visible evidence of prohibited smoking
exists within the building or structure.



   (E)   No person shall remove any legally required “NO SMOKING”
sign, or smoke in any areas where such signs are posted.



(Ord. CO-03-05, passed 8-25-03; Am. Ord. 14-08, passed 8-11-14)  Penalty,
see § 93.999



§ 93.126  UNDERGROUND STORAGE TANKS AND NOTIFICATION.



   Any person who supervises, manages, or directs the installation,
retrofitting, removal or closure of underground storage tanks shall notify
the appropriate Fire Prevention Division 14 days prior to commencement of
work; however, this requirement shall not apply on emergency repair work
where 14-day notification is not possible.



(Ord. CO-03-05, passed 8-25-03; Am. Ord. 14-08, passed 8-11-14)  Penalty,
see § 93.999



EMERGENCY VEHICLE LANES



§ 93.135  INTENT.



   It is the intent of this subchapter to provide for open areas of lanes
for the purpose of unrestricted access to certain commercial properties by
the Fire and Police Departments of the city, the emergency medical services,
or other emergency services.



(Ord. 14-08, passed 8-11-14)



§ 93.136  EMERGENCY LANE STANDARDS.



   (A)   Any owner, lessee, or other person in possession or control of
private commercial property shall in accordance with this subchapter
establish emergency vehicle lanes upon their property.



   (B)   Any new commercial structures must establish emergency vehicle
lanes in accordance with this subchapter.  Furthermore, any renovation of an
existing commercial structure over 50% pursuant to the Uniform Building Code
shall be required to include the establishment of emergency lanes.



   (C)   The Chief of Police and/or Chief of the Fire Department after
approval by the Board of Public Works and Safety are authorized and required
to establish emergency vehicle lanes on private commercial property.  The
Chief shall determine the location of emergency vehicle lanes established
herein and shall notify the property owners affected thereby in writing,
together with a notation as to the number of signs necessary pursuant to
division (D) below to properly notify vehicle drivers of the existence and
location of emergency vehicle lanes.



   (D)   Emergency lanes shall be approximately 20 feet in width and
shall be marked with the appropriate  yellow marks or lines. Signs
designating the emergency lanes shall be marked “NO PARKING - EMERGENCY
LANE” and shall be placed at least every 50 feet along the curb or side of
building wherein the lanes are established. The signs shall be of such size
and marking as to conform to state law. It shall be the responsibility of the
owner of the commercial property to bear the cost of the signs and marking
for the emergency vehicle lanes.



(Ord. 14-08, passed 8-11-14)  Penalty, see § 93.999



§ 93.137  COMPLIANCE.



   The parking, stopping, or standing of any personal property including
motor vehicles, or any other means of obstructing fire lanes on private,
commercial property shall be prohibited. Any vehicle or other personal
property found to be obstructing a fire lane shall, with the consent of the
owner, lessee, or other person in possession or control of the real estate
where such an emergency vehicle lane has been established, be towed away or
removed. The owner of such personal property shall be responsible for all
tow-in charges and resulting storage charges, if any.



(Ord. 14-08, passed 8-11-14)  Penalty, see § 93.999



§ 93.138  ENFORCEMENT.



   To aid in the enforcement of this subchapter the Fire Chief and/or the
Police Chief shall obtain from each property owner, lessee, or person in
possession of property covered by this subchapter an affidavit granting
permission for and consent to towing away of any personal property which is
obstructing emergency vehicle lanes. The original affidavit shall be filed in
the Clerk-Treasurer’s office with copies on file in the Fire Chief’s and
Police Chief’s offices.



(Ord. 14-08, passed 8-11-14)  Penalty, see § 93.999



§ 93.139  EXCEPTIONS.



   Those vehicles displaying a state “disabled” or other
“disabled” identifying insignia or by the attesting officer’s certain
knowledge of the person in question being “disabled” or
“handicapped,” may occupy an emergency lane while loading or unloading.
All areas already established and marked as “HANDICAPPED PARKING” shall
remain as placed and marked, and shall not be moved or changed in any manner
as to conflict with the establishing of emergency lanes.



(Ord. 14-08, passed 8-11-14)



FAIRS AND FESTIVALS/AMUSEMENT OPERATIONS



§ 93.150  TENTS, CANOPIES AND MEMBRANE STRUCTURES.



   (A)   Tents having an area of 200 square feet or greater shall
comply with Chapter 24 of the Indiana Fire Code.



   (B)   Canopies with rigid frames used by vendors shall be anchored
by not less than 40 pounds of ballast on each leg of the structure. Ballast
can be sandbags, formed concrete anchors, concrete blocks, and the like,
fixed securely to the frame or leg of the structure. Anchoring with screws or
driven rods into the ground or paved surface is prohibited.



   (C)   Any cooking process that utilizes an open flame, creates
sparks or grease laden vapors is prohibited inside tents, canopies and
membrane structures.



   (D)   Any cooking process that grease laden vapors will require a
portable “K” class (potassium acetate wet chemical) fire extinguisher on
site.



   (E)   Compressed gas cylinders shall be secured in an upright
position that will prevent them from falling or being caused to fall over.



(Ord. 14-08, passed 8-11-14)  Penalty, see § 93.999



§ 93.151  HALLOWEEN AMUSEMENTS DEFINED.



   As used in this subchapter, HALLOWEEN AMUSEMENT means haunted house,
house of horrors, or any other activity in which persons are invited, guided,
escorted, or otherwise transported through a building or structure or portion
of a building or structure, temporary or permanent, for the purposes of
entertainment or amusement.



(Ord. CO-03-05, passed 8-25-03; Am. Ord. 14-08, passed 8-11-14)



§ 93.152  PERMIT APPLICATION; PERMIT AND FEES REQUIRED.



   (A)   No person shall operate a Halloween amusement without first
obtaining a permit from the appropriate Fire Prevention Division.



   (B)   An application for a Halloween amusement permit shall be
obtained from the appropriate Fire Prevention Bureau and shall contain the
following information.



      (1)   The name of the organization sponsoring the amusement;



      (2)   The name of person(s) in charge of the amusement
operations; and



      (3)   The period of time (dates and hours) in which the
amusement will be operated.



   (C)   The fee for each permit issued pursuant to this section shall
be $25 payable to the appropriate Fire Prevention Bureau.



(Ord. CO-03-05, passed 8-25-03; Am. Ord. 14-08, passed 8-11-14)  Penalty,
see § 93.999



§ 93.153  AMUSEMENT INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   The authorized representative of the Fire Prevention Division
shall inspect the building or structure and the Halloween amusement as often
as may be reasonably necessary for compliance with applicable fire and life
safety requirements for its intended occupancy.



   (B)   Such inspections shall occur at the start of amusement
construction, at permit issuance and during permit period.



(Ord. CO-03-05, passed 8-25-03; Am. Ord. 14-08, passed 8-11-14)



§ 93.154  PERMIT ISSUANCE AND TRANSFERABILITY.



   (A)   A Halloween amusement permit shall be issued only after the
appropriate Fire Prevention Division has had an opportunity to inspect the
subject premises, and has found that the building or structure and amusement
conforms with all applicable fire and life safety requirements as set forth
in 675 IAC 22 and this chapter.



   (B)   A permit issued pursuant to this section shall not be
transferable, and any change in use or occupancy of premises shall require a
new permit.



(Ord. CO-03-05, passed 8-25-03; Am. Ord. 14-08, passed 8-11-14)



§ 93.155  APPEAL FROM DENIAL OF PERMIT.



   When the appropriate Fire Prevention Division shall reject or refuse to
grant a permit required by this  subchapter, or when it is claimed that
provisions of this section or any other provision of this code relating
thereto do not apply, the person may appeal from the decision in writing set
forth in this chapter.



(Ord. CO-03-05, passed 8-25-03; Am. Ord. 14-08, passed 8-11-14)



§ 93.156  PERMIT PERIOD.



   Each permit granted under the provisions of this subchapter shall be
for such period as indicated on the permit and permit application; however,
any such permit shall expire 30 days after issued, of the year in which it is
issued.



(Ord. CO-03-05, passed 8-25-03; Am. Ord. 14-08, passed 8-11-14)



§ 93.157  DISPLAY OF PERMIT REQUIRED.



   A permit issued pursuant to this subchapter shall at all times be in a
conspicuous place on the premises designated in the permit and shall at all
times be subject to inspection by anyone duly authorized by the Fire or
Police Department.



(Ord. CO-03-05, passed 8-25-03; Am. Ord. 14-08, passed 8-11-14)  Penalty,
see § 93.999



FIRE REPORTING SYSTEMS



§ 93.170  SCOPE OF DIVISION.



   The division shall cover installation and maintenance of all manual and
automatic fire alarm systems in new and existing buildings. Also, faulty
and/or false alarms, and delayed notification of manual or automatic systems.



(Ord. CO-03-05, passed 8-25-03; Am. Ord. 14-08, passed 8-11-14)



§ 93.171  MONITORING OF FIRE ALARM SYSTEMS.



   Fire alarms systems required by the rules of the Commission or its
predecessor agencies shall be monitored as set forth in such rules.



(Ord. CO-03-05, passed 8-25-03; Am. Ord. 14-08, passed 8-11-14)  Penalty,
see § 93.999



§ 93.172  NOTIFICATION UPON FIRE ALARM ACTIVATION.



   (A)   The Fire Department shall be notified upon the activation of
any alarm, except in a supervised fire drill or periodic testing of system.



   (B)   Notwithstanding division (A), such notice shall be required if
the alarm is directly transmitted by private line or automatic dialer to the
Fire Department.



   (C)   The monitoring company shall notify the Fire Department
immediately when the alarm is received at all times except as stated in
division (A).



(Ord. CO-03-05, passed 8-25-03; Am. Ord. 14-08, passed 8-11-14)



§ 93.173  FAULTY ALARMS.



   (A)   Whenever a Fire Department responds to an automatic fire alarm
or medical alarm at a premise or building more than three times in a 90-day
period due to improper alarm installation, lack of maintenance, servicing, or
failure to notify the Fire Department of a drill or test, a service charge
shall be imposed.



   (B)   For a fourth response in a 90-day period, the service charge
shall be $75, for a fifth response in a 90-day period, the service charge
shall be $100, and for the sixth and subsequent responses in a 90-day period,
the service charge shall be $150.



   (C)   Such service charges shall be payable to the Fire Department.



(Ord. CO-03-05, passed 8-25-03; Am. Ord. 14-08, passed 8-11-14)



FIREWORKS



§ 93.180  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this subchapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CONSUMER FIREWORK.  As defined in I.C. 22-11-14-1, as amended.



   FIREWORK.  As defined in I.C. 22-11-14-1, as amended.



(Ord. CO-07-11, passed 8-20-07; Am. Ord. 14-08, passed 8-11-14)



§ 93.181  CERTIFICATE OF INSURANCE AND ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Fireworks and the temporary storage, use handling of
pyrotechnic special effects material used in motion pictures, television, and
theatrical and group entertainment productions shall be in accordance with
I.C. 22-11-14 and 675 IAC 22.



   (B)   A certificate of insurance conditioned for the payment of all
damages which may be caused either to a person or persons in an amount of not
less than $100,000, and to property in an amount of not less than $100,000,
by reason of the licensed display, arising from any acts of the licensee, his
or her agents, employees or subcontractors.



   (C)   A questionnaire that is available at Frankfort Fire
Headquarters must be filled out in its entirety and reviewed before approval
of a permit for a public display of fireworks.



   (D)   It shall be unlawful to conduct a public display of fireworks
prior to complying with these requirements.



(Ord. CO-03-05, passed 8-25-03; Am. Ord. 14-08, passed 8-11-14)  Penalty,
see § 93.999



§ 93.182  SALES OF CONSUMER FIREWORKS.



   (A)   A questionnaire that is available at Frankfort Fire
Headquarters must be filled out in its entirety and reviewed before approval
of a permit for the sale of consumer fireworks.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale any consumer
fireworks prior to complying with these requirements.



(Ord. 14-08, passed 8-11-14)  Penalty, see § 93.999



§ 93.183  RESTRICTIONS AS TO DATES AND TIMES.



   Consumer fireworks may only be used or discharged within the City of
Frankfort, Indiana, on the following dates and times, as provided in I.C.
22-11-14-10.5:



   (A)   Between the hours of 5:00 p.m. and 11:00 p.m. on June 29, June
30, July 1, July 2, July 3, July 5, July 6 and July 7;



   (B)   Between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight on July 4;
and



   (C)   Between the hours of 10:00 a.m. on December 31 and 1:00 a.m.
on January 1.



(Ord. CO-07-11, passed 8-20-07; Am. Ord. 14-08, passed 8-11-14)  Penalty,
see § 93.999



§ 93.184  RESTRICTIONS AS TO LOCATION.



   Consumer fireworks may not be used or discharged in any city park or on
any other property owned or occupied by the city and may be used or
discharged only as follows:



   (A)   On the property of the purchaser of the consumer fireworks;



   (B)   On the property of another who has given permission to use the
consumer fireworks; or



   (C)   At a special discharge location designated by the Fire Chief
in accordance with rules adopted by the Indiana Fire Prevention and Building
Safety Commission.



(Ord. CO-07-11, passed 8-20-07; Am. Ord. 14-08, passed 8-11-14)  Penalty,
see § 93.999



§ 93.185  ENFORCEMENT.



   The Fire Chief of the city, or his or her designee, or the Police
Department is responsible for the interpretation and civil enforcement of
this subchapter.



(Ord. CO-07-11, passed 8-20-07; Am. Ord. 14-08, passed 8-11-14)



§ 93.186  SEIZURE AND FORFEITURE OF CONSUMER FIREWORKS.



   Enforcement personnel from the Fire Department or the Police Department
may seize and dispose of consumer fireworks that are used in violation of
this subchapter.



(Ord. CO-07-11, passed 8-20-07; Am. Ord. 14-08, passed 8-11-14)



PROHIBITED ACTS



§ 93.195  FALSE ALARMS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to give or cause to be
given any false alarm of fire in the city.



(Ord. 14-08, passed 8-11-14)  Penalty, see § 93.999



§ 93.196  DRIVING OVER FIRE HOSE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any automobile, truck,
trailer, railroad car, or other vehicle over or to permit such vehicle to
drive over, any hose belonging to the Fire Department while the hose is laid
in the streets of the city during time of fire, or the practice of the Fire
Department of the city, or when such hose is laid in the streets of the city
for any other purpose.



(Ord. 14-08, passed 8-11-14)  Penalty, see § 93.999



§ 93.197  FOLLOWING EMERGENCY VEHICLES TOO CLOSELY.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any motorized vehicle in
such a manner as to be following an emergency vehicle at a distance of less
than 300 feet, while the emergency vehicle is responding to an emergency call.



(Ord. 14-08, passed 8-11-14)  Penalty, see § 93.999



§ 93.198  FAILURE TO YIELD.



   It shall be unlawful for any person operating a vehicle to fail to
yield the right of way to an emergency vehicle that has its lights and siren
operating while responding to an emergency call.



(Ord. 14-08, passed 8-11-14)  Penalty, see § 93.999



§ 93.999  PENALTY.



   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which a penalty is
not otherwise provided shall be fined not more than $250. A separate offense
shall be deemed committed on each day that a violation occurs or continues.



(Ord. CO-07-11, passed 8-20-07; Am. Ord. 14-08, passed 8-11-14)



CHAPTER 94:  SKATEBOARD PARK



Section



   94.01   Requirements



§ 94.01  REQUIREMENTS.



   The following requirements shall apply to all parks, facilities or
improvements owned, maintained, operated or situated on property owned by the
city for use by skateboarders and inline skaters:



   (A)   The city recommends that any person using the skateboard park,
which is located on property owned by the city, wear elbow pads, knee pads,
wrist pads and a helmet that meets the standard of either the American
Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) or the United States Consumer
Product Safety Commission (CPSC) or standards established by these entities
subsequent to the adoption of this section.



   (B)   Any child or children 12 years of age or under who are using
the skateboard park shall be supervised by an adult.



   (C)   Use of bicycles in the skateboard park is prohibited.



   (D)   Any person using the skateboard park must wear shoes at all
times while in the skateboard park.



   (E)   It shall be a violation of this section for any person to
create graffiti in or upon the skateboard park improvements or to engage in
tagging or the use of accelerants or wax.



   (F)   It shall be a violation of this section for any person in the
skateboard park to use profanity or to engage in horseplay, roughhousing,
violence or any potential dangerous activity.



   (G)   Alcoholic beverages, tobacco products, firearms or weapons of
any kind are expressly forbidden in the skateboard park on city-owned
property.



   (H)   No skating shall be permitted on surfaces containing water,
snow or ice. Further, it shall be a violation of this section for any person
to cause salt or sand to be applied to the skateboard park facility or to use
any means whatsoever for removal of snow or ice from the facility.



   (I)   No person shall use, enter, or be on a skateboard park outside
of the hours of operation posted in the skateboard park.



   (J)   No person shall use, enter, be on or remain in the skateboard
park after having been notified by the Superintendent of the Parks Department
or by the Frankfort Police Department that they must leave the skateboard
park or that they are barred from use of the skateboard park as a result of
an unsafe use of the skateboard park, or failure or refusal to obey the rules
pertaining to the park's use.



   (K)   No person shall enter or exit the skateboard park by any means
other than by walking through a gate, turnstile, door, or other means
provided and intended by the city for ingress or egress into the skateboard
park.



   (L)   No person at, in or on the skateboard park shall violate any
rule or regulation developed and adopted by the Superintendent of the Parks
Department and posted on signs at the skateboard park or any other applicable
rule established by this section.



   (M)   Any person determined by the Chief of Police of the City of
Frankfort or his or her authorized designee to have been in violation of
divisions (C) through (K), above, shall be subject to citation for an
infraction and shall be subject to a fine of $25 for a first violation and
$50 for a second or any subsequent violation.  Violators shall be cited to
the Frankfort City Court for adjudication of their citation.  In addition to
or in lieu of any fine, provided for herein, the Chief of Police of the city
or his or her authorized designee may temporarily or permanently bar the
violator from using the skateboard park for any violation of divisions (C)
through (K), above, or for violation of any rule provided for under division
(L), above.



   (N)   The parent or legal guardian having control or custody of an
un-emancipated minor whose conduct violates this section shall be jointly and
severally liable with the minor for the amount of any fine and court costs
imposed pursuant to this section.



(Ord. 06-19, passed 7-10-06)



CHAPTER 95:  NOISE CONTROL



Section



   95.01   Definitions



   95.02   Vehicle noise limits



   95.03   Excessive noise by vehicles



   95.04   Exemptions



   95.05   Violations; procedure



   95.06   Evidence of excessive noise in criminal prosecution



 



   95.99   Penalty



§ 95.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   A-WEIGHTED SOUND LEVEL.  The sound pressure level in decibles as
measured on a sound level meter using the A-weighting network.  The level so
read is designated db (A) or dbA.



   DECIBEL (db).  This means a unit of sound pressure measurement as
defined by the American National Standards Institute bulletin.



   LIGHT MOTOR VEHICLES.  Any automobile, van, motorcycle, motor-driven
cycle, motor scooter, dune buggy, snowmobile, all-terrain vehicles, go-carts,
minibikes, trail bikes, or trucks with gross vehicular  weight of less than
8,000 pounds.



   MODIFIED AND DEFECTIVE EXHAUST SYSTEMS.  An exhaust system in which
the original noise abatement devices have been physically altered causing
them to be less effective in reducing noise or the original noise abatement
devices have either been removed or replaced by noise abatement devices which
are not as effective in reducing noise as their original devices, or devices
have been added to the original noise abatement devices such that noise
levels are increased.



   NOISE LEVEL.  The A-weighted sound level produced by a motor vehicle.



   SOUND LEVEL METER.  An instrument which includes a microphone,
amplifier, RMS detector, integrator or time averager, output meter, and
weighting networks used to measure sound pressure levels.  The instrument
shall be used for measurement of the intensity of sound and calibrated in
decibels as standardized by the American Standard Association.  Readings
shall be made on a db (A) scale.



   TRAFFIC NOISE.  Sound made by a motor vehicle operated either on the
public right-of-way or private property.



(Ord. PO-81-1, passed 5-11-81)



§ 95.02  VEHICLE NOISE LIMITS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to cause noise levels from the
operation or use of light motor vehicles in excess of 80 db (A) in any area
within the corporate limits of the city, at any time.  The noise level limit
shall be measured on a distance of not less than 15 feet from the noise
source.



(Ord. PO-81-1, passed 5-11-81)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.03  EXCESSIVE NOISE BY VEHICLES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, cause to operate, or
use a light motor vehicle such as to cause excessive noise levels as a result
of a defective or modified exhaust system, or as a result of unnecessary
rapid acceleration, deceleration, revving or tire squeal, or as a result of
the operation of audio devices such as but not limited to radios,
phonographs, and tape players on or from the vehicle.



(Ord. PO-81-1, passed 5-11-81)  Penalty, see § 95.99



Cross-reference:



   Unnecessary vehicle noise in drive-in restaurants or on private parking
lots prohibited, see § 131.29



§ 95.04  EXEMPTIONS.



   The following are exempted from the provisions of this chapter.



   (A)   Sound emitted from sirens of authorized emergency vehicles.



   (B)   Lawnmowers, garden tractors, and similar home power tools when
properly muffled.



   (C)   Burglar alarms on light motor vehicles of the electronic
signaling type which transmit an audible signal to a receiver which can be
carried by the owner or operator of the vehicle.



   (D)   Celebrations on Halloween and legal holidays and celebrations
in connection with duly authorized parades.



(Ord. PO-81-1, passed 5-11-81)



§ 95.05  VIOLATIONS; PROCEDURE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate the provisions of this
chapter.  Whenever any police officer makes an arrest for violation of this
chapter he shall take down the name, address, operator's license number, and
registration number of the vehicle of the alleged violator in writing on the
form provided by the Police Department, a citation for a violation of this
chapter.



(Ord. PO-81-1, passed 5-11-81)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.06  EVIDENCE OF EXCESSIVE NOISE IN CRIMINAL PROSECUTION.



   In any criminal prosecution for a violation of this chapter, the court
may admit evidence of a noise level as tested by a sound level meter which
meets or exceeds the American National Standards Institute (AMSI)
specifications or type II equipment.  A person shall be found guilty of
violation of this chapter for the emission of the excessive noise from or on
any motor vehicle source in excess of the limitations established herein.



(Ord. PO-81-1, passed 5-11-81)



§ 95.99  PENALTY.



   Any person upon conviction of a violation of this chapter shall be
punished by a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $500.



(Ord. PO-81-1, passed 5-11-81)



CHAPTER 96:  NUISANCES



Section



General Provisions



   96.01   Definitions



   96.02   Buildings unfit for habitation



   96.03   Open, uncovered pits or cellars



   96.04   Accumulations of junk or litter



   96.05   Machinery, refrigerators accessible to public



   96.06   Loud, unnecessary, or unusual noise



   96.07   Abatement



Junk Cars



   96.15   Abandoned or junk vehicles as a nuisance; with exceptions



   96.16   Removal from private property



   96.17   Removal from public property



Noxious Weeds



   96.25   Growth prohibited



   96.26   Violation notice



   96.27   City to abate



   96.28   Continuous abatement



   96.29   Appeal of costs



   96.30   Filing of lien; penalties



Code Enforcement Officers



   96.40   Enforcement violation



 



   96.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Loud or odorous animals, see § 90.04



   Non-maintained or odorous privies, septic tanks, and the like, see §
51.006



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 96.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ABANDONED VEHICLE and JUNK VEHICLE.



      (1)   A vehicle located on public property illegally.



      (2)   A vehicle left on public property continuously without
being moved for three days.



      (3)   A vehicle located on public property in such a manner as
to constitute a hazard or obstruction to the movement of pedestrian or
vehicle traffic on a public right-of-way.



      (4)   A vehicle that has remained on private property without
the consent of the owner, or person in control, of that property, for more
than 48 hours.



      (5)   A vehicle from which there has been removed the engine,
transmission, or differential or that is otherwise partially dismantled or
inoperable and left on public property.



      (6)   A vehicle that has been removed by a towing service or a
public agency upon request of an officer enforcing a statute or ordinance
other than this chapter, if the vehicle once impounded is not claimed or
redeemed by the owner or his agent within 15 days of its removal.



      (7)   A vehicle that is six or more model years old and
mechanically inoperable, and is left on private property continuously in a
location visible from public property for more than 30 days.



(I.C. 9-9-1.1-2)



   PUBLIC NUISANCE.  Any condition found to exist upon any public or
private property within the corporate limits of the city, which is a danger
to the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the city. 
PUBLIC NUISANCES shall include but not be limited to those nuisances
enumerated in the following sections of this chapter. ('75 Code, §  42.01)



§ 96.02  BUILDINGS UNFIT FOR HABITATION.



   Any building or part of a building which by reason of its lack of
repair, unsanitary condition, its being infested with rats, vermin, or
insects, or which for any reason is unfit for human habitation or constitutes
a source of danger to the health and safety of the inhabitants of this city,
shall constitute a public nuisance and shall be unlawful as such.



('75 Code, §  42.03)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.03  OPEN, UNCOVERED PITS OR CELLARS.



   Open or uncovered cellars, cisterns, pits, wells, or vaults shall
constitute a public nuisance and be unlawful as such.



('75 Code, §  42.04)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.04  ACCUMULATIONS OF JUNK OR LITTER.



   All accumulations of brush, junk, litter, rubbish, tin cans, or trash
of any kind shall constitute a public nuisance and shall be unlawful as such.



('75 Code, §  42.05)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.05  MACHINERY, REFRIGERATORS ACCESSIBLE TO PUBLIC.



   Any machinery not connected with the operation of a household or
business; or any equipment, including but not limited to refrigerators or
freezers, with doors intact; in any open or unfenced area, or in any building
or structure to which the public has access, shall constitute a public
nuisance and shall be unlawful as such.



('75 Code, §  42.06)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.06  LOUD, UNNECESSARY, OR UNUSUAL NOISE.



   The making or continuing, or the causing or aiding to be made or
continued, of any loud, unnecessary, or unusual noises which either annoy,
injure, or endanger the comfort, repose, health, or safety of others, unless
the making or continuing of the noise is justified or necessary to protect
life or property, shall constitute a public nuisance and shall be unlawful as
such.



('75 Code, §  42.07)  Penalty, see § 96.99



Cross-reference:



   Loud or excessively noisy animals as public nuisance, see § 90.04



§ 96.07  ABATEMENT.



   (A)   Whenever any nuisance shall be found to exist upon any public
or private property within the city, the Chief of Police or the Building
Inspector of the city shall issue an order to the person maintaining the
nuisance or to the owner or occupant of the premises to abate the nuisance
within three days if upon public property or ten days if upon private
property.  If any person, firm, or corporation so notified shall neglect,
fail, or refuse to comply with the requirements of the order by abating the
nuisance within the specified time, the person, firm, or corporation shall be
punishable under§ 96.99.



   (B)   In the event of refusal or neglect of the notified offender to
obey the order and abate the nuisance as ordered, the Chief of Police or the
Building Inspector shall have the unlawful condition abated.  The costs and
expenses of the abatement shall be a lien upon the real estate of the person
maintaining the nuisance, and shall be placed on the tax duplicates by the
auditor and collected as taxes are collected.



('75 Code, § 42.17)



JUNK CARS



§ 96.15  ABANDONED OR JUNK VEHICLES AS A NUISANCE; WITH EXCEPTIONS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to store or allow to remain in the
open, on public or private property within the city, any disassembled, or
unoperable and unlicensed, or any junked, wrecked, or abandoned motor vehicle
for a period of five days on public property or a period of ten days on
private property, unless it is in connection with an automotive sales or
repair business enterprise which operates under duly issued and exhibited
store license and is located in the properly zoned area.



(Ord. CO-92-5, passed 2-10-92)  Penalty, see § 96.99



Statutory reference:



   Abandoned vehicles, see I.C. 9-22-1 et seq.



§ 96.16  REMOVAL FROM PRIVATE PROPERTY.



   Whenever the Frankfort City Engineer or City Police Officer shall find
any such vehicle placed or stored in the open upon private property within
the city, he or she shall issue an order to the owner of said vehicle to
remove said vehicle within ten days.  Notice of such order shall be placed
upon the vehicle and copies of the notice will be served upon the owner of
said vehicle or any adult occupying the real estate on which the vehicle is
located, if his or her whereabouts is unknown.  If no owner or occupant of
the real estate of the vehicle can be located, a notice affixed to any
building on the real estate shall constitute notice to the owner or the
occupant of the real estate and to the owner of the vehicle.  If there is no
building on the real estate, the notice may be affixed elsewhere on the real
estate.  If the vehicle is not removed within ten days pursuant to such
order and notice, and if the order is not stayed by the issuing officer
pursuant to a written request showing good cause for permanent or temporary
stay, the City Engineer or City Police Officer shall cause the vehicle to be
removed by a junk or salvage yard or wrecker service. The cost and expense of
such removal to be paid by the owner of said vehicle.  The owner of said
vehicle will be issued a ticket into Frankfort City Court for violation of
said order.



(Ord. CO-92-5, passed 2-10-92)



§ 96.17  REMOVAL FROM PUBLIC PROPERTY.



   Whenever the Frankfort City Engineer or City Police Officer shall find
any such vehicle placed or stored in the open upon public property within the
city, he or she shall issue an order to the owner of the vehicle to remove
within three days.  Notice of such order shall be placed upon the vehicle. 
If such vehicle is not removed within three days pursuant to such order and
notice, the City Engineer or City Police Officer shall cause the vehicle
removed by a junk or salvage yard or wrecker service, the cost and expense to
be paid by the owner of the vehicle.  The owner of said vehicle would also
be cited into Frankfort City Court for violation of said order.



(Ord. CO-92-5, passed 2-10-92)



NOXIOUS WEEDS



§ 96.25  GROWTH PROHIBITED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any lot, parcel or tract
of real estate located within the corporate limits of the city to allow,
cause or permit the excessive growth of grass or the growth of weeds or other
rank vegetation, or the excessive accumulation of any such substances, in or
upon any portion of such lots, parcels or tracts of real estate.



   (B)   (1)   For purposes of this subchapter, the term WEEDS OR
OTHER RANK VEGETATION shall include, but not be limited to the following
weeds exceeding seven inches in height: Canada Thistle, Field Bindweed,
Johnson Grass and Sorghum Almum, Perennial Peppergrass, Perennial Sowthistle,
Quackgrass, Russian Knapweed, Wild Garlic and Wild Onion, Bitter Wintercress,
Buckhorn, Cocklebur, Corncockle, Curley Dock, Dodder, Eastern Black
Nightshade, Field Peppergrass, Giant Foxtail, Horsenettle, Mustard, Oxeyed
Daisy, and Pennycress.



      (2)   The term WEEDS OR OTHER RANK VEGETATION shall also
include grass exceeding seven inches in height, but shall not include
agricultural crops such as hay and pasture.



('75 Code, § 42.12)  (Ord. 177, passed 9-l-64; Am. Ord. CO-06-15, passed
6-26-06; Am. Ord. 12-09, passed 9-10-12)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.26  VIOLATION NOTICE.



   In the event of a violation of § 96.25, the City Building Inspector or
the Superintendent of the Frankfort Street Department, or their respective
designees, shall issue a written notice (“violation notice”) to the owner
of record of the real estate at the address most recently shown in the tax
records of the Office of the Clinton County Auditor.  If there are multiple
owners of the property, such notice shall be sent to at least one of such
owners of the property. If the tax records reflect an address different from
the street address of the property in question, then a written notice may
also be delivered to or mailed by ordinary mail to the occupant or tenant of
the property at the street address of the property. The violation notice
shall identify the violation and order the landowner to correct the same
within ten days from the date the notice is served. Notice shall be
considered served when delivered to or when delivery has been attempted at
the owner’s address.



(Ord. CO-06-15, passed 6-26-06; Am. Ord. 12-09, passed 9-10-12)



§ 96.27  CITY TO ABATE.



   If the landowner fails to timely abate each violation set forth in a
violation notice, employees of the city or the city’s agents or independent
mowing contractors, may enter upon the real property for the purpose of
mowing, cutting or removing the grass, weeds or other vegetative
substances.  In such case, the city shall prepare a statement or invoice as
to its costs and expenses incurred in taking such action and shall mail the
statement or invoice by ordinary mail to the landowner at the owner’s
address as used in § 96.26.  The landowner shall within 30 days from date
of such mailing pay the amount shown on the invoice to the Clerk-Treasurer of
the city. Any property owner who disputes the violation notice may appeal the
notice by filing a written notice of appeal with the Building Inspector at
301 E. Clinton Street, Frankfort, Indiana, no later than five days after such
notice is served. Any appeal shall be heard before the Board of Public Works
and Safety of the city.



(Ord. CO-06-15, passed 6-26-06; Am. Ord. 12-09, passed 9-10-12)



§ 96.28  CONTINUOUS ABATEMENT.



   If an initial violation notice was provided by certified mail or
equivalent service under § 96.26, a continuous abatement notice may be
posted at the property at the time of abatement instead of by certified mail
or equivalent service as required under § 96.26. A continuous abatement
notice serves as notice to the real property owner that each subsequent
violation during the same year for which the initial notice of the violation
was provided may be abated by the city.



(Am. Ord. CO-06-15, passed 6-26-06; Am. Ord. 12-09, passed 9-10-12) 
Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.29  APPEAL OF COSTS.



   Any invoice or statement issued pursuant to § 96.27 or § 96.28 of
this subchapter may be appealed to the Board of Public Works and Safety if
written notice of appeal is filed with the Clerk-Treasurer of the city within
14 calendar days after the statement or invoice has been mailed to the
landowner.  In such event of appeal, the city shall notify the owner of the
place, date and time of the hearing on appeal before the Board.



(Ord. CO-06-15, passed 6-26-06; Am. Ord. 12-09, passed 9-10-12)



§ 96.30  FILING OF LIEN; PENALTIES.



   If any statement or invoice for mowing or removal is not paid within
the 30 days provided for in §§ 96.27 and 96.28, the city may certify the
charge or charges and cause the same to be recorded as a lien in the Clinton
County records and to have them placed on the tax duplicate in the Office of
the Clinton County Auditor to be collected as taxes and disbursed to the
general fund of the city.  In addition, any property owner determined to be
in violation of this subchapter shall be subject to the penalties provided in
§ 96.99.



(Ord. CO-06-15, passed 6-26-06; Am. Ord. 12-09, passed 9-10-12)



CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS



§ 96.40  ENFORCEMENT VIOLATION.



   It shall be unlawful and a violation of the municipal code for any
person, firm, corporation or organization to intentionally interfere with any
Code Enforcement Official in the carrying our of such official's enforcement
duties under this subchapter.  For the purpose of this section, the term
"Code Enforcement Official" shall mean and include any employee of the city
who is authorized by the city to enforce the provisions of this subchapter
and is acting within the scope of his or her employment.



(Ord. 06-9, passed 2-13-06)  Penalty, see § 96.99



Cross-reference:



   Provisions concerning interference with city officials, see § 131.02



§ 96.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person, firm, or corporation who shall violate a provision
of this chapter for which another penalty is not provided, shall upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a fine as follows:



      (1)   For a first offense, the fine shall be not less than
$100 nor more than $250, together with court costs, as determined by the
court.



      (2)   For a second offense of the same nature and occurring on
the same property, and within 24 months of a first offense, the fine shall be
not less than $250 nor more than $500, together with court costs, as
determined by the court.



      (3)   For the third offense of the same nature and occurring
on the same property and within 24 months of the second of such offense, the
fine shall be not less than $500 nor more than $2,500, together with court
costs, as determined by the court.



   (B)   For purposes of this section as to penalties, each day that a
violation continues after due notice has been served, shall constitute a
separate offense and each motor vehicle shall constitute a separate
offense.  ('75 Code, §  42.16)  (Ord. 177, passed 9-1-64; Am. Ord. 06-7,
passed 2-13-06)



   (B)   Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any of the
provisions of §§ 96.15 through 96.17, or who interferes in any way with the
due process of enforcement of any of the provisions of this chapter, or who
does not obey within the time fixed any order issued pursuant to §§ 96.16
or 96.17 shall be subject to a fine of not less than $10 nor more than
$500.  Each motor vehicle shall constitute a separate offense and a separate
offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during which a violation
occurs or continues.  ('75 Code, §  42.15)  (Ord. 184, passed 2-1-66)



(Ord. PO-77-2, passed 12-21-77)



CHAPTER 97:  STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



Section



General Provisions



   97.01   Ice, snow, or dirt accumulations



   97.02   Building materials on streets or sidewalks



   97.03   Erection of poles or posts



   97.04   Vehicles or animals on pavement



   97.05   Tree-trimming requirements



Excavations



   97.10   Permit required; fee



   97.11   (Reserved)



   97.12   Bond; insurance



   97.13   Completion of work



   97.14   Accident prevention



   97.15   Specifications for refilling excavation



   97.16   Duty of applicant to repair; failure to repair



   97.17   Authority of Building Inspector



   97.18   Emergency excavation



Moving of Buildings



   97.25   Permit required



   97.26   Application; fees



   97.27   Bond



   97.28   Applicant liable for damages



   97.29   Route designation



   97.30   Authority of Board of Public Works and Safety



Complete Streets



   97.40   Definition



   97.41   Complete Streets improvements



   97.42   Exceptions



 



   97.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Painting, marking on utility poles, pavement, see § 130.02



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 97.01  ICE, SNOW, OR DIRT ACCUMULATIONS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation having the
management or control, or being the owner, occupant, or agent of any lot,
parcel of ground, or tract of land abutting upon any improved street in the
city, to cause, or suffer or permit the growth, accumulation, or existence of
snow, ice, dirt, or other matter on the pavement of any public sidewalk on
the street adjoining the lot, parcel of ground, or tract of land.



('75 Code, §  46.01)  (Ord. 177, passed 9-1-64)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.02  BUILDING MATERIALS ON STREETS OR SIDEWALKS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to place
building materials in or upon any street, alley, gutter, or sidewalk within
the city without first having obtained the permission of the Street
Superintendent.  Where such permission is granted, the materials shall not
unnecessarily encumber the streets, alleys, gutters, and sidewalks, and not
more than one-half of the width of any such street, alley, gutter, or
sidewalk shall be obstructed.



('75 Code, §  46.02)  (Ord. 27, passed 6-7-1888)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.03  ERECTION OF POLES OR POSTS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to erect or
place any pole or post in any of the streets or alleys within the corporate
limits of the city, or to make any hole or excavation in any of the streets
or alleys of the city for the purpose of erecting any pole or post unless the
excavation or the erection of the pole or post is made by virtue of an order
of the Common Council, under the direction of the City Engineer upon
petition, therefor stating the size, height, and purpose of the pole or post
and location.



('75 Code, §  46.05)  (Ord. 53, passed 7-17-1896)  Penalty, see § 97.99



Cross-reference:



   Posting handbills, advertisements on poles or posts, see § 130.01



§ 97.04  VEHICLES OR ANIMALS ON PAVEMENT.



   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to drive any vehicle, or
to lead or ride any horse or non- domestic animal upon or across any sidewalk
which is improved by paving, grading, graveling, or planking or upon or
across any unfinished sidewalk prepared for paving, graveling, or planking
during the progress of any work thereon.



('75 Code, §  46.06)  (Ord. 42, passed 4-7-1893)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.05  TREE-TRIMMING REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   All persons owning real estate adjacent to, or adjoining with
any of the dedicated rights-of-way for city streets and alleys within the
corporate limits of the city, are required to mow and maintain the grass and
care for and maintain all trees in the area between the extension of their
respective property lines to the centerline of the street or alley
rights-of-way.  (Ord. 86-21, passed 10-27-86)



   (B)   It shall be the duty of persons owning real estate adjacent to
any street or avenue within the corporate limits of the city on which shade
trees have been or may hereafter be planted to cause the trees to be properly
trimmed so that no limbs or foliage shall extend nearer than eight feet of
the adjacent sidewalk, gutter, or street.



   (C)   Whenever any property owner shall fail for ten days to trim
the trees, after being notified by the City Street Superintendent, the Street
Superintendent shall cause the trees to be trimmed at the expense of the
property owner, and the amount of the expense shall be a lien against the
real estate affected thereby.



('75 Code, §  46.07)  (Ord. 1-193, passed 8-7-1896)  Penalty, see § 
97.99



EXCAVATIONS



§ 97.10  PERMIT REQUIRED; FEE.



   (A)   No person, firm or corporation shall make any opening or
excavation in any street, alley, sidewalk or other public place or remove any
pavement from any street or alley, except as herein provided until he or she
has made application for a permit to do so nor until having received a
written permit from the city Building Inspector's office for each cut to be
made.



   (B)   The issuance of a permit under this section shall require
payment of a fee to the city determined as follows: $4 per square foot of
area excavated, with a maximum fee of $500, and a minimum fee of $50. If
additional excavation is required after the permit is issued, there shall be
an additional fee paid to the city in the sum of $4 per square foot of
additional excavation. The foregoing permit fees include any required
inspection by the Office of the Building Inspector during regular working
hours. If an inspector should be required outside of normal working hours,
the contractor shall reimburse the city for city's expenses incurred for
overtime pay and benefits contributions.



   (C)   Applications for permits shall be filed with the city Building
Inspector's office in such form as the Building Inspector shall provide.



   (D)   The Common Council hereby grants to the city Building
Inspector the authority to enforce the provisions of this section as an agent
of the city.



   (E)   Activities that shall require a right-of-way permit shall
include but not be limited to the following:



      (1)   The extension of services to a new development in the
existing right-of-way;



      (2)   The extension of services to existing homes in the
right-of-way;



      (3)   The upgrade of service to single user within the
right-of-way;



      (4)   Directional bores occurring within the right-of-way;



      (5)   Parallel, diagonal, or perpendicular cuts through the
existing pavement of the right-of-way;



      (6)   The installation of overhead services within the
right-of-way, excluding those that fall under the exemption provided for in
§ 97.15(B);



      (7)   Emergency excavations in the right-of-way performed
under I.C. 8-1-26-19;



      (8)   Open trenching;



      (9)   The addition of auxiliary lanes (i.e. acceleration and
deceleration lanes or any other traffic control devices) within the
right-of-way;



      (10)   The installation or repair of driveways or sidewalks
that require curb cuts.



(Ord. CO-88-15, passed 10-24-88; Am. Ord. 10-09A, passed 8-23-10)  Penalty,
see § 97.99



§ 97.11  (RESERVED).



§ 97.12  BOND; INSURANCE.



   (A)   Whenever any application for a permit under this subchapter
has been approved by the City Building Inspector, the City Clerk shall
require the applicant to give bond in a sum equal to the cost of the work as
determined and endorsed on the application by the City Building Inspector,
but at no time to be fixed at a sum less than $1,000.  Such bond shall be
conditioned on the restoration of the place where the work is to be done in
as good condition structurally as before the work was done and in the manner
provided by this subchapter and shall maintain it in such condition for a
period of one year after completion of the work.  The bond shall be for a
period of two years.



      (1)   In addition thereto, the applicant shall file with the
bond a certificate of insurance in the amount of $300,000 for property damage
resulting from any one incident and for bodily injury or death to any one
person, with a limit, however, of $5,000,000 for bodily injury or death
resulting from any one incident.



      (2)   The certificate shall carry an endorsement which shall
extend the policy to work to be done under the permit and shall indemnify 
and save the city and any utilities thereof harmless of and from any and all
losses, claims, demands, payments, suits, actions, recoveries and judgements
of every nature and description made, brought or recovered against the
permittee and city or either of them by reason of any act or omission of
permittee, his agents or employees or subcontractor thereof.



   (B)   In lieu of a bond and certificate of insurance as above
provided any person, firm or corporation who contemplates more than one dig
or excavation in any one year may file with the City Clerk a yearly bond as
above provided, except in the penal sum of $10,000 and a yearly certificate
of insurance as above provided.  However, nothing shall relieve such person,
firm or corporation from securing a permit and approval for each such dig or
excavation prior thereto as above provided.



(Ord. CO-88-15, passed 10-24-88)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.13  COMPLETION OF WORK.



   The holder of any permit granting permission to dig, excavate, or
remove pavement in any street, alley, sidewalk, or public place as provided
in this subchapter shall complete the work and repair the place or places
where the work was done within the time specified in such permit.  The City
Building Inspector, however, may extend the time for completion of the work
for which the permit was granted and any such extension shall be noted on the
original permit on file in the City Clerk's Office.



(Ord. CO-88-15, passed 10-24-88) 



§ 97.14  ACCIDENT PREVENTION.



   The permittee shall take all necessary measures to protect the work and
prevent accidents during construction and until the repairs have been
approved.  All openings and excavations shall be properly barricaded at all
times and properly lighted from dusk to dawn by suitable lights, lanterns or
fire pots.



(Ord. CO-88-15, passed 10-24-88)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.15  SPECIFICATIONS FOR REFILLING EXCAVATION.



   It shall be the duty of the City Building Inspector to prepare from
time to time general plans and specifications governing the refilling of
trenches or excavations and the repaving or resurfacing of the different
types of pavement in the city.  The plans and specifications, after approval
by the Common Council, shall be placed on file in the Office of the City
Building Inspector and the City Street Superintendent.  The City Building
Inspector may prepare special plans and specifications when he deems them to
be necessary.



(Ord. CO-88-15, passed 10-24-88) 



§ 97.16  DUTY OF APPLICANT TO REPAIR; FAILURE TO REPAIR.



   (A)   All materials removed from any dig or excavation shall be
removed from the site immediately and shall be replaced therein by backfill
with granular material or sand as approved by the City Building Inspector.



   (B)   All digs or excavations across or in traffic lanes where it
becomes necessary to remove any existing surfacing or pavement shall be
provided with temporary trench cover by the permittee.  Such temporary
trench cover shall be at least two inches thick and be of cold asphalt mix or
its equivalent.  Such temporary trench cover shall be placed on the trench
within six working hours after completion of trench backfilling and
compaction and shall be maintained in a good condition until a permanent
trench cover is placed.



   (C)   Within 45 days of the placement of a temporary trench cover,
unless a longer time is specified by the City Building Inspector, the final
patch or replacement of the pavement shall be made by the permittee pursuant
to the plans and specifications of the City Building Inspector.



   (D)   The City Building Inspector may temporarily suspend the repair
of cuts due to weather, materials or conditions beyond the control of the
permittee.



   (E)   Whenever any permittee under the provisions of this subchapter
shall fail to repair, refill or repave an opening or excavation as provided
herein, the city shall undertake the repair of the opening or excavation by
soliciting bids, the lowest bidder to receive the job of repair.



   (F)   Whenever the city shall engage an independent contractor to
repair an opening or excavation as provided herein, the cost of repair of the
opening or excavation shall be charged to the permittee who has filed to make
the repairs as required by this subchapter.



   (G)   Immediately upon the completion of the refilling and
restoration of any street or alley pavement or surface by an independent
contractor, the City Building Inspector shall file with the City
Clerk-Treasurer for collection an itemized bill of the amount due the city
for the work.  All bills for repair under this subchapter are due and
payable within 30 days.  No new permits shall be granted to any applicant
who has not settled any prior bill.



(Ord. CO-88-15, passed 10-24-88)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.17  AUTHORITY OF BUILDING INSPECTOR.



   It shall be the duty of the City Building Inspector or his designate,
together with the City Street Superintendent to supervise the refiling of all
excavations and the replacement of all pavement and see that all work done in
connection therewith is done in a workmanlike manner.  Whenever any such
opening or excavation is ready for refilling or the street surface is ready
for relaying, repaving or resurfacing notice should be given by the applicant
to the City Building Inspector.



(Ord. CO-88-15, passed 10-24-88) 



§ 97.18  EMERGENCY EXCAVATION.



   In the event at the time a dig or excavation is required to be made and
the Offices of the City Building Inspector and City Clerk are closed and an
emergency exists, a person, firm or corporation may cut immediately into any
street or alley or other public place without the permit required in this
subchapter being first had and obtained on notifying the Police Department
and on appearing at the City Clerk's Office and applying for the permit as
soon thereafter as the Office is open to transact business.



(Ord. CO-88-15, passed 10-24-88) 



MOVING OF BUILDINGS



§ 97.25  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to move any
building or structure of any kind, over, along, or across any public place,
street, or alley in the city without first obtaining a permit to do so from
the City Clerk-Treasurer and paying the fees herein provided for.



('75 Code, §  15.01)  (Ord. 2-260, passed 4-19-07)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.26  APPLICATION; FEES.



   (A)   Any person, firm, or corporation desiring to move any building
or structure over, along, or across any public place, street, or alley in the
city, shall first make application to the City Clerk-Treasurer for a permit
to move the building or structure.  The application shall set forth the
following information.



      (1)   The size and type of the building to be moved.



      (2)   The place from which it is to be moved.



      (3)   The destination proposed.



('75 Code, §  15.02)  (Ord. 121, passed 5-8-28)



   (B)   The Board of Public Works and Safety shall charge the
applicant a fee for the moving permit in the amount of $25 for each building
or structure to be moved.  The permit shall be good for ten days from the
date thereof.  At the expiration of the permit, if the moving has not been
completed, the applicant shall take out a new permit under the same
conditions and shall pay the same fees as are required for the first permit,
but no second renewal shall be granted.



('75 Code, §  15.06)  (Ord. 2-260, passed 4-19-07)



§ 97.27  BOND.



   (A)   Upon the recommendation of the City Engineer and City Street
Commissioner, the Board of Public Works and Safety shall consider the matter,
and if they deem it advisable to have the structure so moved they shall fix
the amount of the bond deemed necessay and enter an order directing the
Clerk- Treasurer to issue a house moving permit. ('75 Code, § 15.04)



   (B)   The person, firm, or corporation desiring to move the house or
structure shall execute and deliver to the Clerk-Treasurer a good and 
sufficient  bond  in the sum so fixed by the Board of Public Works and
Safety, and conditioned that the person, firm, or corporation will pay all
damage occasioned by the city or any other person by reason of the moving of
the house or structure.  ('75 Code, §  15.05) (Ord. 121, passed 5-8-28)



§ 97.28  APPLICANT LIABLE FOR DAMAGES.



   Any person, firm, or corporation being issued a moving permit shall
pay, and the bond executed under § 97.27 shall also be liable for the
payment of all damages, repairs, and expenses of any person, firm, or
corporation occasioned by the moving of the house or structure, and shall
also save the city harmless from all damages and expenses occasioned by the
moving.



('75 Code, §  15.07)  (Ord. 2-260, passed 4-19-07; Am. Ord. 121, passed
5-8-28)



§ 97.29  ROUTE DESIGNATION.



   The City Clerk-Treasurer shall submit all applications to the City
Street Superintendent and City Engineer, who shall make investigation and
report their recommendation to the Board of Public Works and Safety.  If
they shall recommend that a permit be granted they shall designate the route
they deem most advisable over which the structure shall be moved.



('75 Code, §  15.03)  (Ord. 121, passed 5-8-28)



§ 97.30  AUTHORITY OF BOARD OF PUBLIC WORKS AND SAFETY.



   The Board of Public Works and Safety is hereby authorized to make
reasonable regulations relative to the manner of moving any building or
structure so that the same can be moved with the least possible damage to the
streets of the city.



('75 Code, §  15.04)  (Ord. 121, passed 5-8-28)



COMPLETE STREETS



§ 97.40  DEFINITION.



   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   COMPLETE STREETS. Roadways planned, designed, and constructed to
provide appropriate access to all legal users in a manner that promotes safe
and efficient movement of people and goods whether by car, truck, transit,
assistive device, foot, or bicycle.



(Ord. 12-06A, passed 5-29-12)



§ 97.41  COMPLETE STREETS IMPROVEMENTS.



   It shall be the policy of the city to plan, design, construct, operate
and maintain street improvements to provide reasonable and appropriate
accommodation for all potential users of the public right-of-way, in
accordance with the City of Frankfort Non-Motorized Transportation Plan
(NMTP) and as funding priorities permit. In furtherance of such policy:



   (A)   The city Plan Commission will draft a Non-Motorized
Transportation Plan: Complete Streets for the City of Frankfort. This
amendment to the city’s Master Plan will set forth specifications, criteria
and long-range plans for providing Complete Streets in the city.



   (B)   After appropriate public review and consideration of the NMTP
and following its approval by the Common Council, the Plan will be reviewed
and updated on a regular basis.



   (C)   The NMTP will include, as appropriate, bicycle routes, lanes,
and paths; sidewalks and pedestrian paths; best practices for crossing
pedestrians and bicycles at both intersections and mid-block locations;
transit facilities; and related safety improvements and amenities. In
developing the Plan, consideration will be given to existing non-motorized
transportation facilities; potential non-motorized travel patterns;
implementation and maintenance costs versus potential use; the public safety
of both street users and abutting property owners; and funding priorities.
The city will look for opportunities to provide for Complete Streets in
conjunction with all public works projects, as appropriate.



   (D)   Infrastructure improvements made under the NMTP will be
designed, constructed, and operated using guidance from the Indiana
Department of Transportation (INDOT) and the Clinton County Highway
Department and will be in substantial conformance to the latest guidelines
promulgated by the American Association of State Highway and Transportation
Officials (AASHTO), Guide for the Development of Bicycle Facilities. All
improvements shall conform to the Indiana Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices (IMUTCD) and the Americans With Disabilities Act Accessibility
Guidelines (ADAAG).



   (E)   It will be the goal of the Common Council to reasonably fund
the implementation of the Non-Motorized Transportation Plan, which shall
include any grant funds that can be made available.



   (F)   Until the Plan Commission completes and the Common Council
approves the initial Non-Motorized Transportation Plan, the City Building
Inspector shall review all new street plans and existing street
reconstruction projects prior to their commencement; after such review, and
any recommendation by the Building Inspector, the Board of Public Works and
Safety shall determine, where feasible, that such projects be designed to
safely accommodate all users of the right-of-way, including motor vehicles,
pedestrians, people requiring mobility aids and bicycles.



   (G)   After completion of the NMTP by the Plan Commission and
following its approval by the Common Council, all public street projects and
public street reconstruction projects in the city shall be in conformity with
the NMTP unless exception is made as provided below.



(Ord. 12-06A, passed 5-29-12)



§ 97.42  EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   Infrastructure improvements specifically intended for
pedestrians, bicyclists, and transit riders need not be planned nor made
where it is determined that the project or any portion of the project should
be excepted from the provisions of this subchapter and the NMTP.  Such
exceptions should generally be implemented where:



      (1)   Use by non-motorized users is prohibited by law;



      (2)   The cost of implementing the Plan’s provisions would
be excessively disproportionate to the need or probable future use over the
long term. EXCESSIVELY DISPROPORTIONATE is defined as exceeding 20% of the
cost of the larger transportation project;



      (3)   There is an absence of current or future need documented
through demographic, school, employment, and public transportation route data;



      (4)   Significant, documented, adverse environmental impacts
outweigh the positive effects of the infrastructure; or



      (5)   Implementation of the NMTP’s standards would be
contrary to public health or safety.



   (B)   If exception is sought in connection with plat approval of a
proposed subdivision, the request for exception shall be made with the
application for primary plat approval. In such event, the Plan Commission,
after any recommendation by the Building Inspector, shall determine whether
exception should be granted in connection with any approval of the primary
plat. In all other projects involving construction or reconstruction of roads
and sidewalks, the determination of whether an exception should be allowed
shall be made by the Board of Public Works and Safety after recommendation,
if any, by the Building Inspector.



(Ord. 12-06A, passed 5-29-12)



§ 97.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person, firm, or corporation who shall violate a provision
of this chapter for which another penalty is not provided, shall upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a fine as follows:



      (1)   For a first offense, the fine shall be not less than $50
nor more than $100, together with court costs, as determined by the court.



      (2)   For a second offense of the same nature and occurring on
the same property, if applicable, and within 24 months of the first offense,
the fine shall be not less than $150 nor more than $250, together with court
costs, as determined by the court.



      (3)   For the third offense of the same nature and occurring
on the same property, if applicable, and within 24 months of the second of
such offense, the fine shall be not less than $350 nor more than $2,500,
together with court costs, as determined by the court.



('75 Code, §  46.08)  (Ord. 27, passed 10-5-64; Am. Ord. PO-77-2, passed
12-21-77; Am. Ord. 06-6, passed 2-13-06)



   (B)   Any person, firm, or corporation who shall fail to comply with
the provisions of §§ 97.10 through 97.18 shall be fined in any sum not less
than $10 nor more than $500 for each offense, and/or shall be refused future
permits until the person, firm, or corporation complies with the provisions
of §§ 97.10 through 97.18.  (Ord. CO-88-15, passed 10-24-88)



   (C)   Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the
provisions of §§ 97.25 through 97.30 be fined in any sum not less than $25
or more than $500.  ('75 Code, §  15.08)  (Ord. 2-260, passed 4-19-07;
Am. Ord. 121, passed 5-8-28; Am. Ord. PO-77-2, passed 12-21-77)



CHAPTER 98: TRASH COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL



Section



   98.01   Definitions



   98.02   Accumulation, nuisance and abatement



   98.03   Trash collection services



   98.04   Authorized bags, recycling containers and fees



   98.05   Central and public disposal areas



   98.06   Transporting uncovered garbage or rubbish



   98.07   Deposits on streets and city property prohibited



   98.08   Unlawful use of containers for trash disposal



   98.09   Administrative liability



   98.10   Enforcement



 



   98.99   Penalty



§ 98.01   DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BIO-HAZARD CONTAINER.  A hard-plastic or metal container with screw-on
or tightly secured lid excluding clear plastic or glass.



   BULK ITEMS.  Furniture, mattresses, box springs, carpets, plumbing
fixtures, automobile parts, appliances including Freon-containing appliances,
and any other items which are too large or heavy to fit into trash bags.



   CODE ENFORCEMENT.  Persons given authority by the Frankfort Board of
Public Works and Safety to make inspections of ordinance violations of this
code and/or state law.



   CONSTRUCTION DEBRIS.  Waste building materials resulting from
construction, remodeling, repair and demolition operations.



   CONTAINER.  A receptacle of plastic, metal or fiberglass not to exceed
33 gallons in volume, nor 40 pounds in weight. The receptacle shall have a
tightfitting cover in order to be insectproof, watertight and animal-proof,
and so equipped with handles to be convenient for collectors to lift and
empty.



   CONTAMINATED SHARP.  An object that meets the following conditions:



      (1)   Is capable of cutting or penetrating the skin; and



      (2)   Has been in contact with blood or body fluids.



      (3)   This term includes hypodermic or suture needles,
syringes or other sharp objects.



   CONTRACTOR.  Any person or persons performing a service on a dwelling,
structure or property for the owner or occupant for a fee.



   FREON WASTE ITEM.  An appliance or other waste item of a type which
originally contained Freon or any other nonflammable gaseous or liquid
fluorinated hydrocarbons used as a refrigerant disposal of which is
specifically regulated by the United States Environmental Protection Agency.



   GARBAGE.  The animal, fruit and vegetable waste resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food and of waste from the
handling, storage and sale of food materials.



   HAZARDOUS WASTE.  Waste designated as hazardous by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA) and/or the State Department of
Environmental Management (IDEM).



   NATURAL DEBRIS.  Leaves, trees and tree limbs of large bulk,
accumulating from natural processes.



   OCCUPANT.  Any individual living, sleeping, cooking or eating in or
having possession of a dwelling unit.



   OWNER.  All persons, entities or organizations who are responsible for
payment of taxes on the real estate as on record at the county recorder's
office; or the purchaser of such real estate under a contract for conditional
sale; or person in control of the property as the personal representative,
trustee, receiver or guardian of the owner.



   REFUSE.  Discarded waste materials in a solid or semisolid state
consisting of garbage, rubbish or a combination thereof.



   RESIDENTIAL COMPLEX.  Habitable dwellings of four units or more that
fall under the Indiana Building Code, constituting a commercial structure; or
four or more residential units situated on one parcel within the city.



   RUBBISH.  Combustible and noncombustible waste materials other than
garbage such as small quantities of natural debris, concrete, glass,
crockery, ashes, boxes, barrels, metals, but excluding earth and waste from
building operations, yard and garden wastes, hazardous wastes, infectious
wastes and tires.



   TRASH BAGS.  Plastic sacks not exceeding 33 gallons in capacity
designed for refuse with sufficient wall strength to maintain physical
integrity when lifted, securely tied at the top for collection and not to
exceed 40 pounds in loaded weight.



   TRASH.  Garbage and rubbish.



   YARD WASTE.  Leaves, grass clippings, weeds, brush, limbs, branches
and other organic garden debris.



(Ord. 04-29, passed 1-24-05)



§ 98.02 ACCUMULATION, NUISANCE AND ABATEMENT.



   (A)   All exterior property and premises, and the interior of every
structure within the city, shall be kept free from mass accumulation of
garbage, refuse, rubbish, bulk items or natural debris other than natural
debris deposited by the wind and natural forces. Failure to comply with this
requirement shall constitute a nuisance.



   (B)   The city shall not be responsible for collection of refuse and
rubbish generated from rental property vacated. Removal is the responsibility
of the owner of the property and subject to enforcement as set out in this
chapter.



   (C)   The occupant or owner of the property upon which a nuisance is
found shall be ordered by the Frankfort Building Inspector or the Frankfort
Police Department to abate the same not later than a date to be stated in a
written notice ordering such abatement. In no case shall such date be less
than two days after the date of the notice.



   (D)   Upon the failure of the occupant or owner to abate such
nuisance, the city may enter upon such premises and abate the nuisance. The
costs of such abatement shall be assessed against the owner of such property
and, if not paid within 30 days after notification, the city shall impose a
lien upon such property for such expense and shall place the same upon the
tax duplicate of the Office of the County Treasurer for collection as
provided by law.



   (E)   All garbage, animal, fruit or vegetable matter, or similar
substance of a decaying nature shall be removed from each residence, retail
business or other buildings within the city at least once each week.



   (F)   Residential complexes shall be supplied by the owner with a
dumpster having a minimum of one-half yard per unit capacity. The owner shall
be responsible for having garbage and trash removed from the dumpster at
least one time per week by a commercial service. The owner of each
residential complex shall present a paid receipt or other evidence of having
obtained a dumpster to the Clerk-Treasurer who shall then issue a written
waiver of any user fee that might otherwise be assessed under this chapter.
If, however, it is determined by either the Street Department or the city
Building Inspector that use of a dumpster is not physically possible at a
residential complex, then each unit in the residential complex will be
subject to a $12 user fee to be collected on each dwelling unit and to be
paid by landlord or property owner at the Clerk-Treasurer's office and the
city will collect such trash and garbage in accordance with the other
provisions of this chapter. For purposes of this chapter, the term DWELLING 
UNIT shall refer to a single living unit providing complete independent
living facilities for one or more persons including permanent provisions for
living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation.



   (G)   Commercial establishments and businesses shall arrange for
commercial disposal of their garbage, trash and other disposal items to be
carried out at least one time per week. Commercial storage containers and
dumpsters shall be adequately screened from public view.



(Ord. 04-29, passed 1-24-05; Am. Ord. CO-07-17, passed 11-26-07)  Penalty,
see § 98.99



§ 98.03  TRASH COLLECTION SERVICES.



   (A)   The city, acting through the Frankfort Street Department,
shall provide a curbside or roadside trash collection service to only those
residences located within the city comprising three or less residential units
per building. Regular trash collection services shall be provided no less
than one time per week for the collection of authorized trash bags. The times
and locations of the collection services shall be determined and established
by the Board of Public Works and Safety. If the scheduled trash pick-up for
any residence is two days during any week, then such residence shall be
limited to five bags per pick-up. If the scheduled trash pick-up for any
residence is only one day during any week, then such residence shall be
limited to seven bags per pick-up.



   (B)   The trash collection schedule shall be subject to change as
may be necessitated by special circumstances, including but not limited to
holidays, special events, inclimate weather, equipment breakdown or natural
disaster.



   (C)   The Frankfort Street Department shall only pick up bulk items
upon request of the resident and only after the bulk item or items have been
paid for at the City Clerk-Treasurer's Office or the Frankfort Street
Department in advance. No appliances containing Freon will be picked up or
accepted for disposal by the city. The cost of the bulk items shall be
established by the City Council through ordinance and may be amended as
needed from time to time but shall initially be as follows:



 

Bulk Item
 
Fee




Non-Freon appliances
 
$25.00 per item


Mattresses and box springs
 
$10.00 per item


Furniture and other household items
 
$15.00 per item


Plumbing fixtures
 
$15.00 per item


Automobile parts
 
$10.00 per item


Automobile and light truck tires
 
$5.00 per tire


Carpet and carpet padding
 
$10.00 per trip




 



      (1)   Carpeting and carpet padding will be picked up only if
cut into pieces no larger than four feet by 12 feet, tied and rolled.



   (D)   Brush and tree limbs will be picked up by the city without
cost if the resident bundles the items, places the items at curbside and
calls the Frankfort Street Department in advance. However, brush and tree
limbs will only be picked up if it was accumulated by the resident or through
an act of God and not by a person, firm or corporation hired to trim trees,
brush, shrubs and the like. The city will not pick up grass clippings
regardless of their source.



   (E)   All garbage, trash or other items to be picked up by the city
pursuant to this chapter shall be placed at curbside or alley immediately
adjacent to the individual's residence prior to 7:00 a.m. on the pick up day
designated for that location. Garbage and trash shall not be set out earlier
than dusk on the evening preceding the day designated for pick up. Any
garbage, trash or rubbish that has not been picked up by 5:00 p.m. of a given
day must be removed by the resident so that it does not remain on the street
or alley between the hours of 5:00 p.m. and dusk of the day scheduled for
pick up at the residence.



   (F)   It shall be unlawful for any person to transport refuse,
garbage, rubbish and material debris from outside the city limits for purpose
of pick up or disposal by the city.



(Ord. 04-29, passed 1-24-05; Am. Ord. CO-07-17, passed 11-26-07; Am. Ord.
09-12A, passed 11-27-09; Am. Ord. 13-01, passed 2-11-13)  Penalty, see §
98.99



§ 98.04 AUTHORIZED BAGS, RECYCLING CONTAINERS AND FEES.



   (A)   Authorized bags.  To be eligible for collection, all garbage
and trash must be placed in an enclosed authorized bag. Further, all bags
must be closed tightly, and no bag may be larger than 33 gallons or 40 pounds
in weight. A bag not in compliance with this chapter will not be collected.
All contaminated sharps shall be placed in a bio-hazard container before
going into garbage bags for pick up. It shall be unlawful to place any
garbage in a container unless it is placed and tied in a trash bag to prevent
exposure to air.



   (B)   Fees.



      (1)   A user fee of $7 per month shall be added to the utility
billing of each resident served through the month of June, 2016. Effective
July 1, 2016, such residential user fee shall be increased to $8 per month.
Effective January 1, 2017, such residential user fee shall be increased to
$10 per month. Effective January 1, 2018, such residential user fee shall
increase to $12 per month.



      (2)   In the case of residential complexes which cannot
accommodate a dumpster, the user fee shall be $15 per month per residential
unit, as provided in § 98.02(F).



      (3)   In the event that any trash user fee remains unpaid for
a period of 60 days, the city may suspend trash pick-up service to the
residence involved, without notice. In such event, the owner or occupant of
the residence shall promptly dispose of the trash attributed to said
residence by private means.



   (C)   Recycling.  The Frankfort Street Department shall also
provide curbside or alley pick up of certain specified recyclable materials
including, but not limited to, glass, plastic, aluminum and metal cans and
newspapers. Such items shall be picked up once a week at curbside of each
residence at times to be scheduled by the Board of Public Works and Safety.
All such recyclable items shall be separated from trash and placed in
approved separate containers and shall not require authorized trash stickers.



   (D)   Revenue.  The revenues generated from the user fees,
collection fees, and sale of recycled materials, as provided above, shall be
deposited in the city’s User Fee Account.  Expenditures from such fund
shall be limited to expenses associated with the city’s administration,
collection and disposal of trash and the maintenance and purchase of
equipment used in providing such service.



(Ord. 04-29, passed 1-24-05; Am. Ord.09-12A, passed 7-27-09; Am. Ord. 16-06,
passed 5-23-16)  Penalty, see § 98.99



§ 98.05 CENTRAL AND PUBLIC DISPOSAL AREAS.



   (A)   The city shall provide a city-wide cleanup at least twice each
calendar year by curb pick-up or by utilizing roll-offs placed at various
points throughout the city. The Board of Public Works and Safety shall
determine the dates for such clean-ups which dates shall be published in
advance.



   (B)   Garbage and trash receptacles in the city parks, on public
sidewalks or on other city property are not community trash disposal areas.
Persons shall not use such facilities for the disposal of trash accumulated
at their residence or place of business.



(Ord. 04-29, passed 1-24-05)  Penalty, see § 98.99



§ 98.06  TRANSPORTING UNCOVERED GARBAGE OR RUBBISH.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to transport
over or along any street, alley, or public place in the city, any loose
material, dirt, or substance or liquid of any kind in vehicles, vessels, or
containers which leak or permit or suffer any loose material, dirt, liquid,
or substance to drop, spill, or scatter upon the street, alley, or public
place from the vehicle, vessel, or container while the materials, dirt,
liquids, or substances are being transported over or along the street, alley,
or public place.



(Ord. 04-29, passed 1-24-05)  Penalty, see § 98.99



§ 98.07 DEPOSITS ON STREETS AND CITY PROPERTY PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to cast or
deposit upon any street, alley, sidewalk, park or public place in the city,
any garbage, rubbish, trash or bulk items.



(Ord. 04-29, passed 1-24-05)  Penalty, see § 98.99



§ 98.08 UNLAWFUL USE OF CONTAINERS FOR TRASH DISPOSAL.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to use a container or trash bag
owned or located on premises of another person, business, or facility for the
disposal of trash not generated at such household or facility owning or
possessing the container.



(Ord. 04-29, passed 1-24-05)  Penalty, see § 98.99



§ 98.09 ADMINISTRATIVE LIABILITY.



   No officer, agent, or employee of the city shall be held personally
liable for any damage that may occur to persons or property as a result of
any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties under this
chapter. Any suit brought against any officer, agent or employee of the city
as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties
under this chapter shall be defended by the City Attorney until the final
determination of the proceedings therein.



(Ord. 04-29, passed 1-24-05)



§ 98.10  ENFORCEMENT.



   Unless stated otherwise, the Office of the Frankfort Building Inspector
or Frankfort Police Department shall enforce this chapter.



(Ord. 04-29, passed 1-24-05)  Penalty, see § 98.99



§ 98.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any of the
provisions, as herein above defined, violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than $25 nor more than
$2,500 for the first violation. Second and subsequent violations will result
in a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $2,500.  Each days’ operation
or maintaining or any part thereof shall be a separate violation.



   (B)   In addition to the fine imposed in division (A), the violator
shall also be liable to the city for all damages and expenses incurred by the
city by reason of such violation, which shall be established in a civil
action brought for such purpose.



   (C)   In the event that any fines, expenses or damages are not paid
by the user or owner of the property within 30 days after the fee is due, the
amount of the fee along with interest of 8%, court costs, and a reasonable
attorney's fee, may be recovered by the city. This action shall be commenced
in a civil action in the name of the city.



(Ord. 04-29, passed 1-24-05)



CHAPTER 99:  ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION



Section



   99.01   Purpose and intent



   99.02   Definitions



   99.03   Environmental public nuisances prohibited



   99.04   Violations of rules and regulations of the Indiana
Department of Environmental Management and the Unites States Environmental
Protection Agency



   99.05   Investigation



   99.06   Trade secrets; public information



   99.07   Notice of violation



   99.08   Consent agreements



   99.09   Clean-up and abatement



   99.10   Court action for failure to address a notice violation



   99.11   Reimbursement of abatement costs; penalties; other remedies



§ 99.01  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   (A)   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "City of
Frankfort Environmental Protection Ordinance".



   (B)   It is hereby declared to be the purpose of this chapter to
protect public safety, health and welfare and enhance the environment for the
people of the city providing for the investigation and remediation of
hazardous substances.



   (C)   The provisions of this chapter are not intended and shall not
be construed as superseding or conflicting with any statutory provisions
relating to, or rules and regulations promulgated by, United State
Environmental Protection Agency or the Indiana Department of Environmental
Management, but shall be construed as supplementing, implementing and
assisting in the enforcement of federal and state laws concerning hazardous
substances. Should any of the provisions of this chapter be determined to be
inconsistent with federal or state law the remainder of this chapter shall
remain in effect and be interpreted ignoring such provision.



   (D)   This chapter shall not be construed to limit the authority of
the city to adopt more stringent standards. The purpose of this chapter is
solely to establish minimum standards protective of human health and the
environment.



(Ord. CO-05-11, passed 10-24-05; Am. Ord. CO-06-11, passed 3-13-06)



§ 99.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ABATE.  To reduce the presence of uncontrolled hazardous materials in
the environment to a level that adequately reduces the risk of human health
and the environment consistent with the future proposed use of the property.



   ABATEMENT COSTS.  All necessary and reasonable costs required to abate
any discharge of hazardous substances.



   COVERED PERSON.



      (1)   Those persons described in the Comprehensive
Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act, Section 107(a), 42
U.S.C. Sec. 9607(a); and



      (2)   All tenants or other persons in control of any real
property within the city where hazardous substances exist.



   DISCHARGE.  Any intentional or accidental action or omission which in
the releasing, spilling, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, or dumping of
any hazardous substance upon public or private property located within the
limits of the city.



   ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.  The City Engineer for the city and any agent or
employee of the Office of the City Engineer who is authorized to carry out
the enforcement duties of this chapter.



   ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC NUISANCE.



      (1)   Any property where hazardous substances are present,
unless the presence of hazardous substances is specifically authorized under
state or federal laws or regulations governing hazardous substances; or



      (2)   Property which has otherwise been allowed to become a
health or safety hazard.



   HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE.  As defined in the Comprehensive Environmental
Response, Compensation and Liability Act, Section 101(14), 42 U.S.C. Sec.
9601(14) and HAZARDOUS WASTE as defined in the Solid Waste Disposal Act,
Section 3001 (42 U.S.C. Sec. 6921) and HAZARDOUS MATERIAL as defined in I.C.
13-11-2-96 and HAZARDOUS WASTE as defined in I.C. 13-11-2-99.



   NOTICE OF VIOLATION.  Pursuant to § 99.07 of this chapter.



   PERSONS.  One or more individuals, partnerships, corporations, trusts,
joint ventures, association or any other entities or any combination thereof.



(Ord. CO-05-11, passed 10-24-05)



§ 99.03  ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC NUISANCES PROHIBITED.



   (A)   All covered persons shall be required to keep the real
property in the city free from environmental nuisances.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any covered person to allow an
environmental public nuisance to exist.



(Ord. CO-05-11, passed 10-24-05)  Penalty, see § 99.11(C)



§ 99.04  VIOLATIONS OF RULES AND REGULATIONS OF THE INDIANA DEPARTMENT OF
ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND THE UNITED STATES ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
AGENCY.



   (A)   The regulations of the United States Environmental Protection
Agency, as set forth in 40 C.F.R. 403 on the effective date of this chapter,
are hereby adopted and are incorporated herein by reference hereto.



   (B)   All rules and regulations promulgated by the Indiana
Department of Environmental Management are hereby adopted and are made a part
of this chapter by reference.



   (C)   Any person who commits a violation of any rules and
regulations adopted pursuant to this section shall be deemed guilty of
committing a violation of this chapter.



   (D)   Violations of such rules and regulations shall constitute
violations of this chapter triable in the court of appropriate jurisdiction.



(Ord. CO-05-11, passed 10-24-05)  Penalty, see § 99.11(C)



§ 99.05  INVESTIGATION.



   (A)   Whenever an Enforcement Officer has reason to believe that a
discharge of a hazardous substance has occurred or is about to occur, the
Enforcement Officer may undertake such investigation, monitoring, surveying,
testing, and other information gathering as the Enforcement Officer may deem
necessary or appropriate to identify the existence and extent of a discharge
or the threat of a discharge, the source and nature of any hazardous
substances involved and the extent of danger to the public health or welfare
or to the environment.



   (B)   The local Enforcement Officer may require any person who has
or may have information relevant to any of the following to furnish, upon
reasonable notice, information or documents relating to such matter:



      (1)   The identification, nature and quantity of materials
which have been or are manufactured, generated, treated, stored, or disposed
of at the property;



      (2)   The nature or extent of a release or threatened release
of hazardous substance or pollutant or contaminant at or on the property; and



      (3)   Information relating to the ability of a person to pay
for or to perform a cleanup.



   (C)   In addition, upon reasonable notice, such person shall either:



      (1)   Grant the Enforcement Officer access at all reasonable
times to any facility, establishment, place, property, or location to inspect
and copy all documents or records relating to such matters; or



      (2)   Copy and furnish to the Enforcement Officer all such
documents or records, at the option and expense of such person. However,
nothing in this section shall be interpreted to waive the Enforcement
Officer's ability to inspect original documents.



   (D)   The Enforcement Officer is authorized to enter at reasonable
times any of the following:



      (1)   Any facility, establishment, or other place or property
where any hazardous substance may be or has been discharged;



      (2)   Any facility, establishment, or other place or property
from which or to which a hazardous substance has been or may have been
discharged;



      (3)   Any facility, establishment, or other place or property
where such discharge is or may be threatened; or



      (4)   Any facility, establishment, or other place or property
where entry is needed to determine the need for response or the appropriate
response or to effectuate abatement under this chapter.



   (E)   The Enforcement Officer is authorized to inspect and obtain
samples from any facility, establishment, or other place or property referred
to in division (D) or from any location of any suspected hazardous
substance.  Each such inspection shall be completed with reasonable
promptness.



   (F)   The Enforcement Officer is authorized to inspect and obtain
samples of any containers or labeling for suspected hazardous substances. 
If the Enforcement Officer obtains any samples, before leaving the premises
the Enforcement Officer shall give to the covered person of the place from
which the samples were obtained a receipt describing the sample obtained and,
if requested, a portion of each such sample. A copy of the results of any
analysis made of such samples shall be furnished promptly to the covered
person in control, if such person can be located.



   (G)   Where there is a reasonable basis to believe there may be a
release or threat of a release of a hazardous substance, the Enforcement
Officer may seek compliance in court as follows:



      (1)   In the case of interference with entry or inspection,
the court shall enjoin such interference or direct compliance with orders to
prohibit interference with entry or inspection, unless under the
circumstances of the case, the demand for entry or inspection is arbitrary
and capricious, an abuse of discretion, or otherwise not in accordance with
law.



      (2)   In the case of information or document requests or
orders, the court shall enjoin interference with such information or document
requests or orders or direct compliance with requests or orders to provide
such information or documents unless, under the circumstances of the case,
the demand for information or documents is arbitrary and capricious, an abuse
of discretion, or otherwise not in accordance with law.



(Ord. CO-05-11, passed 10-24-05)



§ 99.06  TRADE SECRETS; PUBLIC INFORMATION.



   (A)   Any trade secret reported to or otherwise obtained by the city
of an Enforcement Officer in connection with an investigation conducted
pursuant to this chapter shall be considered confidential.



   (B)   Sampling results and other environmental data regarding the
conditions of soil or groundwater at a property are not trade secrets under
this section and shall be available to the public at the discretion of the
Enforcement Officer.



(Ord. CO-05-11, passed 10-24-05)



§ 99.07  NOTICE OF VIOLATION.



   (A)   Any department of the city which receives a complaint
regarding an environmental public nuisance on any property within the city
shall forward that complaint to the Enforcement Officer, who shall make a
record of, and assign a case number to, such complaint.  The Enforcement
Officer shall inspect the property in question.



   (B)   If the Enforcement Officer determines action is appropriate
and necessary to abate an environmental public nuisance, a notice of
violation shall be issued to one or more of the covered persons, unless there
is an imminent threat to public health or the environment.  If there is an
imminent threat to public health or the environment, then no notice is
required.



   (C)   Notice of violation shall be issued either by personal service
or by first class United States mail, postage prepaid.  Such notice of
violation shall state the nature of the alleged environmental public nuisance
and the action deemed necessary to correct the condition, and shall fix a
date no sooner than ten days from the date of the notice of violation when
the property will be re-inspected. The notice of violation shall inform the
recipient that, if the condition is not corrected upon re-inspection, the
city has the right to:



      (1)   Enter on the property to abate the environmental public
nuisance and bill the recipient for abatement costs and, if necessary, assert
a lien against the subject property;



      (2)   File a court action against the recipient for ordinance
violation; or



      (3)   File a court action against the recipient to enjoin the
environmental public nuisance.



   (D)   A notice to the occupant at the real estate or to any covered
person at the address to which property tax statements are sent, as these
addresses are shown by the most current records in the township assessor's
office of the township in which the real estate is located, shall be
sufficient notice under this section.



(Ord. CO-05-11, passed 10-24-05)



§ 99.08  CONSENT AGREEMENTS.



   (A)   The city or the Enforcement Officer may, in their discretion:



      (1)   Terminate an investigation or an action commenced under
the provisions of this chapter upon execution of a written consent agreement
between the Enforcement Officer, and the persons who are the subjects of the
investigation or action; or



      (2)   Hold in abeyance pending performance of voluntary
compliance activities an investigation or an action commenced under the
provisions of this chapter upon execution of a written consent agreement
between the Enforcement Officer, and the persons who are the subjects of the
investigation or action.



   (B)   The consent agreement shall provide written assurance of
voluntary compliance with all the applicable provisions of this chapter by
said persons.



   (C)   The consent agreement may provide, in the discretion of the
Enforcement Officer, the following: environmental mitigation; compensatory
damages; punitive damages; civil penalties; abatement costs of the city and
attorneys' fees and costs.



   (D)   The consent agreement may provide, in the discretion of the
Enforcement Officer, a release or covenant not to sue to any covered person.



   (E)   An executed written consent agreement shall neither be
evidence of a prior violation of this chapter, nor shall such agreement be
deemed to impose any limitation upon any investigation or action by the city
or the Enforcement Officer, in the enforcement of this chapter.



   (F)   No consent agreement shall constitute a waiver of or
limitation upon the enforcement of any federal or state laws.



   (G)   No consent agreement shall constitute a waiver of or
limitation upon the enforcement of any local laws and ordinances, unless
expressly provided.



   (H)   Each violation of any of the terms and conditions of an
executed written consent agreement shall constitute a separate offense under
this chapter by any persons in active concert or participation with the
person who executed the consent agreement, including but not limited to
officers, directors, agents, servants and employees who receive actual notice
of the consent agreement.



   (I)   Each day during any portion of which each such violation
occurs constitutes a separate offense under this chapter.



(Ord. CO-05-11, passed 10-24-05)



§ 99.09  CLEAN-UP AND ABATEMENT.



   (A)   The city is authorized to take such steps as are necessary to
clean up, remove or abate the effects of any hazardous substances located on
the property (including streets and appurtenances) or facilities located
within the limits of the city.



   (B)   In complying with the provisions of this chapter, the
Enforcement Officer may retain the use of private contractors to assist it.



   (C)   Any covered person shall be jointly and severally liable for
the abatement costs for any discharge of hazardous substance.



   (D)   When responding to any discharge of any hazardous substance,
the Enforcement Officer shall keep a detailed record of the abatement costs
attributable to any covered person.



(Ord. CO-05-11, passed 10-24-05)



§ 99.10  COURT ACTION FOR FAILURE TO ADDRESS A NOTICE VIOLATION.



   (A)   If the Enforcement Officer determines that the abatement has
not occurred within ten days of the issuance of any notice of violation or
within any period specifically provided in the notice of violation, the
Enforcement Officer may initiate a civil action or administrative action for
ordinance violation against the recipient.



   (B)   Any court action may involve a complaint of ordinance
violation, a request to enjoin any environmental public nuisance or both.



(Ord. CO-05-11, passed 10-24-05)



§ 99.11  REIMBURSEMENT OF ABATEMENT COSTS; PENALTIES; OTHER REMEDIES.



   (A)   Each covered person shall reimburse the city for the full
amount of all abatement costs within a period of ten days after receipt of an
itemized bill for such abatement costs from the city, plus any accrued
interest. No further documentation is required.



   (B)   If any covered person fails to reimburse the city as required
by division (A) within 30 days, the Enforcement Officer may certify to the
County Auditor the amount of the bill, plus any additional administrative
costs, tax duplicate for the property affected, and the total amount,
including any accrued interest, shall be collected as delinquent taxes are
collected, except that payments from these efforts shall be made to the city.



   (C)    Any person who fails to comply with this chapter shall be
subject to:



      (1)   Civil penalties up to the amount of $2,500 per violation
per day.



      (2)   A lien for abatement costs, civil penalties and other
damages under this chapter upon the real property owned which is the subject
of any notice of violation or any abatement efforts on the part of the city
or the Enforcement Officer.



      (3)   In assessing any civil penalty, the following factors
should be considered: (a) the seriousness of the violation or violations; (b)
the economic benefit (if any) resulting from the violation or violations; (c)
any history of such violations, and any good-faith efforts to comply with the
applicable requirements; (d) the economic impact of the penalty on the
violator; and, (e) such other matters as justice may require.



   (D)   The city shall be entitled to the reasonable attorneys' fees
and costs expended in obtaining amounts due the city under this chapter.



   (E)   Funds recovered under this chapter will be charged back to the
city department that provided services or materials.  It is the intent of
this chapter that amounts expended by any city department in performing
activities authorized under this chapter shall be replenished in a prompt
manner.



   (F)   The remedies provided for in this section shall be
supplemental to and in addition to all other available remedies at law and
equity.



(Ord. CO-05-11, passed 10-24-05)



TITLE X:  PROPERTY MAINTENANCE AND STANDARDS



   Chapter



      100.   PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE



CHAPTER 100:  PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE



Section



Administration



   100.01   General



   100.02   Validity



   100.03   Maintenance



   100.04   Duties and Powers of Code Official



   100.05   Violations



   100.06   Notices and orders



   100.07   Unsafe structures and unlawful equipment and structures



   100.08   Emergencies



   100.09   Demolition



   100.10   Means of appeal



Definitions



   100.20   General



   100.21   General definitions



General Requirements



   100.25   General



   100.26   Exterior property areas



   100.27   Exterior structure



   100.28   Interior structure



Light, Ventilation and Occupancy Requirements



   100.35   General



   100.36   Definitions



   100.37   Minimum standards for light and ventilation



   100.38   Minimum standards for basic equipment and facilities



   100.39   Occupancy requirements



Plumbing Facilities and Fixture Requirements



   100.45   General



   100.46   Definitions



   100.47   Required facilities



   100.48   Toilet rooms



   100.49   Plumbing fixtures



   100.50   Water system



   100.51   Sanitary drainage system



   100.52   Storm drainage



Mechanical and Electrical Requirements



   100.60   General



   100.61   Heating facilities



   100.62   Mechanical equipment



   100.63   Facilities



   100.64   Electrical equipment



   100.65   Disconnection or disruption of electrical service



Fire Safety Requirements



   100.70   General



   100.71   Means of egress



   100.72   Accumulations and storage



   100.73   Fire resistance ratings



   100.74   Fire protection systems



   100.75   Elevator recall



   100.76   Mechanical equipment control



Abandoned Buildings



   100.85   Boarding standards for abandoned properties



ADMINISTRATION



§ 100.01  GENERAL.



   (A)   Title. These regulations shall be known as the Property
Maintenance Code of the City of Frankfort hereinafter referred to as “this
code.”



   (B)   Scope. This code is to protect the public health, safety and
welfare in all existing structures, residential and nonresidential, and on
all existing premises by establishing current minimum requirements and
standards for premises, structures, equipment, and facilities for light,
ventilation, space, heating, sanitation, protection from the elements, life
safety, safety from fire and other hazards, and for safe and sanitary
maintenance; fixing the responsibility of owners, operator and occupants;
regulating the occupancy of existing structures and premises, and providing
for administration, enforcement and penalties. In the event of a conflict
between the provisions of this code and the rules of the Fire Prevention and
Building Safety Commission (“Commission”), the rules of the Commission
shall govern.



   (C)   Intent. This code shall be construed to secure its expressed
intent, which is to ensure public health, safety and welfare insofar as they
are affected by the continued occupancy and maintenance of structures and
premises. Existing structures and premises that do not comply with these
provisions shall be altered or repaired to provide a minimum level of health
and safety as required herein.



   (D)   Existing remedies. The provisions in this code shall not be
construed to abolish or impair existing remedies of the jurisdiction or its
officers or agencies relating to the removal or demolition of any structure
which is dangerous, unsafe and unsanitary.



   (E)   Workmanship. All repairs, maintenance work, alterations or
installations which are caused directly or indirectly by the enforcement of
this code shall be executed and installed in a workmanlike manner.



   (F)   Application of other codes.



      (1)   Any construction, repairs, additions or alterations to a
structure, or changes of occupancy, shall be done in accordance with the
procedures and provisions of the rules and regulations of the Commission as
set out in the following articles of Title 675 of the Indiana Administrative
Code:



         (a)   Article 12: General Administrative Rules.



         (b)   Article 13: Building Codes.



            1.   Fire and Building Safety Standards.



            2.   Indiana Building Code.



         (c)   Article 14:  Indiana One and Two Family Dwelling
Code.



         (d)   Article 16:  Indiana Plumbing Code.



         (e)   Article 17:  Indiana Electrical Code.



         (f)   Article 18: Indiana Mechanical Code.



         (g)   Article 19: Indiana Energy Conservation Code.



         (h)   Article 20: Indiana Swimming Pool Code.



         (i)   Article 22: Indiana Fire Code.



         (j)   Article 25: Indiana Fuel Gas Code.



      (2)   The foregoing articles of Title 675 of the Indiana
Administrative Code, together with any amendments, supplements or additions
thereto, as the same are published in the Indiana Register as a final rule or
in the Indiana Administrative Code, are hereby incorporated by reference into
this code.



(Ord. CO-96-08, passed 9-23-96; Am. Ord. CO-01-5, passed 3-26-01; Am. Ord.
06-2, passed 7-13-06; Am. Ord. 14-20, passed 12-22-14)



§ 100.02  VALIDITY.



   (A)   Severability. If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence,
clause or phrase of this code shall be declared invalid, unconstitutional or
unlawful for any reason whatsoever, such decision shall not affect the
remaining portions of this code which shall continue in full force and
effect, and to this end the provisions of this code are hereby declared to be
severable.



   (B)   Saving clause. This code shall not affect violations of any
other ordinance, code or regulation existing prior to the effective date
hereof, and any such violation shall be governed and shall continue to be
punishable to the full extent of the law under the provisions of those
ordinances, codes or regulations in effect at the time the violation was
committed.



(Ord. CO-96-08, passed 9-23-96; Am. Ord. CO-01-5, passed 3-26-01; Am. Ord.
06-2, passed 7-13-06; Am. Ord. 14-20, passed 12-22-14)



§ 100.03  MAINTENANCE.



   Required. All equipment, systems devices and safeguards required by
this code or a previous statute or code for the structure or premises when
erected or altered shall be maintained in good working order. The
requirements of this code are not intended to provide the basis for removal
or abrogation of fire protection and safety systems and devices in existing
structures.



(Ord. CO-96-08, passed 9-23-96; Am. Ord. CO-01-5, passed 3-26-01; Am. Ord.
06-2, passed 7-13-06; Am. Ord. 14-20, passed 12-22-14)



§ 100.04  DUTIES AND POWERS OF CODE OFFICIAL.



   (A)   General. The following officials are hereby designated and
empowered as Code Officials who shall enforce or assist in enforcing
provisions of this code: County Health Officer and County Sanitarian-Health
and Sanitation; City Engineer/Building Inspector-Structure and Equipment;
City Fire Inspector-Fire and Life Safety.



   (B)   Notices and orders. The Code Official shall issue all
necessary notices or orders to ensure compliance with the code.



   (C)   Right of entry. The Code Official is authorized to enter the
structure or premises at reasonable times to inspect. Prior to entering into
a space not otherwise open to the general public, the Code Official shall
make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or
control of the structure or premises, present proper identification and
request entry. If requested entry is refused or not obtained, the Code
Official shall pursue recourse as provided by law.



   (D)   Access by owner or operator. Every occupant of a structure or
premises shall give the owner or operator thereof, or agent or employee,
access to any part of such structure or its premises at reasonable times for
the purpose of making such inspection, maintenance, repairs or alterations as
are necessary to comply with the provisions of this code.



   (E)   Identification. The Code Official shall carry proper
identification when inspecting structures or premises in the performance of
duties under this code.



   (F)   Coordination of enforcement. Inspection of premises, the
issuance of notices and orders and enforcement thereof shall be the
responsibility of the Code Official so charged by the jurisdiction. 
Whenever inspections are necessary by any other department, the Code Official
shall make reasonable effort to arrange for the coordination of such
inspections so as to minimize the number of visits by inspectors, and to
confer with the other departments for the purpose of eliminating conflicting
orders before any are issued. A department shall not, however, delay the
issuance of any emergency orders.



   (G)   Organization. The Code Official shall appoint such number of
officers, technical assistants, inspectors, and other employees as shall be
necessary for the administration of this code and as authorized by the
appointing authority. The Code Official is authorized to designate any
employee as deputy who shall exercise all the powers of the Code Official
during the temporary absence or disability of the Code Official.



   (H)   Relief from personal responsibility. The Code Official,
officer or employee charged with the enforcement of this code, while acting
for the jurisdiction, shall not thereby be rendered liable personally, and is
hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage accruing to
persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the
discharge of official duties. Any suit instituted against an officer or
employee in the lawful discharge of duties and under the provisions of this
code shall be defended by the legal representative of the jurisdiction until
the final termination of the proceedings. The Code Official or any
subordinate shall not be liable for costs in any action, suit or proceeding
that is instituted in pursuance of the provisions of this code; and any
officer of the Department of Building Inspection, acting in good faith and
without malice, shall be free from liability for acts performed under any of
its provisions or by reason of any act or omission in the performance of
official duties in connection therewith.



   (I)   Official records. An official record shall be kept of all
business and activities of the department specified in the provisions of this
code, and all such records shall be open to public inspection at all
appropriate times and according to reasonable rules to maintain the integrity
and security of such records.



(Ord. CO-96-08, passed 9-23-96; Am. Ord. CO-01-5, passed 3-26-01; Am. Ord.
06-2, passed 7-13-06; Am. Ord. 14-20, passed 12-22-14)



§ 100.05  VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for any person firm, or
corporation to erect, construct, alter, extend, repair, remove, demolish,
maintain, fail to maintain, provide, fail to provide, occupy, let to another
or occupy or permit another person to occupy any structure or equipment
regulated by this code, or cause same to be done, contrary to or in conflict
with or in violation of any of the provisions of this code, or to fail to
obey a lawful order of the Code Official, or to remove or deface a placard or
notice posted under the provisions of this code.



   (B)   Penalty. Any person who shall be determined by the Code
Official to have violated a provision of this code shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to a fine as follows:



      (1)   First offense, fine not less than $100 nor more than
$250, together with court costs, as determined by the court.



      (2)   For a second offense of the same nature and occurring on
the same property and within 24 months of a first offense, the fine shall not
be less than $250 no more than $500 together with court costs, as determined
by the court.



      (3)   For a third offense of the same nature and occurring on
the same property within 24 months of the second offense, the fine shall be
not less than $500  nor more than $2,500 together with court costs, as
determined by the court.



   (C)   Enforcement. The Code Official shall issue written citations
and/or orders for violations of this section and shall institute appropriate
actions or proceedings at law to exact the penalties provided in division (B)
above. The Code Official may request the city’s legal representative to
proceed at law or in equity against the person responsible for the violation
for the purpose of ordering that person:



      (1)   To restrain, correct or remove the violation or refrain
from any further execution of work;



      (2)   To restrain or correct the erection, installation,
maintenance, repair or alteration of such structure;



      (3)   To require the removal of work in violation; or



      (4)   To prevent the occupancy of the structure that is not in
compliance with the provisions of this code.



(Ord. CO-96-08, passed 9-23-96; Am. Ord. CO-01-5, passed 3-26-01; Am. Ord.
06-2, passed 7-13-06; Am. Ord. 14-20, passed 12-22-14)



§ 100.06  NOTICES AND ORDERS.



   (A)   Notice to owner or to person or persons responsible. Whenever
the Code Official determines that there has been a violation of this code or
has grounds to believe that a violation has occurred, notice shall be given
to the owner of the property or the person or persons responsible for such
violation.  Notices for condemnation procedures shall also comply with §
100.07(B).



   (B)   Form. Such notice prescribed in division (A) shall:



      (1)   Be in writing;



      (2)   Include a description of the real estate sufficient for
identification;



      (3)   Include a statement of the reason or reasons why the
notice is being issued; and



      (4)   Include a correction order allowing a reasonable time
for the repairs and improvements required to bring the dwelling unit or
structure into compliance with the provisions of this code.



   (C)   Method of service. Such notice shall be deemed to be properly
served if a copy thereof is (a) delivered to the owner personally; or (b)
sent by certified or registered mail addressed to the owner at the last known
address, with return receipt requested. If the certified or registered letter
is returned showing that the letter was not delivered, a copy thereof shall
be posted in a conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by such
notice. Service of such notice in the foregoing manner upon the owner’s
agent or upon the person responsible for the structure shall constitute
service of notice upon the owner.



   (D)   Penalties. Penalties for noncompliance with orders and notices
shall be as set forth in § 100.05(B).



   (E)   Transfer of ownership. It shall be unlawful for the owner of
any dwelling unit or any other structure who has received a compliance order
or upon whom a notice of violation has been served to sell, transfer,
mortgage, lease or otherwise dispose to another until the provisions of the
compliance order or notice of violation have been complied with, or until
such owner shall first furnish the grantee, transferee, mortgagee, or lessee
a true copy of any compliance order or notice of violation issued by the code
official and shall furnish to the Code Official a signed and notarized
statement from the grantee, transferee, mortgagee, or lessee, acknowledging
the receipt of such compliance order or notice of violation and fully
accepting the responsibility without condition for making the corrections or
repairs required by such compliance order or notice of violation.



(Ord. CO-96-08, passed 9-23-96; Am. Ord. CO-01-5, passed 3-26-01; Am. Ord.
06-2, passed 7-13-06; Am. Ord. 14-20, passed 12-22-14)



§ 100.07  UNSAFE STRUCTURES AND UNLAWFUL EQUIPMENT AND STRUCTURES.



   (A)   General. When a structure or equipment is found by the Code
Official to be unsafe, or when a structure is found unfit for human
occupancy, or is found unlawful, such structure shall be condemned pursuant
to the provisions of this code.



   (B)   Unsafe structure. An unsafe structure is one that is found to
be dangerous to the life, health, property or safety of the public or the
occupants of the structure by not providing minimum safeguards to protect or
warn occupants in the event of fire, or because such structure is so damaged,
decayed, dilapidated, structurally unsafe, or of such faulty construction or
unstable foundation, that partial or complete collapse is likely.  For the
purpose of this code, any structure or premises that have any or all of the
conditions or defects described below shall be considered dangerous:



      (1)   Any door, aisle, passageway, stairway, exit or other
means of egress that does not conform to the approved building or fire code
of the jurisdictions related to the requirements for existing buildings.



      (2)   The walking surface of any aisle, passageway, stairway,
exit or other means of egress is so warped, worn loose, torn or otherwise
unsafe as to not provide safe and adequate means of egress.



      (3)   Any portion of a building, structure or appurtenance
that has been damaged by fire, earthquake, wind, flood, deterioration,
neglect, abandonment, vandalism or by any other cause to such an extent that
it is likely to partially or completely collapse, or to become detached or
dislodged.



      (4)   Any portion of a building, or any member, appurtenance
or ornamentation on the exterior thereof that is not of sufficient strength
or stability, or is not so anchored, attached or fastened in place so as to
be capable of resisting natural or artificial loads of one and one-half the
original designed value.



      (5)   The building or structure, or part of the building or
structure, because of dilapidation, deterioration, decay, faulty
construction, the removal or movement of some portion of the ground necessary
for the support, or for any other reason, is likely to partially or
completely collapse, or some portion of the foundation or underpinning of the
building or structure is likely to fail or give way.



      (6)   The building or structure, or any portion thereof, is
clearly unsafe for its use and occupancy.



      (7)   The building or structure is neglected, damaged,
dilapidated, unsecured or abandoned so as to become an attractive nuisance to
children who might play in the building or structure to their danger, becomes
a harbor for vagrants, criminals or immoral persons, or enables persons to
resort to the building or structure for committing a nuisance or an unlawful
act.



      (8)   Any building or structure that has been constructed,
exists or is maintained in violation of any specific requirement or
prohibition applicable to such building or structure provided by the approved
building or fire code of the jurisdiction, or of any law or ordinance to such
an extent as to present either a substantial risk of fire, building collapse
or any other threat to life and safety.



      (9)   A building or structure, used or intended to be used for
dwelling purposes, because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, decay,
damage, faulty construction or arrangement, inadequate light, ventilation,
mechanical or plumbing system, or otherwise, is determined by the Code
Official to be unsanitary, unfit for human habitation or in such a condition
that is likely to cause sickness or disease.



      (10)   Any building or structure, because of a lack of
sufficient or proper fire-resistance-rated construction, fire protection
systems, electrical system, fuel connections, mechanical system, plumbing
system or other cause, is determined by the Code Official to be a threat to
life or health,



      (11)   Any portion of a building remains on a site after the
demolition or destruction of the building or structure or whenever any
building or structure is abandoned so as to constitute such building or
portion thereof as an attractive nuisance or hazard to the public.



   (C)   Unsafe equipment. Unsafe equipment includes any boiler,
heating equipment, elevator, moving stairway, electrical wiring or device,
flammable liquid containers or other equipment on the premises or within the
structure which is in such disrepair or condition that such equipment is a
hazard to life, health, property or safety of public or occupants of the
premises or structure.



   (D)   Structure unfit for human occupancy. A structure is unfit for
human occupancy whenever the Code Official finds that such structure is
unsafe, unlawful or, because of the degree to which the structure is in
disrepair or lacks maintenance, is unsanitary, vermin or rat infested,
contains filth and contamination, or lacks ventilation, illumination,
sanitary or heating facilities or other essential equipment required by this
code, or because the location of the structure constitutes a hazard to the
occupants of the structure or to the public.



   (E)   Unlawful structure. An unlawful structure is one found in
whole or in part to be occupied by more persons than permitted under this
code, or was erected, altered or occupied contrary to law.



   (F)   Closing of vacant structures. If the structure is vacant and
unfit for human habitation and occupancy, and is not in danger of structural
collapse, the Code Official is authorized to post a placard of condemnation
on the premises and order the structure closed up so as not to be an
attractive nuisance.  Upon failure of the owner to close up the premises
within the time specified in the order, the Code Official shall cause the
premises to be closed through any available public agency or by contract or
arrangement by private persons and the cost thereof shall be charged against
the real estate upon which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon
such real estate.



   (G)   Notice. Whenever the Code Official has condemned a structure
or equipment under the provisions of this section, notice shall be posted in
a conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by such notice and
served on the owner or the person or persons responsible for the structure or
equipment in accordance with § 100.06(C). The notice shall be in the form
prescribed in § 100.06(B).



   (H)   Placarding. Upon failure of the owner or person responsible to
comply with the notice provisions within the time given, the Code Official
shall post on the premises or on defective equipment, a placard bearing the
word “condemned” and a statement of the penalties provided for occupying
the premises, operating the equipment or removing the placard.



   (I)   Prohibited occupancy. Any person who shall occupy placarded
premises or shall operate placarded equipment, and any owner or any person
responsible for the premises who shall let anyone occupy placarded premises
or operate placarded equipment shall be liable for the penalties provided by
this code.



   (J)   Removal of placard. The Code Official shall remove the
condemnation placard whenever the defect or defects upon which the
condemnation and placarding action were based have been eliminated.  Any
person who defaces or removes a condemnation placard without the approval of
the Code Official shall be subject to the penalties provided by this code.



(Ord. CO-96-08, passed 9-23-96; Am. Ord. CO-01-5, passed 3-26-01; Am. Ord.
06-2, passed 7-13-06; Am. Ord. 14-20, passed 12-22-14)



§ 100.08  EMERGENCIES.



   (A)   Imminent danger. When, in the opinion of the Code Official,
there is imminent danger of failure or collapse of a building or structure
which endangers life, or when any structure or part of a structure has fallen
and life is endangered by the occupation of the structure, or when there is
actual or potential danger to the building occupants or those in the
proximity of any structure because of explosives, explosive fumes or vapors
or the presence of toxic fumes, gases or materials, or operation of defective
or dangerous equipment, the Code Official is hereby authorized and empowered
to order and require the occupants to vacate the premises forthwith. The Code
Official shall cause to be posted at each entrance to such structure a notice
reading as follows: “This Structure is Unsafe and its Occupancy has been
prohibited by the Code Official.” It shall be unlawful for any person to
enter such structure except for the purpose of securing the structure, making
the required repairs, removing the hazardous condition, or of demolishing the
same.



   (B)   Temporary safeguards. Notwithstanding other provisions of this
code, whenever, in the opinion of the Code Official, there is imminent danger
due to an unsafe condition, the Code Official shall order the necessary work
to be done, including the boarding-up of openings, to render such structure
temporarily safe whether or not the legal procedure herein described has been
instituted; and shall cause such other action to be taken as the Code
Official deems necessary to meet such emergency.



   (C)   Closing streets. When necessary for the public safety, the
Code Official shall temporarily close structures and close, or order the
authority having jurisdiction to close, sidewalks, streets, public ways and
places adjacent to unsafe structures, and prohibit the same from being
utilized.



   (D)   Emergency repairs. For the purposes of this section, the Code
Official shall employ the necessary labor and materials to perform the
required work as expeditiously as possible.



   (E)   Cost of emergency repairs. Costs incurred in the performance
of emergency work shall be paid from the treasury of the jurisdiction on
approval of the Code Official. The legal counsel of the jurisdiction shall
institute appropriate action against the owner of the premises where the
unsafe structure is or was located for the recovery of such costs.



   (F)   Hearing. Any person ordered to take emergency measures shall
comply with such order forthwith. Any affected person shall thereafter, upon
petition directed to the Board of Public Works and Safety be afforded a
hearing as described in this code.



(Ord. CO-96-08, passed 9-23-96; Am. Ord. CO-01-5, passed 3-26-01; Am. Ord.
06-2, passed 7-13-06; Am. Ord. 14-20, passed 12-22-14)



§ 100.09  DEMOLITION.



   (A)   General. The Code Official shall order the owner of any
premises upon which is located any structure, which in the Code Official’s
judgment is so old, dilapidated or has become so out of repair as to be
dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary or otherwise unfit for human habitation or
occupancy, and such that it is unreasonable to repair the structure, to raze
and remove such structure; or if such structure is capable of being made safe
by repairs, to repair and make safe and sanitary or to raze and remove at the
owner’s option; or where there has been a cessation of normal construction
of any structure for a period of more than two years, to raze and remove such
structure.



   (B)   Order. All notices and orders shall comply with § 100.06.



   (C)   Failure to comply. If the owner of a premises fails to comply
with a demolition order within the time prescribed, the Code Official shall
cause the structure to be razed and removed, either through an available
public agency or by contract or arrangement with private persons, and the
cost of such razing and removal shall be charged against the real estate upon
which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate.



   (D)   Salvage materials. When any structure has been ordered razed
and removed, the governing body or other designated officer under the
contract or arrangement aforesaid shall have the right to sell the salvage
and valuable materials at the highest price obtainable. The net proceeds of
such sale, after deducting the expenses of such razing and removal, shall be
promptly remitted with a report of such sale or transaction, including the
items of expense and the amounts deducted, for the person who is entitled
thereto, subject to any order of a court. If such a surplus does not remain
to be turned over, the report shall so state.



(Ord. CO-96-08, passed 9-23-96; Am. Ord. CO-01-5, passed 3-26-01; Am. Ord.
06-2, passed 7-13-06; Am. Ord. 14-20, passed 12-22-14)



§ 100.10  MEANS OF APPEAL.



   (A)   Application for appeal. Any person affected by a decision of
the Code Official or a notice or order issued under this code shall have the
right to appeal to the Board of Works and Public Safety provided that a
written application for appeal is filed within 15 days after the day the
decision, notice, or order was served. An application for appeal shall be
based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the rules legally
adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this
code do not fully apply, or the requirements of this code are adequately
satisfied by other means.



   (B)   Open hearing. All hearings before the Board shall be open to
the public. The appellant, the appellant’s representative, the Code
Official, and any person whose interests are affected shall be given an
opportunity to be heard.



   (C)   Court review. Any person, whether or not a previous party of
the appeal, shall have the right to apply to the appropriate court for a writ
of certiorari to correct errors of law. Application for review shall be made
in the manner and time required by law following the filing of the decision
in the office of the chief administrative officer.



   (D)   Appeal to the Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission.



      (1)   A person aggrieved by an order issued under this code
may appeal to the Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission, in
accordance with I.C. 22-13-2-7 if the order relates to a rule adopted by the
Commission.



      (2)   The Commission may review all other orders issued under
this code.



      (3)   The review of an order by the Commission does not
suspend the running of the time period under any statute in which a person
must petition a court for judicial review of the order.



(Ord. CO-96-08, passed 9-23-96; Am. Ord. CO-01-5, passed 3-26-01; Am. Ord.
06-2, passed 7-13-06; Am. Ord. 14-20, passed 12-22-14)



DEFINITIONS



§ 100.20  GENERAL.



   (A)   Scope. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms
shall, for the purposes of this code, have the meanings shown in this
subchapter, unless such term is otherwise defined by the rules of the
Commission. In that event, the definition contained in the rules of the
Commission shall govern.



   (B)   Interchangeability. Words stated in the present tense include
the future; words stated in the masculine gender include the feminine and
neuter; the singular number includes the plural and the plural the singular.



   (C)   Terms not defined. Where terms are not defined in this code or
rules of the Commission, through the methods authorized by this section, such
terms shall have ordinarily accepted meanings such as the context implies.



   (D)   Parts. Whenever the words “dwelling unit,” “dwelling,”
“premises,” “building,” “rooming house,” “rooming unit,”
“story,” or “structure” are stated in this code, they shall be
construed as though they were followed by the words “or any part thereof.”



   (E)   Gender. Words used in the singular include the plural and the
plural the singular, the masculine gender includes the feminine and the
feminine the masculine.



(Ord. CO-96-08, passed 9-23-96; Am. Ord. CO-01-5, passed 3-26-01; Am. Ord.
06-2, passed 7-13-06; Am. Ord. 14-20, passed 12-22-14)



§ 100.21  GENERAL DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Definitions shall refer to the code in effect at the time of construction,
installation, or alteration.



   ACCESSORY BUILDING OR STRUCTURE. A detached building or structure in a
secondary or subordinate capacity from the main or principal building or
structure on the same premises.



   APPROVED. Approval by the building officials as the result of
investigation and tests conducted by him or her, or by reason of accepted
principles or tests by nationally recognized organizations.



   ASHES. The residue from the burning of combustible materials.



   ATTIC. Any story situated wholly or partly within the roof, and so
designed, arranged or built as to be used for business, storage, or
habitation.



   BASEMENT. That portion of a building that is partially or completely
below grade.



   BATHROOM. An area including a basin and one or more of the following: a
toilet, a tub, or a shower.



   BUILDING. Any structure defined in I.C. 22-12-1-4 and/or I.C.
22-12-1-5, or any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any
use or occupancy.



   BULK CONTAINER. Any garbage, rubbish, and/or refuse container having a
capacity of two cubic yards or greater and which is equipped with fittings
for hydraulic and/or mechanical emptying, unloading and/or removal.



   CELLAR. A portion of a building located partly or wholly underground,
and having more than one-half of its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the
average grade of the adjoining ground.



   CENTRAL HEATING SYSTEM. A single system supplying heat to one or more
dwelling unit(s) or more than rooming unit.



   CHIMNEY. A vertical masonry shaft of reinforced concrete, or other
approved noncombustible heat-resisting material enclosing one or more flues
for the purpose of removing products of combustion from solid, liquid or
gaseous fuel.



   CODE OFFICIALS. County Health Officer or County Sanitarian who shall
enforce all of the provisions of his or her section of this code; City
Engineer/ Building Inspector who shall enforce all of the provisions of his
or her section of this code; and City Fire Inspector who shall enforce all of
the provisions of his or her section of this code.



   DILAPIDATED. A decayed or deteriorated state that shall render the
structure inadequate for the purpose or use for which it was originally
intended.



   DORMITORY. Same as ROOMING UNIT.



   DWELLING. A residence with at least one dwelling unit as in I.C.
22-12-1-4 or I.C. 22-12-1-5.



   DWELLING UNIT. Any building or portion thereof that contains living
facilities, including provisions for sleeping, eating, cooking, and
sanitation.



   EGRESS. An arrangement of exit facilities to assure a safe means of
exit from buildings.



   EXIT. A continuous and unobstructed means of egress to a public way and
shall include intervening aisles, doors, doorways, gates, corridors, exterior
exit balconies, ramps, stairways, smoke proof enclosures, horizontal exits,
exit passageways, exit courts and yards, per I.C. 22-11-17-1.



   EXTERMINATION. The control and elimination of insects, rodents, or
other pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making
inaccessible materials that may serve as their food; by poisoning, spraying,
fumigating, trapping, or by any other recognized and legal pest elimination
methods approved by the Health Officer.



   FAMILY.



      (1)   Any number of individuals who:



         (a)   Are all related to each other by marriage,
consanguinity, or legal adoption, and



         (b)   Live together as a single household with a single
head of household.



      (2)   The term includes the following:



         (a)   Live-in paid domestic employees;



         (b)   Not more than two non-transient guests of the
household.



   FLUSH WATER CLOSET. A toilet bowl that is flushed with water which has
been supplied under pressure and equipped with water sealed trap above the
floor level.



   GARBAGE. The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking, serving and non-consumption of food.



   GRADE. The finished ground level adjoining the building at exterior
walls.



   HABITABLE ROOM. A room or enclosed floor space used or intended to be
used for living, sleeping, cooking, or eating purposes, excluding bathrooms,
water closet compartments, laundries, furnace rooms, pantries, kitchenettes
and utility rooms, foyers, or connecting corridors, stairways, closets,
storage spaces, and workshops, hobby and recreation areas.



   HEATED WATER. Water heated to a temperature of not less than 110
degrees Fahrenheit at the outlet.



   HEATING DEVICE. All furnaces, unit heaters, domestic incinerators,
cooking and heating stoves and ranges, and other similar devices.



   INFESTATION. The presence within or around a dwelling of any insects,
rodents, or other pests.



   JUNK VEHICLE. Any vehicle that is no longer operable, is currently
unlicensed, disassembled, wrecked or abandoned, or meets the criteria set out
in I.C. 9-13-2-1.



   LEAD-BASED PAINT. Any paint containing more lead than the level
established by the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission as being the
“safe” level of lead in residential paint and paint products.



   MOBILE STRUCTURE. As defined by I.C. 22-12-1-17.



   MULTIPLE DWELLING. Any dwelling containing more than two dwelling units.



   OCCUPANT. Any individual living, sleeping, cooking, or eating in or
having possession of a dwelling unit or a rooming unit.



   OPERATOR. Any person who has charge, care, control, or management of a
building, or part thereof, in which dwelling units or rooming units are let.



   OWNER.



      (1)   Any one or more of the following:



         (a)   The owner or owners in fee simple of a parcel of
real estate including the life tenant or tenants if any; or



         (b)   The record owner or owners as reflected by the
Clinton County Auditor’s record; or



         (c)   The purchaser or purchasers of such real estate
under any contract for the conditional sale thereof; or



         (d)   The person or persons in control of the property
as executor, executrix, trustee, receiver, or guardian of the owner.



      (2)   Any person acting as agent, or property manager for the
owner shall not be construed to be OWNER within the terms of this chapter,
but shall be bound to notify the owner, by means of a registered letter
addressed to the owner at his or her last known address, of any order or
notice issued by the Code Official relating to the property of the owner.



   PERMISSIBLE OCCUPANCY. The maximum number of individuals permitted to
reside in a dwelling unit or rooming unit.



   PERSON. Any individual, form, corporation, association, partnership,
cooperative or governmental agency.



   PLUMBING. All of the following supplied facilities and equipment: water
pipes, garbage disposal units, waste pipes, water closets, sinks, installed
dishwasher, lavatories, bathtubs shower baths, installed, catch basins,
drains, vents and any other similar supplied fixtures, and the installation
thereof, together with all connections to water or sewer lines.



   PRIVACY. The existence of conditions which will permit an individual or
individuals to carry out an activity commenced without interruption or
interference, either by sight or sound by unwanted individuals.



   PROPERLY CONNECTED. Connected in accordance with all applicable codes
and ordinances of the City of Frankfort or the State of Indiana.



   RAT HARBORAGE. Any conditions or place where rats can live, nest, or
seek shelter.



   RATPROOFING. A form of construction which will prevent the ingress or
egress of rats to or from a given space or building, or from gaining access
to food, water, or harborage. It consists of the closing and keeping closed
of every opening in foundations, basements, cellars, exterior and interior
walls, ground or first floors, roofs, sidewalk gratings, sidewalk openings,
and other places that may be reached and entered by rats by climbing,
burrowing or other methods, by the use of materials impervious to rat gnawing
and other methods approved by the Health Officer.



   REFUSE. All putrescible and nonpurtrescible solids including garbage,
rubbish, ashes and dead animals.



   REFUSE CONTAINER. A watertight container that is constructed of metal,
or other durable material impervious to rodents, that are capable of being
survived without creating insanitary conditions; or such other containers as
have been approved by the Code Official.  Openings into the container such
as covers and doors shall be tight fitting.



   ROOMING HOUSE. Any dwelling or that part of any dwelling, containing
one or more rooming units, and/or one or more dormitory rooms and in which
persons either individually or as families are housed with or without meals
being provided.



   ROOMING UNIT. Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable
unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking
purposes.



   RUBBISH. Non-putrescible solid wastes consisting of either:



      (1)   Combustible wastes such as paper, cardboard, plastic
containers, yard clippings, and wood; or



      (2)   Noncombustible wastes such as tin cans, glass and
crockery.



   SAFETY. The condition of being reasonably free from danger and hazards,
that may cause accidents or disease.



   SPACE HEATER. A self-contained heating appliance of either the
convection type or the radiant type and intended primarily to heat only a
limited space or area such as one room or two adjoining rooms.



   SUPPLIED. Paid for, furnished by, provided by, or under the control of
the owner, operator or agent.



   TEMPORARY HOUSING. Any tent, trailer or any other structure, or
building on the same premises for more than 30 consecutive days.



   TOXIC SUBSTANCE. Any chemical product applied on the surface of or
incorporated into any structural or decorative material which constitutes a
potential hazard to human health at acute or chronic exposure levels.



   UNDEFINED WORDS. Words not specifically defined in this chapter; they
shall have the common definition set forth in a standard dictionary.



   WEEDS. Vegetation which has attained a height of seven inches or more
and which constitutes a potential rat harborage or any other health or safety
hazard.



(Ord. CO-96-08, passed 9-23-96; Am. Ord. CO-01-5, passed 3-26-01; Am. Ord.
06-2, passed 7-13-06; Am. Ord. 14-20, passed 12-22-14)



GENERAL REQUIREMENTS



§ 100.25  GENERAL.



   (A)   Scope. The provisions of this subchapter shall govern the
current minimum conditions and the responsibilities of persons for
maintenance of structures, equipment and exterior property.



   (B)   Responsibility. Responsibilities of owners and occupants:



      (1)   No owner or other person shall occupy or let to another
person any dwelling unless the premises are clean, sanitary and fit for human
occupancy.



      (2)   Every owner of a dwelling containing more than one
dwelling unit shall maintain in a clean and sanitary condition the shared or
public area of the dwelling and premises thereof.



      (3)   Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall
maintain in a clean and sanitary condition the part of the dwelling and
premises thereof that he or she occupies and controls.



      (4)   Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall
store and dispose of all his or her rubbish in a clean, sanitary and safe
manner. Rubbish and trash shall be picked up in alleys where permissible.



      (5)   Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall
store and dispose of all his or her garbage, refuse and any other organic
waste which might provide food for insects and/or rodents in a clean,
sanitary and safe manner. All garbage cans and refuse containers shall be rat
proof, insect proof, water tight, structurally strong with tight fitting
covers or semi closures and shall be maintained at all times in a clean,
sanitary condition. Plastic garbage bags may be used on regular scheduled
trash pickup days provided they are set out at the required time.



      (6)   The owner of every occupied premise shall supply
approved bulk covered containers for rubbish, and the owner of the premise
shall be responsible for the removal of rubbish. Multi-family dwellings of
four or more units, commercial and industrial owners must use commercial
trash removal service.



      (7)   The total capacity of all provided garbage and/or refuse
cans and bulk storage containers shall be sufficient to meet the needs of the
occupants of the building.



      (8)   The occupants of a dwelling shall be responsible for the
extermination of insects and/or rats on the premises, except whenever the
infestation is caused by failure of the owner to maintain a dwelling in a rat
proof or reasonable insect proof condition at which time extermination shall
be the responsibility of the owner.



      (9)   No buildings, vehicle, structure, receptacle, yard, lot,
premises or part thereof shall be construed, made, used, maintained or
operated in any manner causing or producing any health or safety hazard or
permitted to become a rat or mosquito harborage or to become conducive to rat
or mosquito harborage.



      (10)   Every owner of a dwelling shall be responsible for
cutting and removing all weeds on the premises except where modified by
contract with a separate occupant.



      (11)   Every occupant of a dwelling shall keep all supplied
fixtures and facilities therein in a clean, sanitary condition and shall be
responsible for the exercise of reasonable care and the proper use and
operation thereof.



      (12)   It shall be unlawful for any occupant of any dwelling
unit, building, or structure of any kind whatever to vacate the premises
without his or her causing to be removed therefrom and properly disposed of
all garbage or rubbish or other objectionable waste of any kind.



      (13)   Every owner of premises shall maintain the premises in
a safe and sanitary condition and shall remove therefrom and properly dispose
of all garbage, rubbish and weeds.



      (14)   No person shall deposit or place any refuse or other
hazardous materials in or adjacent to any road, street, alley or other public
place unless it is in proper container for collection.



      (15)   No owner or occupant shall apply a lead base paint to
any surface in any dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house and/or rooming unit.



   (C)   Vacant structures and land. All vacant structures and premises
thereof or vacant land shall be maintained in a clean, safe, secure and
sanitary condition as provided herein so as not to cause a blighting problem
or adversely affect the public health or safety and in compliance with rules
of the Commission.



(Ord. CO-96-08, passed 9-23-96; Am. Ord. CO-01-5, passed 3-26-01; Am. Ord.
06-2, passed 7-13-06; Am. Ord. 14-20, passed 12-22-14)



§ 100.26  EXTERIOR PROPERTY AREAS.



   (A)   Sanitation. All exterior property and premises shall be
maintained in a clean, safe and sanitary condition. The occupant shall keep
that part of the exterior property that such occupant occupies or controls in
a clean and sanitary condition.



   (B)   Grading and drainage.



      (1)   All premises shall be graded and maintained to prevent
the accumulation of stagnant water thereon, or within any structure located
thereon.



      (2)   Exception. Water retention areas and reservoirs approved
by the county drainage board/city Plan Commission.



   (C)   Sidewalks and driveways. All sidewalks, walkways, stairs,
driveways, parking spaces and similar areas on private property shall be kept
in a proper state of repair, and maintained free from hazardous conditions.
Stairs shall comply with the requirements of division (J) below.



   (D)   Noxious weeds. All premises and exterior property shall be
maintained free from weeds or plant growth in excess of seven inches. All
noxious weeds shall be prohibited. WEEDS shall be defined as all grasses,
annual plants and vegetation, other than trees or shrubs provided; however,
this term shall not include cultivated flowers and gardens.



   (E)   Rat harborage. All structures and exterior property shall be
kept free from rat infestation.  Where rats are found, they shall be
promptly exterminated by approved processes that will not be injurious to
human health. After extermination proper precautions shall be taken to
prevent re-infestation. Along creeks, regulated drains and streams, property
owners may seek assistance from local and state government agencies to remove
rats.



   (F)   Exhaust vents. Pipes, ducts, conductors, fans or blowers shall
not discharge gases, steam, vapor, hot air, grease, smoke, odors or other
gaseous or particulate wastes directly upon abutting or adjacent public or
private property or that of another tenant unless permitted by the rules of
the Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission or its predecessor
agencies.



   (G)   Accessory structures. All accessory structures, including
detached garages, fences and walls, shall be maintained structurally sound
and in good repair.



   (H)   Motor vehicles.



      (1)   Except as provided for in other regulations, no
currently unregistered or uninspected motor vehicle shall be parked, kept or
stored on any premises, and no vehicle shall at any time be in a state of
major disassembly, disrepair, or in the process of being stripped or
dismantled.



      (2)   Exception. A vehicle of any type is permitted to undergo
major overhaul, including body work, provided that such work is performed
inside a structure or similarly enclosed area designed and approved for such
purposes.



(Ord. CO-96-08, passed 9-23-96; Am. Ord. CO-01-5, passed 3-26-01; Am. Ord.
06-2, passed 7-13-06; Am. Ord. 14-20, passed 12-22-14)



§ 100.27  EXTERIOR STRUCTURE.



   (A)   General. The exterior of a structure shall be maintained in
good repair, structurally sound and sanitary so as not to pose a threat to
the public health, safety or welfare.



   (B)   Street numbers. Each structure to which a street number has
been assigned shall have such number displayed in a position easily observed
and readable from the public right-of-way or accessible road. All numbers
shall be in Arabic numerals at least three inches high by two inches wide
except as otherwise permitted under the rules of the Commission.



   (C)   Structural members. All structural members shall be maintained
free from deterioration, and shall be capable of safely supporting the
imposed dead and live loads.



   (D)   Foundation walls. All foundation walls shall be maintained
plumb and free from open cracks and breaks and shall be kept in such
condition so as to prevent the entry of rats.



   (E)   Protective treatment. All exterior surfaces, including but not
limited to, doors, door and window frames, cornices, porches, trim,
balconies, decks and fences, shall be maintained in good condition. Exterior
wood surfaces, other than decay-resistant wood, shall be protected the
elements and decay by painting or other protective covering or treatment.
Peeling, flaking and chipped paint shall be eliminated and surfaces
repainted. All siding and masonry joints, as well as those between the
building envelope and the perimeter of windows, doors, and skylights, shall
be maintained weather resistance and water tight. All metal surfaces subject
to rust or corrosion shall be coated to inhabit such rust and corrosion, and
all surfaces with rust or corrosion shall be stabilized and coated to inhibit
future rust and corrosion. Oxidation stains shall be removed from exterior
surfaces; Surfaces designed for stabilization by oxidation are exempt from
this requirement.



   (F)   Roofs and drainage. The roof and flashing shall be sound,
tight and not have defects that admit rain. Roof drainage shall be adequate
to prevent dampness or deterioration in the walls or interior portion of the
structure. Roof water shall not be discharged in a manner that creates a
public nuisance.



   (G)   Decorative features. All cornices, belt courses, corbels,
terra cotta trim, wall facings and similar decorative features shall be
maintained in good repair.



   (H)   Overhang extensions. All canopies, marquees, signs, metal
awnings, stairways, fire escapes, standpipes, exhaust ducts and similar
overhang extensions shall be maintained in good repair and be properly
anchored so as to be kept in a safe and sound condition. When repaired, all
exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be protected from the elements and
against decay or rust by periodic application of weather-coating materials,
such as paint or similar surface treatment.



   (I)   Chimneys and towers. All chimneys, cooling towers smoke
stacks, and similar appurtenances shall be maintained structurally safe and
sound, and in good repair. All exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be
protected from the elements and against decay or rust by periodic application
of weather-coating materials, such as paint or similar surface treatment.



   (J)   Handrails and guards. Every handrail and guard shall be firmly
fastened and capable of supporting normally imposed loads and shall be
maintained in good condition.



   (K)   Window and door frames. Every window, door and frame shall be
kept in sound condition, good repair and weather tight.



   (L)   Glazing. All glazing (glass) materials shall be maintained
free from cracks and holes.



   (M)   Openable windows. Every window, other than a fixed window,
shall be easily openable and capable of being held in position by window
hardware.



   (N)   Insect screens.



      (1)   Every door, window and other outside opening utilized or
required for ventilation purposes serving any structure containing habitable
rooms, food preparation areas, food service areas, or any areas where
products to be included or utilized in food for human consumption are
processed, manufactured, packaged or stored, shall be supplied with approved
tightly fitting screens of not less than 16 mesh per inch and every exterior
storm door shall have a self-closing device in good working condition.



      (2)   Exception. Screen doors shall not be required for
out-swinging doors or other types of openings which make screening
impractical, provided other approved means, such as air curtains or insect
repellent fans are employed.



   (O)   Doors. All exterior doors and hardware shall be maintained in
good condition. Locks at all entrances to dwelling units, rooming units and
guest rooms shall tightly secure the door.



   (P)   Basement hatchways. Every basement hatchway shall be
maintained to prevent the entrance of rats, rain and surface drainage water.



   (Q)   Guards for basement windows. Every basement window that is
openable shall be supplied with storm windows or other approved protection
against the entry of rats.



   (R)   Defacement of property. No person shall willfully or wantonly,
mutilate or deface any exterior surface of any structure or building on any
private or public property by placing thereon any marking, carving or
graffiti. It shall be the responsibility of the owner to restore the surface
to an approved state of maintenance and repair.



   (S)   Swimming pools hot tubs and spas.



      (1)   Swimming pools shall be maintained in a clean and
sanitary condition, and in good repair. Swimming pools, hot tubs and spas,
containing water more than 24 inches in depth shall be completely surrounded
by a fence or barrier at least 48 inches in height above the finished ground
level measured on the side of the barrier away from the pool. Gates and doors
in such barriers shall be self-closing and self-latching. Where the
self-latching device is a minimum of 54 inches above the bottom of the gate,
the release mechanism shall be located on the pool side of the gate.
Self-closing and self-latching gates shall be maintained such that the gate
will positively close and latch when released from an open position of six
inches from the gatepost. No existing pool enclosure shall be removed,
replaced or changed in a manner that reduces its effectiveness as a safety
barrier.



      (2)   Exception. Spas or hot tubs with a safety cover that
complies with ASTM F 1346 shall be exempt from the provisions of this
division (S) that otherwise comply with the rules of the Commission.



(Ord. CO-96-08, passed 9-23-96; Am. Ord. CO-01-5, passed 3-26-01; Am. Ord.
06-2, passed 7-13-06; Am. Ord. 14-20, passed 12-22-14)



§ 100.28  INTERIOR STRUCTURE.



   (A)   General. The interior of a structure and equipment therein
shall be maintained in good repair, structurally sound and in a sanitary
condition. Every occupant shall keep that part of the structure that such
occupant occupies or controls in a clean and sanitary condition. Every owner
of a structure containing a rooming house, a hotel, a dormitory, two or more
dwelling units or two or more nonresidential occupancies, shall maintain, in
a clean and sanitary condition the shared or public areas of the structure
and exterior property.



   (B)   Structural members. The supporting structural members of every
structure shall be maintained structurally sound, and be capable of
supporting the imposed loads.



   (C)   Interior surfaces. All interior surfaces, including windows
and doors, shall be maintained in good, clean and sanitary condition. Peeling
paint, cracked or loose plaster, decayed wood, and other defective surface
conditions shall be corrected.



   (D)   Lead-based paint. Interior and exterior painted surfaces of
dwellings and child and day care facilities, including fences and
outbuildings, which contain in excess of 0.06% lead by weight shall be
removed or covered in an approved manner. Any surface to be covered shall
first be marked with warnings as to the lead content of such surface.



   (E)   Stairs and railings. All interior stairs and railings shall be
maintained in sound condition and good repair.



   (F)   Handrails and guards. Every handrail and guard shall be firmly
fastened and capable of supporting normally imposed loads and shall be
maintained in good condition.



   (G)   Infestation. All structures shall be kept free from insect and
rodent infestation. All structures in which insects or rodents are found
shall be promptly exterminated by approved processes that will not be
injurious to human health. After pest elimination, proper precautions shall
be taken to prevent reinfestation.



      (1)   Owner. The owner of any structure shall be responsible
for pest elimination within the structure prior to renting or leasing the
structure.



      (2)   Single occupant. The occupant of a one-family dwelling
or of a single-tenant nonresidential structure shall be responsible for pest
elimination on the premises.



      (3)   Multiple occupancy. The owner of a structure containing
two or more dwelling units, a multiple occupancy, a rooming house or a
nonresidential structure shall be responsible for pest elimination in the
public or shared areas of the structure and exterior property. If infestation
is caused by failure of an occupant to prevent such infestation in the area
occupied, the occupant and owner shall be responsible for pest elimination.



      (4)   Occupant.



         (a)   The occupant of any structure shall be responsible
for the continued rodent and pest-free condition of the structure.



         (b)   Exception. Where the infestations are caused by
defects in the structure, the owner shall be responsible for pest elimination.



(Ord. CO-96-08, passed 9-23-96; Am. Ord. CO-01-5, passed 3-26-01; Am. Ord.
06-2, passed 7-13-06; Am. Ord. 14-20, passed 1-22-14)



LIGHT, VENTILATION AND OCCUPANCY REQUIREMENTS



§ 100.35  GENERAL.



   (A)   Scope. The provisions of this subchapter shall govern the
current minimum conditions and standards for ventilation, basic equipment and
facilities. Subject to the rules of the Commission any buildings or equipment
constructed or installed under a prior code shall be maintained in
conformance with the rules of the Fire Prevention and Building Safety
Commission or its predecessors.



   (B)   Responsibility. The owner of the structure shall provide and
maintain light, ventilation, basic equipment and facilities in compliance
with these requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant, or
permit another person to occupy any premises that do not comply with the
requirements of this subchapter.



   (C)   Alternative devices. In lieu of the means for natural light
and ventilation herein prescribed, artificial light or mechanical ventilation
shall be permitted.



(Ord. CO-96-08, passed 9-23-96; Am. Ord. CO-01-5, passed 3-26-01; Am. Ord.
06-2, passed 7-13-06; Am. Ord. 14-20, passed 12-22-14)



§ 100.36  DEFINITIONS.



   General. The following words and terms shall, for the purposes of this
subchapter and as stated elsewhere in this code, have the meanings shown
herein, unless such term is otherwise defined by the rules of the Commission.
In the event, the definitions contained in the rules of the Commission shall
govern. (Definitions shall refer to the code in effect at the time of
construction, installation, or alteration.)



   HABITABLE SPACE. Space in a structure for living, sleeping, eating or
cooking. Bathrooms, toilet compartments, closets, halls, storage or utility
spaces, and similar areas are not considered HABITABLE SPACES.



   OPENABLE AREA. That portion of a window or door which is available for
unobstructed ventilation and which opens directly to the outdoors.



   VENTILATION. The natural or mechanical process of supplying conditioned
air to, or removing such air from, any space.



(Ord. CO-96-08, passed 9-23-96; Am. Ord. CO-01-5, passed 3-26-01; Am. Ord.
06-2, passed 7-13-06; Am. Ord. 14-20, passed 12-22-14)



§ 100.37  MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR LIGHT AND VENTILATION.



   (A)   Habitable spaces. Every newly constructed habitable room shall
have at least one window or skylight facing directly outdoors. If such window
or skylight cannot be easily opened to adequately ventilate the room then
alternative ventilation must be provided as required. Prior construction
shall be covered by the code in effect at the time of construction and
installation, or alteration, in accordance with the rules of the Commission.



   (B)   Bathrooms and toilet rooms. Every bathroom and water closet
compartment and non-habitable room used for food preparation shall comply
with the light and ventilation requirement except that no window or skylight
shall be required in such rooms if they are equipped with an adequate
ventilation system, or otherwise complies with the rules of the Commission.



      (1)   Air exhausted by a mechanical ventilation system from a
bathroom with a dwelling unit shall be exhausted to the exterior and shall
not be re-circulated to any space, including the space from which such air is
withdrawn, unless permitted under the rules of the Commission.



      (2)   Air exhausted by a mechanical ventilation system from
all other bathrooms or toilet rooms shall be exhausted to the exterior
without re-circulation to any space, unless permitted under the rules of the
Commission.



      (3)   (a)   Every common hall and stairway, other than in
one-and two-family dwellings, shall be lighted at all times with at least a
60-watt standard incandescent light bulb or equivalent for each 200 square
feet of floor area, provided that the spacing between lights shall not be
greater than 30 feet.  Every exterior stairway shall be illuminated with a
minimum of 1 foot-candle (11 lux) at floors, landings and treads.



         (b)   Exception. Buildings and structures that comply
with the rules of the Commission.



      (4)   All other spaces shall be provided with natural or
artificial light sufficient to permit the maintenance of sanitary conditions,
and the safe occupancy of the space and utilization of the appliances,
equipment and fixtures.



   (C)   Process ventilation. Unless otherwise permitted under the
rules of the Commission where injurious, toxic, irritating or noxious fumes,
gases, dusts or mists are generated, a local exhaust ventilation system shall
be provided to remove the contaminating agent at the source. Air shall be
exhausted to the exterior and not be re-circulated to any space.



   (D)   Clothes dryer exhaust. Clothes dryer venting system shall be
independent of all other systems and shall be vented to the outside in
accordance with manufacturer’s instructions.



(Ord. CO-96-08, passed 9-23-96; Am. Ord. CO-01-5, passed 3-26-01; Am. Ord.
06-2, passed 7-13-06; Am. Ord. 14-20, passed 12-22-14)



§ 100.38  MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR BASIC EQUIPMENT AND FACILITIES.



   (A)   Cooking facilities. Unless approved through the certificate of
occupancy, cooking shall not be permitted in any rooming unit or dormitory
unit, and a cooking facility or appliance shall not be permitted to be
present in a rooming unit or dormitory unit.



   (B)   Food preparation. Every dwelling unit shall have a room or
portion of a room in which food may be prepared and/or cooked which shall
have adequate circulation area and which shall be equipped with the following:



      (1)   A kitchen sink in good working condition, providing
adequate amounts of heated and unheated running water under pressure.



      (2)   A counter or table for food preparation of sound
construction furnished with surfaces that are easily cleaned up and that will
not impart any toxic or harmful effect to food.



      (3)   A stove or similar device for cooking food and a
refrigerator or similar device for the safe storage of food at temperatures
less than 41 degrees Fahrenheit. Both stove and refrigerator or similar
devices shall be properly installed with all necessary connections for safe,
sanitary and efficient operation; provided that such stove, refrigerator
and/or similar devices need not be installed when a dwelling unit is not
occupied and when the occupant is expected to provide same on occupancy and
that sufficient space is available for the operation of the stove,
refrigerator and/or similar devices.



   (C)   Bathrooms and toilet rooms. Within every dwelling unit there
shall be a non-habitable room which affords privacy to a person within that
room and which is equipped with a flush water closet in good working
condition.



      (1)   Within every dwelling unit there shall be a lavatory
sink which is in good working condition and properly connected to a water
supply system which provides at all times an adequate amount of heated and
unheated running water under pressure and is properly connected to a sewer
system.



      (2)   Within every dwelling unit there shall be a room which
affords privacy to a person within that room and which is equipped with a
bathtub or shower in good working condition and properly connected to an
appropriate water supply system and approved sewer system.



   (D)   Sewer facilities. Where sewer facilities are not available
within 300 feet of the lot upon which a dwelling unit is located, a separate
sewage disposal system shall be required. It shall be in a sanitary type
construction approved by the Health Officer.



   (E)   Exterior door locks. No person shall let to another for
occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit unless all exterior doors of the
dwelling or dwelling unit are equipped with functioning locking devices.



(Ord. CO-96-08, passed 9-23-96; Am. Ord. CO-01-5, passed 3-26-01; Am. Ord.
06-2, passed 7-13-06; Am. Ord. 14-20, passed 12-22-14)



§ 100.39  OCCUPANCY REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Privacy. Dwelling units, hotel units, housekeeping units,
rooming units and dormitory units shall be arranged to provide privacy and be
separate from other adjoining spaces.



   (B)   Minimum room widths.



      (1)   A habitable room, other than a kitchen, shall be a
minimum of seven feet in any plan dimension. Kitchens shall have a minimum
clear passageway of three feet between counter fronts and appliances or
counter fronts and walls.



      (2)   Exception. Buildings or portions of buildings, including
rooms, that comply with the rules of the Commission.



   (C)   Minimum ceiling heights.



      (1)   Habitable spaces, hallways, corridors, laundry areas,
bathrooms, toilet rooms and habitable basement areas shall have a minimum
clear ceiling height of seven feet.



      (2)   Exceptions.



         (a)   In one- and two-family dwellings, beams or girders
spaced a minimum of four feet on center and projecting a maximum of six
inches below the required ceiling height;



         (b)   Basement rooms in one- and two-family dwellings
occupied exclusively for laundry, study or recreation purposes, having a
minimum ceiling height of six feet eight inches with a minimum clear height
of six feet four inches under beams, girders, ducts and similar obstructions.



         (c)   Rooms occupied exclusively for sleeping, study or
similar purposes and having a sloped ceiling over all or part of the room,
shall have a minimum clear ceiling height of seven feet over a minimum of
one-third of the required minimum floor area. In calculating the floor area
of such rooms, only those portions of the floor area with a minimum clear
ceiling height of five feet shall be included.



         (d)   Buildings or portions of buildings including
rooms, that comply with the rules of the Commission.



   (D)   Bedroom and living room requirements. Every bedroom and living
room shall comply with the following requirements:



      (1)   Room area. Every living room shall contain at least 120
square feet and every bedroom shall contain a minimum of 70 square feet and
every bedroom occupied by more than one person shall contain a minimum of 50
square feet of floor area for each occupant thereof.



      (2)   Access from bedrooms.



         (a)   Bedrooms shall not constitute the only means of
access to other bedrooms or habitable spaces and shall not serve as the only
means of egress from other habitable spaces.



         (b)   Exceptions.



            1.   Units that contain fewer than two bedrooms.



            2.   Buildings or portions of buildings, including
rooms, that comply with the rules of the Commission.



      (3)   Water closet accessibility. Every bedroom shall have
access to at least one water closet and one lavatory without passing through
another bedroom. Every bedroom in a dwelling unit shall have access to at
least one water closet and lavatory located in the same story as the bedroom
or an adjacent story.



      (4)   Prohibited occupancy. Kitchens and non-habitable spaces
shall not be used for sleeping purposes.



      (5)   Other requirements. Bedrooms shall comply with the
applicable provisions of this code including, but not limited to, the light,
ventilation, room area, ceiling height and room width requirements of this
chapter; the plumbing facilities and water-heating facilities requirements of
§§ 100.45 through 100.52; the heating facilities and electrical receptacle
requirements of §§ 100.60 through 100.64; and the smoke detector and
emergency escape requirements of §§ 100.70 through 100.76.



   (E)   Overcrowding.



      (1)   (a)   Dwelling units shall not be occupied by more
occupants than permitted by the minimum area requirements of the Table
appearing below, except as permitted by the rules of the Commission.



 


TABLE 405.5




MINIMUM OCCUPANCY AREA REQUIREMENTS TABLE



Space Minimum Occupancy area in square feet


 

1-2 Occupants

 

2-5 Occupants

 

6 or More Occupants



Living Room
 

No requirements

 

120

 

150



Dining Room
 

No requirements

 

80

 

100



Kitchen
 

50

 

50

 

60




 



         (b)   Exceptions. Buildings, portions of buildings or
rooms that comply with the rules of the Commission.



      (2)   Sleeping area. The minimum occupancy area required by
Table 405.5 shall not be included as a sleeping area in determining the
minimum occupancy area for sleeping purposes. All sleeping areas shall comply
with this division (E).



      (3)   Combined spaces. Combined living room and dining room
spaces shall comply with the requirements of Table 405.5 if the total area is
equal to that required for separate rooms and if the space is located so as
to function as a combination living room/dining room.



   (F)   Efficiency unit.



      (1)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit an efficiency
living unit from meeting the following requirements:



         (a)   A unit occupied by not more than one occupant
shall have a minimum clear floor area of 120 square feet. A unit occupied by
not more than two occupants shall have a minimum clear floor area of 220
square feet. A unit occupied by three occupants shall have a minimum clear
floor area of 320 square feet. These required areas shall be exclusive of the
areas required by division (F)(1)(b) and (c) below.



         (b)   The unit shall be provided with a kitchen sink,
cooking appliance and refrigeration facilities, each having a minimum clear
working space of 30 inches in front. Light and ventilation conforming to this
code shall be provided.



         (c)    The unit shall be provided with a separate
bathroom containing a water closet, lavatory and bathtub or shower.



         (d)    The maximum number of occupants shall be three.



      (2)   Exceptions. Buildings or portions of buildings,
including rooms, that comply with the rules of the Commission.



   (G)   Food preparation. All spaces to be occupied for food
preparation purposes shall contain suitable space and equipment to store,
prepare and serve foods in a sanitary manner. There shall be adequate
facilities and services for the sanitary disposal of food wastes and refuse,
including facilities for temporary storage.



(Ord. CO-96-08, passed 9-23-96; Am. Ord. CO-01-5, passed 3-26-01; Am. Ord.
06-2, passed 7-13-06; Am. Ord. 14-20, passed 12-22-14)



PLUMBING FACILITIES AND FIXTURE REQUIREMENTS



§ 100.45  GENERAL.



   (A)   Scope. The provisions of this subchapter and the rules of the
Commission shall govern the current minimum plumbing facilities and plumbing
fixtures to be provided. Any plumbing facilities or fixtures constructed or
installed prior to this code shall be governed by the rules of the
Commission. In the event of a conflict between the provisions of this code
and the, rules of the Commission.



   (B)   Responsibility. The owner of the structure shall provide and
maintain such plumbing facilities and plumbing fixtures in compliance with
these requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit
another person to occupy any structure or premises which does not comply with
the requirements of this subchapter.



(Ord. CO-96-08, passed 9-23-96; Am. Ord. CO-01-5, passed 3-26-01; Am. Ord.
06-2, passed 7-13-06; Am. Ord. 14-20, passed 12-22-14)



§ 100.46  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   General. The following words and terms shall, for the purposes
of this subchapter and as stated elsewhere in this code, have the meanings
shown herein, unless such a term is otherwise defined by the rules of the
Commission. In the event, the definition contained in the rules of the
Commission shall govern. (Definitions shall refer to the code in effect at
the time of construction, installation, or alteration.)



      BATHROOM. An area including a basin and one or more of the
following: a toilet, tub, or shower.



      PLUMBING. The practice, materials and fixtures utilized in the
installation, maintenance, extension and alteration of all piping, fixtures,
appliances and appurtenances within the scope of the Indiana Plumbing Code.



      PLUMBING FIXTURE. A receptacle or device which is permanently
connected to the water distribution system of the premises, and demands a
supply of water therefrom; or discharges waste water, liquid-borne waste
materials, or sewage either directly or indirectly to the drainage system of
the premises; or which requires both a water supply connection and discharge
to the drainage system of the premises or shall refer to the code in effect
at the time of construction, installation, or alteration.



      TOILET ROOM. A room containing a water closet or urinal but not a
bathtub, shower, or basin.



(Ord. CO-96-08, passed 9-23-96; Am. Ord. CO-01-5, passed 3-26-01; Am. Ord.
06-2, passed 7-13-06; Am. Ord. 14-20, passed 12-22-14)



§ 100.47  REQUIRED FACILITIES.



   (A)   Dwelling units. Every dwelling unit shall contain its own
bathtub or shower, lavatory, water closet and kitchen sink which shall be
maintained in a sanitary, safe working condition. The lavatory shall be
placed in the same room as the water closet or located in close proximity to
the door leading directly into the room in which such water closet is located.



   (B)   Rooming houses.



      (1)   At least one water closet, lavatory and bathtub or
shower shall be supplied for each four rooming units.



      (2)   Exceptions. Buildings or portions of buildings,
including rooms, that otherwise comply with the rules of the Commission.



   (C)   Hotels.



      (1)   Where private water closets, lavatories and baths are
not provided, one water closet, one lavatory and one bathtub or shower having
access from a public hallway shall be provided for each ten occupants.



      (2)   Exceptions. Buildings or portions of buildings,
including rooms, that otherwise comply with the rules of the Commission.



   (D)   Employee’s facilities.



      (1)   A minimum of one water closet, one lavatory and one
drinking facility shall be available to employees in accordance with the
rules of the Commission or its predecessor agencies in effect at the time of
completion, construction, addition or alteration of the building or structure.



         (a)   Drinking facilities. Drinking facilities shall be
a drinking fountain, water cooler, bottled water cooler, or disposable cups
next to a sink or water dispenser.



      (2)   Exceptions. Buildings or portions of buildings,
including rooms, that otherwise comply with the rules of the Commission.



(Ord. CO-96-08, passed 9-23-96; Am. Ord. CO-01-5, passed 3-26-01; Am. Ord.
06-2, passed 7-13-06; Am. Ord. 14-20, passed 12-22-14)



§ 100.48  TOILET ROOMS.



   (A)   Privacy. Toilet rooms and bathrooms shall provide privacy and
shall not constitute the only passageway to a hall or other space, or to the
exterior.



   (B)   Location.



      (1)   Toilet rooms and bathrooms serving hotel units, rooming
units, or dormitory units, shall have access by traversing not more than one
flight of stairs and shall have access from a common hall or passageway.



      (2)   Exceptions. Buildings or portions of buildings,
including rooms, that otherwise comply with the rules of the Commission.



   (C)   Location of employee toilet facilities.



      (1)   Toilet facilities shall have access from within the
employees’ regular working area. The required toilet facilities shall be
located not more than one story above or below the employees’ regular
working area and the path of travel to such facilities shall not exceed a
distance of 500 feet. Employee facilities shall either be separate facilities
or public customer facilities.



      (2)   Exception. Facilities that are required for employees in
storage structures or kiosks, and which are located in adjacent structures
under the same ownership, lease or control, shall not exceed a travel
distance of 500 feet from the employees’ regular working area to the
facilities.



(Ord. CO-96-08, passed 9-23-96; Am. Ord. CO-01-5, passed 3-26-01; Am. Ord.
06-2, passed 7-13-06; Am. Ord. 14-20, passed 12-22-14)



§ 100.49  PLUMBING FIXTURES.



   (A)   General. All plumbing fixtures shall be properly installed and
maintained in working order, and shall be kept free from obstructions, leaks
and defects and be capable of performing the function for which such plumbing
fixtures are designed. All plumbing fixtures shall be maintained in a safe,
sanitary and functional condition.



   (B)   Fixture clearances. Plumbing fixtures shall have adequate
clearances for usage and cleaning.



(Ord. CO-96-08, passed 9-23-96; Am. Ord. CO-01-5, passed 3-26-01; Am. Ord.
06-2, passed 7-13-06; Am. Ord. 14-20, passed 12-22-14)



§ 100.50  WATER SYSTEM.



   (A)   General. Every sink, lavatory, bathtub or shower, drinking
fountain, water closet or other plumbing fixture shall be properly connected
to either a public water system or to an approved private water system. All
kitchen sinks, lavatories, laundry facilities, bathtubs and showers shall be
supplied with hot or tempered and cold running water.



   (B)   Contamination. The water supply shall be maintained free from
contamination.



   (C)   Supply. The water supply system shall be installed and
maintained to provide a supply of water to plumbing fixtures, devices and
appurtenances in sufficient volume and at pressures adequate to enable the
fixtures to function properly, safely and free from defects and leaks.



   (D)   Water heating facilities.



      (1)   Water heating facilities shall be properly installed,
maintained and capable of providing an adequate amount of water to be drawn
at every required sink, lavatory, bathtub, shower and laundry facility at a
temperature of not less than 110 degrees Fahrenheit (43 degrees Celsius). A
gas-burning water heater shall not be located in any bathroom, toilet room,
bedroom or other occupied room normally kept closed (exception: a direct vent
heater). An approved combination temperature and pressure relief valve and
relief valve discharge pipe shall be properly installed and maintained on
water heaters.



      (2)   Exceptions. Buildings or portions of buildings,
including rooms, that otherwise comply with the rules of the Commission.



(Ord. CO-96-08, passed 9-23-96; Am. Ord. CO-01-5, passed 3-26-01; Am. Ord.
06-2, passed 7-13-06; Am. Ord. 14-20, passed 12-22-14)



§ 100.51  SANITARY DRAINAGE SYSTEM.



   (A)   General. All plumbing fixtures shall be properly connected to
either a public sewer system or to an approved private sewage disposal system.



   (B)   Maintenance. Every plumbing stack, vent, waste and sewer line
shall function properly and be kept free from obstructions, leaks and defects.



(Ord. CO-96-08, passed 9-23-96; Am. Ord. CO-01-5, passed 3-26-01; Am. Ord.
06-2, passed 7-13-06; Am. Ord. 14-20, passed 12-22-14)



§ 100.52  STORM DRAINAGE.



   General. Drainage of roofs and paved areas, yards and courts, and other
open areas on the premises shall not be discharged in a manner that creates a
public nuisance.



(Ord. CO-96-08, passed 9-23-96; Am. Ord. CO-01-5, passed 3-26-01; Am. Ord.
06-2, passed 7-13-06; Am. Ord. 14-20, passed 12-22-14)



MECHANICAL AND ELECTRICAL REQUIREMENTS



§ 100.60  GENERAL.



   (A)   Scope. Mechanical and electrical facilities and equipment
shall be in accordance with the rules of the Fire Prevention and Building
Safety Commission or its predecessor agencies.



   (B)   Responsibility. The owner of the structure shall provide and
maintain mechanical and electrical facilities and equipment in compliance
with these requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or
permit another person to occupy any premise that does not comply with the
requirements of this subchapter.



(Ord. CO-96-08, passed 9-23-96; Am. Ord. CO-01-5, passed 3-26-01; Am. Ord.
06-2, passed 7-13-06; Am. Ord. 14-20, passed 12-22-14)



§ 100.61  HEATING FACILITIES.



   (A)   Facilities required.



      (1)   Heating facilities shall be provided in structures as
required by this section.



      (2)   Exception. Buildings or portions of buildings, including
room, that otherwise comply with rules of the Commission.



   (B)   Residential buildings. Every dwelling shall be provided with
heating facilities capable of maintaining a room temperature of 68 degrees
Fahrenheit (18 degrees Celsius) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet
rooms based on the outside design temperature required for the locality.



      (1)   Heat supply. Every owner and operator of any building
who rents, leases or lets one or more dwelling unit, rooming unit, dormitory
or guestroom on terms, either express or implied, to furnish heat to the
occupants thereof shall supply sufficient heat during the period from
September to May to maintain the room temperatures specified in this division
(B) during the hours between 6:30 a.m. and 10:30 p.m. of each day and not
less than 60 degrees Fahrenheit (16 degrees in Celsius) during other hours.



      (2)   Room temperature exceptions. When the outdoor
temperature is below the outdoor design temperature required for the locality
by the Indiana Energy Conservation Code, the owner or operator shall not be
required to maintain the minimum  room temperatures, provided that the
heating system is operating at full capacity, with supply valves and dampers
in a full open position.



   (C)   Room temperature measurement. The required room temperatures
shall be measured at a point three feet above the floor and three feet from
the exterior walls.



(Ord. CO-96-08, passed 9-23-96; Am. Ord. CO-01-5, passed 3-26-01; Am. Ord.
06-2, passed 7-13-06; Am. Ord. 14-20, passed 12-22-14)



§ 100.62  MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT.



   (A)   Mechanical equipment. All mechanical equipment, fireplace and
fuel-burning appliances shall be properly installed and maintained in a safe
working condition and shall be capable of performing the intended function.



   (B)   Cooking and heating equipment. All cooking and heating
equipment, components and accessories in every heating, cooking and
water-heating device shall be maintained free from leaks and obstructions.



   (C)   Flue.



      (1)   All fuel-burning equipment and appliances shall be
connected to an approved chimney or vent.



      (2)   Exception. Fuel-burning equipment and appliances that
are labeled for unvented operation.



   (D)   Clearances. All required clearances to combustible materials
shall be maintained.



   (E)   Safety controls. All safety controls for fuel-burning
equipment shall be maintained in effective operation.



   (F)   Combustion air. A supply of air for complete combustion of the
fuel for ventilation of the space shall be provided for the fuel-burning
equipment.



   (G)   Energy conservation devices. Devices purporting to reduce fuel
consumption by attachment to a fuel-burning appliance, to the fuel supply
line thereto, or to the vent outlet or vent piping therefrom, shall not be
installed unless labeled for such purpose and the installation is
specifically approved.



(Ord. CO-96-08, passed 9-23-96; Am. Ord. CO-01-5, passed 3-26-01; Am. Ord.
06-2, passed 7-13-06; Am. Ord. 14-20, passed 12-22-14)



§ 100.63  FACILITIES.



   Electrical system hazards. Where is found that the electrical system in
a structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants or the structure by reason
of inadequate service, improper fusing, insufficient outlets, improper wiring
or installation, deterioration or damage, or for similar reasons, the Code
Official shall require the defects to be corrected to eliminate the hazard.



(Ord. CO-96-08, passed 9-23-96; Am. Ord. CO-01-5, passed 3-26-01; Am. Ord.
06-2, passed 7-13-06; Am. Ord. 14-20, passed 12-22-14)



§ 100.64  ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT.



   (A)   Installation. All electrical equipment, wiring and appliances
shall be properly installed and maintained in a safe and approved manner.



   (B)   Receptacles. All receptacles shall be in accordance with the
rules of the Commission or its predecessor at time of construction,
installation, or alteration.



   (C)   Circuits. All circuits shall be in accordance with the rules
of the Commission or its predecessors at time of construction, installation,
or alteration.



   (D)   Temporary wiring or extension cords. Temporary wiring or
extension cords shall not be used as permanent wiring.



(Ord. CO-96-08, passed 9-23-96; Am. Ord. CO-01-5, passed 3-26-01; Am. Ord.
06-2, passed 7-13-06; Am. Ord. 14-20, passed 12-22-14)



§ 100.65  DISCONNECTION OR DISRUPTION OF ELECTRICAL SERVICE.



   (A)   Thirty-day electrical safety inspections. Any structure having
a disconnection or disruption of electrical service for a period of 30
continuous days or more shall require a 30-day electrical safety inspection
by the Office of the Frankfort Building Inspector prior to reconnection of
electrical service by city Light and Power Department personnel.



   (B)   Inspection requirements. Each 30-day electrical safety
inspection shall require that, prior to service being reconnected, all
electrical service components meet local and state building and property
maintenance code standards including those specifications relating to meter
base, weather head, ground rod and ground wire, panel box (service entrance
panel) and disconnect boxes.



   (C)   Thirty-day electrical safety permit. If the Building
Inspection determines that any required electrical components do not meet the
standards for connection of electrical service under the applicable local and
state building and property maintenance codes, such electrical service shall
be tagged-out to prevent reconnection, the property owner shall be required
to apply for and receive a 30- day electrical safety permit from the Office
of the Building Inspector assuming that all code standards have been met,
prior to reconnection of the electrical service.



   (D)   Inspection fees. Each inspection and re-inspection performed
by an employee of the Building Inspector’s Office for the purpose of
reconnection of electrical service following disconnection or disruption of
service in excess of 30 days, shall be subject to an inspection fee to be
paid by the owner of the property in such amount as is established in §
156.14, as may be amended from time to time. All requested inspections must
be scheduled at least 24 hours in advance of the inspection. If an owner
schedules an inspection and fails to appear and to assist in the inspection,
the owner shall nevertheless, be liable for payment of the inspection or
re-inspection fee.



(Ord. 17-16, passed 12-5-17)



FIRE SAFETY REQUIREMENTS



§ 100.70  GENERAL.



   (A)   Scope. The provisions of this subchapter shall govern the
current minimum conditions and standards for fire safety relating to
structures and exterior premises, including fire safety facilities and
equipment to be provided. Structures, facilities, and fire safety equipment
constructed or installed under prior codes shall be governed by the rules and
regulations of the prior code.



   (B)   Responsibility. The owner of the premises shall provide and
maintain such fire safety facilities and equipment in compliance with these
requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit another
person to occupy any premises that do not comply with the requirements of
this subchapter.



(Ord. CO-96-08, passed 9-23-96; Am. Ord. CO-01-5, passed 3-26-01; Am. Ord.
06-2, passed 7-13-06; Am. Ord. 14-20, passed 12-22-14)



§ 100.71  MEANS OF EGRESS.



   (A)   General. A safe, continuous and unobstructed means of egress
shall be provided from the interior of a structure to a public way.



   (B)   Exit capacity. The capacity of the exits serving a floor shall
be sufficient for the occupant load thereof in accordance with the rules of
the Commission.



   (C)   Arrangement. Exits from dwelling units, rooming units, guest
rooms and dormitory units shall not lead through other such units, or through
toilet rooms or bathrooms, except as otherwise permitted under the rules of
the Commission.



   (D)   Locked doors.



      (1)   All means of egress doors shall be readily openable from
the side from which egress is to be made without the need for keys, special
knowledge or effort, except as provided in division (D)(2) and under the
rules of the Commission.



      (2)   Locks permitted. Locks or fasteners shall not be
installed on egress doors expect in accordance with the following conditions:



         (a)   In mental, penal or other institutions where the
security of inmates is necessary, in which case properly trained supervisory
personnel shall be continuously on duty and approved provisions are made to
remove occupants safely in case of fire or other emergency.



         (b)   In problem security areas, special-purpose door
alarms or locking devices shall be approved prior to installation. Manually
operated edge or surface-molded flush bolts are prohibited.



         (c)   Where the door hardware conforms to that permitted
by the rules of the Commission.



(Ord. CO-96-08, passed 9-23-96; Am. Ord. CO-01-5, passed 3-26-01; Am. Ord.
06-2, passed 7-13-06; Am. Ord. 14-20, passed 12-22-14)



§ 100.72  ACCUMULATIONS AND STORAGE.



   (A)   Accumulations. Rubbish, garbage or other materials shall not
be stored or allowed to accumulate in stairways, passageways, doors, windows,
fire escapes or other means of egress.



   (B)   Hazardous material. Combustible, flammable, explosive or other
hazardous materials, such as paints, volatile oils and cleaning fluids, or
combustible rubbish, such as wastepaper, boxes and rags, shall not be
accumulated or stored unless such storage complies with the rules of the Fire
Prevention and Building Safety Commission, or its predecessor agencies in
effect at time of construction, installation, or alteration.



(Ord. CO-96-08, passed 9-23-96; Am. Ord. CO-01-5, passed 3-26-01; Am. Ord.
06-2, passed 7-13-06; Am. Ord. 14-20, passed 12-22-14)



§ 110.73  FIRE RESISTANCE RATINGS.



   (A)   General. The fire resistance rating of floors, walls,
ceilings, and other elements and components shall be maintained.



   (B)   Maintenance. All required fire doors and smoke barriers shall
be maintained in good working order, including all hardware necessary for the
proper operation thereof. Fire doors shall not be held open by door-stops,
wedges and other unapproved hold-open devices.



(Ord. CO-96-08, passed 9-23-96; Am. Ord. CO-01-5, passed 3-26-01; Am. Ord.
06-2, passed 7-13-06; Am. Ord. 14-20, passed 12-22-14)



§ 110.74  FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS.



   General. All systems, devices and equipment as required by the rules of
the Commission or its predecessors in effect at time of construction,
installation, addition or alteration shall be installed and maintained per
the rules of the Commission.



   (A)   Fire hydrants. Fire hydrants shall be maintained visibility by
occupant of property where applicable.



   (B)   Valves. Control valves shall be in the fully open position and
the area around the valve shall be accessible at all time.



   (C)   Hose connections. Hose connections shall be identified and the
Fire Department shall have ready access thereto.



   (D)   Hose. Where provided, the hose shall be properly packed, dry
and free from deterioration.



   (E)   Fire extinguisher. All portable fire extinguishers shall be
visible, provided with ready access thereto, and maintained in an efficient
and safe operating condition. Extinguishers shall be of an approved type with
location properly marked.



   (F)   Smoke detectors. This chapter adopts the provisions of I.C.
22-11-18 with regard to smoke detectors. In addition, this chapter adopts the
rules of the Commission or its predecessor agencies in effect at the time of
construction, installation, or alteration.



   (G)   Fire protective signaling systems. Fire protective signaling
systems shall be maintained in accordance with the rules of the Commission or
its predecessor agencies at the time of construction, addition or alteration.



(Ord. CO-96-08, passed 9-23-96; Am. Ord. CO-01-5, passed 3-26-01; Am. Ord.
06-2, passed 7-13-06; Am. Ord. 14-20, passed 12-22-14)



§ 110.75  ELEVATOR RECALL.



   Required. Elevators shall be maintained in accordance with the rules of
the Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission or its predecessor
agencies in effect at the time of construction, installation, or alteration.



(Ord. CO-96-08, passed 9-23-96; Am. Ord. CO-01-5, passed 3-26-01; Am. Ord.
06-2, passed 7-13-06; Am. Ord. 14-20, passed 12-22-14)



§ 110.76  MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT CONTROL.



   Smoke and heat detection. Approved smoke or heat detectors shall be
installed in return air ducts or plenums in each and shall be in accordance
with the rules of the Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission or its
predecessor agencies in effect at time of construction, installation, or
alteration.



(Ord. CO-96-08, passed 9-23-96; Am. Ord. CO-01-5, passed 3-26-01; Am. Ord.
06-2, passed 7-13-06; Am. Ord. 14-20, passed 12-22-14)



ABANDONED BUILDINGS



§ 100.85  BOARDING STANDARDS FOR ABANDONED PROPERTIES.



   (A)   General. All windows and doors of abandoned premises shall be
boarded in an approved manner to prevent entry by unauthorized persons and
shall be painted to correspond to the color of the existing structure with
screws and nails alternating every six inches on center.



   (B)   Doors. Doors shall be secured by the same method as for
windows or door openings. One door to the structure shall be available for
authorized entry and shall be secured and locked in an approved manner.



   (C)   Materials.



      (1)   Boarding sheet material. Boarding sheet material shall
be minimum three- quarter inches thick wood structural panels.



      (2)   Boarding framing material. Boarding framing material
shall be minimum nominal two-inch by four-inch.



      (3)   Boarding fasteners. Boarding fasteners shall be minimum
three-eighth-inch diameter carriage bolts of such a length as required to
penetrate the assembly and as required to adequately attach the washers and
nuts.



   (D)   Installation.



      (1)   Boarding installation. The boarding sheet material shall
be cut to fit the door or window opening neatly or shall be cut to provide an
equal overlap at the perimeter of the door or window.



      (2)   Windows. The window shall be opened to allow the
carriage bolt to pass through or the window sash shall be removed and stored.
The strong back framing material shall be cut minimum two inches wider than
the window opening and shall be placed on the inside of the window opening
six inches minimum above the bottom and below the top of the window opening.
The framing and boarding shall be predrilled. The assembly shall be aligned
and the bolts, washers and nuts shall be installed and secured.



      (3)   Door walls. The door opening shall be framed with
minimum two-inch by four-inch framing material secured at the entire
perimeter and vertical members at a maximum of 24 inches on center. Blocking
shall also be secured at a maximum of 48 inches on center vertically.
Boarding sheet material shall be secured with screws and nails alternating
every six inches on center.



      (4)   Doors. Doors shall be secured by the same method as for
windows or door openings. One door to the structure shall be available for
authorized entry and shall be secured and locked in an approved manner.



(Ord. 14-20, passed 12-22-14)



TITLE XI:  BUSINESS REGULATIONS



   Chapter



      110.   PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, AND ITINERANT MERCHANTS



      111.   TAXICABS



      112.   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES



CHAPTER 110:  PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, AND ITINERANT MERCHANTS



Section



General Provisions



   110.01   Definitions



   110.02   Sales from vehicles prohibited



   110.03   Permitted hours



License Regulations



   110.05   License required; exemption



   110.06   Application



   110.07   Fees; exemptions



   110.08   Issuance



   110.09   Revocation



   110.10   Exhibition required



 



   110.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 110.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PEDDLER or HAWKER.  Any transient person who engages temporarily in
the selling of any kinds of goods, wares, merchandise, or souvenirs within
the corporate limits of the city, regardless of whether the goods are peddled
from house to house, or sold on the public streets, sidewalks, or other
public places, or sold from any room, building, structure, or lot rented or
leased for the purpose of carrying on the business.  ('75 Code, §  17.01)



   SOLICITOR.  Any person who goes from house to house or from place to
place within the corporate limits of the city, selling or taking orders for,
or offering to sell or take orders for goods, wares, or merchandise for
future delivery, or subscriptions, or business of any kind, or soliciting or
seeking donations of any kind. ('75 Code, § 17.02)



(Ord. 66, passed 6-4-26)



§ 110.02  SALES FROM VEHICLES PROHIBITED.



   (A)   For the purpose of this section the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   VEHICLE.  Any automobile, truck, wagon, trailer, or other conveyance
for carrying property.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle on any
street or alley in the city, or between any street and property line in the
city, for the primary purpose of offering for sale or selling from the
vehicle any products, commodities, goods, wares, or merchandise of any kind,
except where prior approval has been given by the Board of Public Works and
Safety.



('75 Code, §  17.11)  (Ord. 68, passed 8-28-30)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.03  PERMITTED HOURS.



   Any peddler, hawker, or solicitor as defined in § 110.01 of this
chapter shall not engage in any activity with which this chapter is concerned
on any day before the hour of 9:00 a.m. local time or after sunset.



(Ord. 85-1, passed 3-25-85)  Penalty, see § 110.99



LICENSE REGULATIONS



§ 110.05  LICENSE REQUIRED; EXEMPTION.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation,
association, or organization to engage in business as a hawker, peddler, or
solicitor, as defined in § 110.01 without first having obtained a license to
do so under the provisions of this chapter. ('75 Code, § 17.03)



   (B)   The licensing provisions of this chapter shall not apply to
sales to dealers from commercial travelers nor the sales of farm and dairy
products produced in the county.  ('75 Code, § 17.09)



(Ord. 66, passed 6-4-26)



§ 110.06  APPLICATION.



   Any person, firm, corporation, association, or organization desiring to
engage in the business of a hawker, peddler, or solicitor, as defined in §
110.01, shall apply in writing over his signature to the Clerk-Treasurer for
a license to do so.  The application must be filed with the Clerk-Treasurer
at least seven days before the applicant begins the business.  The
application must be completed in full and must contain the following
information before a license will be issued.



   (A)   The name and address of the applicant.



   (B)   The name and address of the person, firm, organization,
corporation, or association whom the applicant represents or by whom the
applicant is employed.



   (C)   The length of time for which the license is desired.



   (D)   The nature, character, or kind of goods, wares, merchandise,
or services to be sold or offered, or the kind of donations to be solicited
by the applicant.



   (E)   The place of residence and place of employment of the
applicant for the 12 months preceding the date of application.



   (F)   A personal description of the applicant.



   (G)   A description of the vehicle or vehicles to be used by the
applicant and the license numbers thereof.



   (H)   Such other credentials and evidence of good moral character
and identity as may be reasonably required by the Chief of Police.



   (I)   A list of those cities and towns in which the applicant has
worked as a hawker, peddler, or solicitor within the last 12 months.



   (J)   Payment of the non-refundable license fee.



('75 Code, §  17.04)  (Ord. 66, passed 6-4-26)



§ 110.07  FEES; EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   Each applicant for a license under the provisions of this
chapter shall be accompanied by a license fee which shall be
non-refundable.  The license fee for non-residents of the city shall be
$100, plus $25 for each additional hawker, peddler, or solicitor over the one
included in the application.  The license fee for residents of the city
shall be $5.  ('75 Code, § 17.05)



   (B)   Any person exempted by the laws of this state from payment of
any such license fees, shall before beginning business, present to the
Clerk-Treasurer his credentials showing that he is entitled to the
exemption.  ('75 Code, § 17.06)



(Ord. 66, passed 6-4-26; Am. Ord. CO-92-9, passed 7-20-92)



Statutory reference:



   Veterans exempt from payment of local peddler's license fees, see I.C.
25-25-2-1



§ 110.08  ISSUANCE.



   Upon the filing of a completed application with the Clerk-Treasurer,
payment of the non-refundable license fee, and approval by the Mayor and
Chief of Police, the Clerk-Treasurer shall issue a license pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter.  The license shall be valid for a period not to
exceed 30 days from the date of the issuance.  If the licensee desires to
continue business after the expiration of the license, a new license must be
secured in the same manner and under the same terms and conditions as the
original license.



('75 Code, §  17.07)  (Ord. 66, passed 6-4-26)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.09  REVOCATION.



   Any license issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked
by the Mayor or the Chief of Police if the licensee violates any of the
provisions of this chapter, or for violation of any state or federal law, or
when the licensee ceases to possess the qualifications and character required
by the provisions of this code for the issuance of such a license.



('75 Code, § 17.08)



§ 110.10  EXHIBITION REQUIRED.



   Each person engaged in the business as a hawker, peddler, or solicitor
as defined in § 110.01, is required to carry on his person a license
obtained under the provisions of this chapter and is further required to
exhibit the license to any person to whom the licensee sells or offers to
sell or solicits, or to any police officer or city official upon the request
of the person, officer, or official.  It shall be unlawful to refuse to
exhibit the license to any person demanding exhibition.



('75 Code, §  17.10)  (Ord. 66, passed 6-4-26)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.99  PENALTY.



   Any person, firm, corporation, association, or organization who shall
violate a provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be
subject to a fine as follows:



   (A)   For a first offense, the fine shall be not less than $50 nor
more than $100, together with the court costs, as determined by the court.



   (B)   For a second offense, the fine shall be not less than $150 nor
more than $250, together with court costs, as determined by the court.



   (C)   For the third offense, the fine shall be not less than $350
nor more than $2,500, together with court costs, as determined by the court.



('75 Code, § §  17.12 and 17.13)  (Ord. PO-77-2, passed 12-21-77; Am.
Ord. 06-5, passed 2-13-06)



CHAPTER 111:  TAXICABS



Section



General Provisions



   111.01   Definitions



   111.02   Inspection of vehicle



Vehicle License Regulations



   111.05   License required



   111.06   Application



   111.07   Fees



   111.08   Certificate of insurance required



   111.09   Revocation; suspension



   111.10   License to be kept in conspicuous place



Driver's License Regulations



   111.15   License to drive public carrier required



   111.16   Revocation, suspension of driver's license



Parking Regulations



   111.20   Parking in front of buildings



   111.21   Application of other city parking regulations



 



   111.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 111.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PARKING.  Any stopping at the curb on the public highway. ('75 Code,
§  19.02)  (Ord. 118, passed 9-16-26)



   TAXICAB or PUBLIC CARRIER.  Any motor vehicle used in carrying
passengers for hire, which by its owner or operator is permitted to stand and
be upon any street, public ground, or park, and solicit or receive passengers
for hire, and is not operating on fixed schedules or routes.  ('75 Code,
§  19.01)  (Ord. 99, passed 9-21-16)



§ 111.02  INSPECTION OF VEHICLE.



   Each owner or operator of a public carrier or taxicab shall at all
times keep the automobile in a clean, sanitary, safe, and comfortable
condition.  It is the duty of the Chief of Police to make inspection of all
public carriers or taxicabs as to sanitary condition, lights, brakes, and
general condition, including its strength and carrying capacity.  Each and
every owner or operator shall at all times operate the vehicle in accordance
with the laws of the state and of this code.



('75 Code, §  19.10)  (Ord. 99, passed 9-21-16)  Penalty, see § 111.99



VEHICLE LICENSE REGULATIONS



§ 111.05  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to operate
any vehicle or conveyance for the transportation of passengers for hire to or
from points within the city, without first obtaining a license therefore, as
herein provided.



('75 Code, §  19.05)  (Ord. 99, passed 9-21-16; Am. Ord. 3-397, passed
4-24-41)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.06  APPLICATION.



   (A)   Any owner or operator of any taxicab, as defined in § 111.01,
who desires a license shall make application to the Clerk-Treasurer of the
city, in writing, stating therein the following information.



      (1)   The seating capacity of the automobile to be operated.



      (2)   The maximum number of persons proposed to be carried at
any one time.



      (3)   The fare which the owner or operator proposes to charge
each passenger for a single continuance passage within the city.



      (4)   The registration number of the vehicle.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any owner or operator of any taxicab
licensed under this code, to charge any fare in excess of that named and
fixed in the application for license.



('75 Code, §  19.06)  (Ord. 99, passed 9-21-16; Am. Ord. 101, passed
3-21-18; Am. Ord. 102, passed 8-23- 19)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.07  FEES.



   (A)   The following fees shall be paid by the owners.



      (1)   $25 for the first taxicab or automobile for hire.



      (2)   $5 for the second taxicab or automobile for hire.



   (B)  Licenses issued under this chapter shall extend for a period of
one year, beginning January l each year, and no license shall be issued for
less than one year.  In the case of licenses issued after October 1 of each
year, one-half of the above fees shall be paid.



('75 Code, §  19.07)  (Ord. 3-397, passed 4-24-41)



§ 111.08  CERTIFICATE OF INSURANCE REQUIRED.



   (A)   Before any license for a taxicab shall be issued, the owner
shall file with the Clerk-Treasurer an insurance policy issued by an
insurance company licensed to do business in the state and approved by the
Common Council, providing insurance coverage for each and every vehicle
owned, operated, or leased by the applicant with a minimum liability of
$15,000 per person, $30,000 per accident, and $10,000 property damage,
regardless of whether the vehicle was driven by the owner, his agent, or
lessee.



   (B)   The policy shall provide that insolvency or bankruptcy of the
insured shall not release the insurance company from any payment due under
the policy, and if by reason of bankruptcy or insolvency an execution on a
judgment against the insured is returned unsatisfied the judgment creditor
shall have a right of action against the insurance company to recover the
amount of the judgment to the same extent that the insured would have had to
recover against the company had the insured paid the judgment.



   (C)   The policy shall provide that it cannot be cancelled until 30
days notice of cancellation shall have been given to the Common Council.



('75 Code, §  19.08)  (Ord. 3-397, passed 4-24-41)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.09  REVOCATION; SUSPENSION.



   The Common Council is empowered and authorized to revoke or suspend the
licensee of any public carrier or taxicab found to be unsafe and not in good
condition with respect to appearance, cleanliness, and mechanical
operation.  When a license is suspended or revoked it shall not be reissued
until the public carrier or taxicab and all its appurtenances are put in fit
condition for use by the public and satisfactory to the Common Council.



('75 Code, §  19.09)  (Ord. 3-397, passed 4-24-41)



§ 111.10  LICENSE TO BE KEPT IN CONSPICUOUS PLACE.



   The Clerk-Treasurer shall number the license issued to the owner or
operator of the taxicab and specify in the license the maximum number of
persons that shall be carried at any one time in the vehicle and the fare to
be charged.  The owner or operator of the vehicle shall keep or cause the
license to be kept conspicuously in view on each automobile operated by him
or his agents or employees so that the license may be easily read.  It shall
be unlawful to operate any such vehicle at anytime without the information
being displayed.



('75 Code, §  19.11)  (Ord. 99, passed 9-21-16)



DRIVER'S LICENSE REGULATIONS



§ 111.15  LICENSE TO DRIVE PUBLIC CARRIER REQUIRED.



   No person shall drive a taxicab or public carrier unless he has applied
for and obtained a valid driver's license for that purpose from the
Clerk-Treasurer.  This license shall be, in addition to a chauffeur's
license, required by state law to drive a public carrier. Each applicant for
a license to drive a public carrier must meet the following requirements.



   (A)   Be at least 21 years of age; however, a public chauffeur's
license may be issued to any person 18 years of age or older for the purpose
of driving a taxicab only, provided that any application for such a permit
must be indorsed by the parent or guardian of the person as well as a duly
licensed taxicab company.



   (B)   Have good eyesight and not be subject to epilepsy, vertigo,
heart trouble, or any other infirmity of body or mind which might render him
unfit for the safe operation of a public carrier, and be of good health
generally.



   (C)   Be clean in dress and person, and not addicted to the use of
intoxicating liquors or drugs.



   (D)   Produce on a form to be provided by the Chief of Police,
affidavits of two reputable citizens of this city stating that they have
known the applicant personally; have observed his conduct during the one year
preceding the date of his application; he is of good moral character; and
such further testimonial as the Chief of Police may require.



   (E)   All applicants for driver's licenses shall be made to the
Clerk-Treasurer and, if accepted, upon the payment of a fee of $1, the
Clerk-Treasurer shall issue a card bearing the number of the driver's
license.  It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a public carrier or
taxicab on the streets of the city without having his driver's card in his
possession.  In the event of the loss or destruction of his driver's card he
shall immediately report to the Clerk-Treasurer and may obtain a new card by
paying a fee of $1 therefore.  The license so issued shall extend for a
period of one year, beginning the first day of January of each year.  No
license shall be issued for less than one year.  Driver's licenses shall not
be transferable.



('75 Code, §  19.12)  (Ord. 3-397, passed 4-24-41)  Penalty, see § 111.99



Statutory reference:



   Public passenger chauffeur's license, see I.C. 9-1-4-26



   Age limits for licensees, see I.C. 9-1-4-29



§ 111.16  REVOCATION, SUSPENSION OF DRIVER'S LICENSE.



   (A)   A driver's license may be suspended or revoked at any time by
the Mayor, the Chief of Police, or any City Judge.  It shall be the duty of
any officer or judge suspending a public carrier's driver's license to note
thereon the date and cause of the suspension, and to demand the surrender of
the license, and it shall be the duty of the driver to whom the license was
issued to surrender his license upon the demand of the officer or judge
suspending the license.  When a license is suspended or revoked by an
official other than the Chief of Police, the driver's license and a note of
the revocation or suspension shall be forwarded to the Chief of Police.  The
license shall be returned to the driver surrendering it at the expiration of
the period for which the license was suspended.  Whenever a license is
suspended or revoked by a City Judge, notice of revocation with the cause
thereof shall be forwarded to the Chief of Police.



   (B)   A second suspension for the same reason, or in any case, a
third suspension of a driver's license shall revoke the license.  No driver
whose license has been revoked shall again be licensed as a public carrier
driver in this city except upon satisfactory showing made to the Chief of
Police or in a case where a license has been suspended or revoked by the
Mayor or City Judge, the approval of the Mayor or City Judge shall be
necessary for the restoration or reissue of the license.



('75 Code, §  19.13)  (Ord. 3-397, passed 4-24-41)



PARKING REGULATIONS



§ 111.20  PARKING IN FRONT OF BUILDINGS.



   (A)   For the purposes of this section, the word BUILDING shall mean
any first floor premises actually occupied as a place of business by the
owner of the taxicab, or by the person filing a consent with the
Clerk-Treasurer as herein provided.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to park a taxicab within
the boundaries immediately in front of the building which he or the owner of
the taxicab maintains as his place of business, or within the boundaries
immediately in front of any building other than where the place of business
is maintained.  Further, the tenant or owner in possession of the other
building shall file with the Clerk-Treasurer a written consent for such
parking, and the written consent shall become void upon any change of
possession of the other building.



('75 Code, §  19.03)  (Ord. 118, passed 9-16-26)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.21  APPLICATION OF OTHER CITY PARKING REGULATIONS.



   Section 111.20 of this chapter shall be considered as supplemental to
other parking ordinances of this code, and shall not be construed to repeal
any of the provisions of any other section of this code not in conflict
herewith.



('75 Code, §  19.04)  (Ord. 118, passed 9-16-26)



Cross-reference:



   Parking regulations, see Ch. 72



   Parking meter regulations, see Ch. 73



§ 111.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any owner of a public carrier or taxicab not licensed or
equipped in accordance with the provisions of this chapter or a public
carrier or taxicab, the license of which has been revoked or whose license at
the time has been  suspended, who operates the same as a taxicab as defined
in § 111.01, or attempts to do so, or who solicits passengers for hire in
this city, shall be fined not less than $10 nor more than $50, and any
license issued to him shall be revoked.



   (B)   Any person convicted of violating the provisions of this
chapter for which no punishment is specifically provided, shall be punished,
upon conviction, with a fine not less than $10 nor more than $500.



('75 Code, §  19.14)  (Ord. 99, passed 9-21-16; Am. Ord. 102, passed
8-23-19; Am. Ord. 3-397, passed 4-24- 4l; Am. Ord. PO-77-2, passed 12-21-77)



   (C)   Any person convicted of violating § 111.20 shall be fined in
any sum not to exceed $100.  ('75 Code, §  19.15)  (Ord. 118, passed
9-16-26)



CHAPTER 112: SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES



Section



General Provisions



   112.01   Purpose and intent



   112.02   Definitions



   112.03   Establishment and classification of business regulated



   112.04   Measurement of distance



   112.05   Location of sexually oriented businesses



   112.06   Regulations governing existing sexually oriented businesses



   112.07   Injunction



Sexually Oriented Business Permits



   112.20   Purpose and intent



   112.21   Permit required



   112.22   Investigation and application



   112.23   Issuance of permit



   112.24   Annual permit fee



   112.25   Inspection



   112.26   Expiration of permit



   112.27   Suspension of permit



   112.28   Revocation of permit



   112.29   Judicial review of permit denial, suspension or revocation



   112.30   Transfer of permit



   112.31   Prohibitions regarding minors and sexually oriented
businesses



   112.32   Advertising regulations



   112.33   Hours of operations



   112.34   Nudity at sexually oriented businesses not offering for
sale alcoholic beverages



   112.35   Additional criminal prohibitions for the operation of a
sexually oriented business without a valid permit



   112.36   Exemptions



   112.37   Criminal penalties and additional legal, equitable, and
injunctive relief



   112.38   Immunity from prosecution



   112.39   Prohibition of distribution of sexual devices



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 112.01  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to regulate sexually
oriented businesses to promote the health, safety, morals, and general
welfare of the citizens of the city and to establish reasonable and uniform
regulations to prevent any deleterious location and concentration of sexually
oriented businesses within the city, thereby reducing or eliminating the
adverse secondary effects from such sexually oriented businesses. The
provisions of this chapter have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a
limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials,
including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor
effect of this chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually
oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the
distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their
intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of the chapter to
condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene materials.



(Ord. 98-5, passed 7-27-98)



§ 112.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 



   ADULT ARCADE.  An establishment where, for any form of consideration,
one or more still or motion picture projectors, slide projectors, or similar
machines, or other image producing machines, for viewing by five or fewer
persons each, are regularly used to show films, motion pictures, video
cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are
characterized by the depiction or description of “specified sexual
activities” or “specified anatomical areas”.



   ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT NOVELTY STORE OR ADULT VIDEO STORE.  A
commercial establishment which has a significant or substantial portion of
its stock-in-trade or derives 25% or more of its revenues to the sale, rental
for any form of consideration, of any one or more of the following:



      (1)   Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter,
or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other
visual representations which are characterized by the depiction or
description of “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical
areas”;



      (2)   Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are
designed for use or marketed primarily for stimulation of human genital
organs or for sadomasochistic use or abuse of themselves or others.



      (3)   An establishment may have other principal business
purposes that do not involve the offering for sale, rental or viewing of
materials depicting or describing “specified sexual activities” or
“specified anatomical areas”, and still be categorized as adult
bookstore, adult novelty store, or adult video store. Such other business
purposes will not serve to exempt such establishments from being categorized
as an adult bookstore, adult novelty store or adult video store so long as
one of its principal business purposes is offering for sale or rental, for
some form of consideration, the specified materials which depict or describe
“specified anatomical areas” or “specified sexual activities”.



      (4)   Regardless of the percentage of revenues from adult
materials defined herein, any business which devotes any portion of its
interior business space or advertising, for any form of consideration or
viewing of any of the adult materials defined herein shall be considered to
be an ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT NOVELTY STORE OR ADULT VIDEO STORE as defined by
and governed by this chapter.



   ADULT CABARET.  A nightclub, bar, restaurant “bottle club” or
similar commercial establishment, whether or not alcoholic beverages are
served, which regularly features:



      (1)   Persons who appear semi-nude or in a state of
semi-nudity; and



      (2)   Live performances which are characterized by the
exposure of “specified anatomical area” or by pictures, video cassettes,
slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the
depiction or description of “specified sexual activities“ or “specified
anatomical areas”.



   ADULT MOTEL.  A motel, hotel or similar commercial establishment which:



      (1)   Offers public accommodations, for any form of
consideration, which provides patrons with closed-circuit television
transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other
photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or
description of “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical
area” and which advertises the availability of this sexually oriented type
of material by means of a sign visible from the public right-of-way, or by
means of any off-premises advertising including but not limited to,
newspapers, magazines, pamphlets or leaflets, radio or television;



      (2)   Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time
less than ten hours; or



      (3)   Allows a tenant or occupant to sub-rent the sleeping
room for a time period of less than ten hours.



   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER.  A commercial establishment where films,
motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or similar photographic
reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of
“specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas” are
regularly shown for any form of consideration.



   ADULT THEATER.  A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar
commercial establishment which, for any form of consideration, regularly
features persons who appear in a state of semi-nudity or live performances
which are characterized by exposure of “specified anatomical areas” or by
“specified sexual activities”.



   EMPLOYEE.  A person who works or performs in and/or for a sexually
oriented business regardless of whether or not said person is paid a salary,
wage or other compensation by the operator of said business.



   ESCORT.  A person who, for any form of consideration, agrees or offers
to act as a companion, guide, or date for another person, or who agrees or
offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for
another person.



   ESCORT AGENCY.  A person or business association who furnishes, offers
to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business
purposes for a fee, tip, or other consideration.



   ESTABLISHMENT.  Includes any of the following:



      (1)   The opening or commencement of any such business as a
new business after the adoption of this chapter;



      (2)   The conversion of an existing business, if not a
sexually oriented business, to any of the sexually oriented businesses
defined in this chapter;



      (3)   The addition of any sexually oriented business defined
in this chapter to any other existing sexually oriented business; or



      (4)   The relocation of any such sexually oriented business.



   MASSAGE PARLOR.  Any place where, for any form of consideration or
gratuity, massage, alcohol rub, administration of fomentations, electric or
magnetic treatments, or any other treatment manipulation of the human body
which occurs as a part of or in connection with “specified sexual
activities”, or where any person providing such treatment, manipulation, or
service related thereto, exposes his or her “specified anatomical areas”.
The definition of sexually oriented businesses shall not include the practice
of massage in any licensed hospital, nor by a licensed hospital, nor by a
licensed physician, surgeon, chiropractor, osteopath, or certified massage
therapist, nor by any nurse or technician working under the supervision of a
licensed physician, surgeon, chiropractor, osteopath, or certified massage
therapist, nor by trainers for any amateur, semiprofessional or professional
athlete or athletic team or school athletic program.



   NUDITY OR STATE OF NUDITY. 



      (1)   The appearance of human bare buttock, anus, male
genitals, female genitals, or the areola or nipple of the female breast; or



      (2)   A state of dress which fails to opaquely and fully cover
a human buttocks, anus, male or female genitals, pubic region or areola or
nipple of the female breast.



   OPERATOR.  Includes the owner, permit holder, custodian, manager,
operator or person in charge of any permitted or licensed premises.



   PERMITTED OR LICENSED PREMISES.  Any premises that requires a license
and/or permit and that is classified as a sexually oriented business.



   PERMITTEE AND/OR LICENSEE.  A person in whose name a permit and/or
license to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as well as
the individual listed as an applicant on the application for a permit and/or
license.



   PERSON.  An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation,
association, or other legal entity.



   PUBLIC BUILDING.  Any building owned, leased or held by the United
States, the state, the county, the city, any special district, school
district, or any other agency or political subdivision of the state or the
United States, which building is used for governmental purposes.



   PUBLIC PARK OR RECREATION AREA.  Public land which has been designated
for park or recreational activities including but not limited to a park,
playground, nature trails, swimming pool, reservoir, athletic field,
basketball or tennis courts, pedestrian/bicycle paths, open space, wilderness
areas, or similar public land within the city which is under the control,
operation, or management of the city park and recreation authorities.



   RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION.  Any church, synagogue, mosque, temple or
building which is used primarily for religious worship and related religious
activities.



   RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT OR USE.  A single family, duplex, townhouse,
multiple family, or mobile park or subdivision and campground as defined in
this code.



   SCHOOL.  Any public or private educational facility including but not
limited to child day care facilities, nursery schools, preschools,
kindergartens, elementary schools, primary schools, intermediate schools,
junior high schools, middle schools, high schools, vocational schools,
secondary schools, continuation schools, special education schools, junior
colleges, and universities. SCHOOL includes the school grounds, but does not
include the facilities used primarily for another purpose and only
incidentally as a school.



   SEMI-NUDE. A state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the
genitals, pubic region, and areolae of the female breast, as well as portions
of the body covered by supporting straps or devices.



   SEMI-NUDE MODEL STUDIO.  Any place where a person, who regularly
appears in a state of semi- nudity is provided for money or any form of
consideration to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured,
photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons.



   SEXUAL ENCOUNTER ESTABLISHMENT.  A business or commercial
establishment, that as one of its primary business purposes, offers for any
form of consideration, a place where two or more persons may congregate,
associate, or consort for the purposes of “specified sexual activities”
when one or more of the persons is semi-nude. The definition of sexually
oriented businesses shall not include an establishment where a medical
practitioner, psychologist, psychiatrist, or similar professional person
licensed by the state engages in medically approved and recognized sexual
therapy.



   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS.  An adult arcade, adult bookstore adult
novelty shop, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion
picture theater, adult theater, massage parlor, sexual encounter
establishment, escort agency or semi-nude model studio.



   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.  As used in this chapter includes any of
the following.



      (1)   Less than completely and opaquely covered human
genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts below a point
immediately above the top of the areolae; or



      (2)   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even
if completely and opaquely covered.



   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES.  As used in this chapter includes any of
the following:



      (1)   The fondling or other intentional touching of human
genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts;



      (2)   Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated,
including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy;



      (3)   Masturbation, actual or simulated;



      (4)   Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal
or tumescence; or



      (5)   Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any
of the activities set forth in subdivisions (1) through (4) of this
definition.



   SUBSTANTIAL ENLARGEMENT OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS.  Increase in
the floor areas occupied by the business by more than 15%, as the floor areas
exist on the date this chapter takes effect.



   TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS. 
Includes any of the following:



      (1)   The sale, lease or sublease of the business;



      (2)   The transfer of securities which constitute a
controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange or similar
means; or



      (3)   The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar
legal devise which transfers ownership or control of the business, except for
transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of a person
possessing the ownership or control.



(Ord. 98-5, passed 7-27-98)



§ 112.03  ESTABLISHMENT AND CLASSIFICATION OF BUSINESSES REGULATED.



   The establishment of a sexual oriented business shall be permitted only
in the appropriately designated zoning category and shall be subject to the
following restriction:  No person shall cause or permit the establishment of
any of the following sexually oriented business, as defined above, within
1,000 feet of another such business or within 1,000 feet of any religious
institution, school, boys’ club, girls’ club, or similar existing youth
organization, or public park or public building, or within 1,000 feet of any
property zoned for residential use or used for residential purposes and are
classified as follows:



   (A)   Adult arcade;



   (B)   Adult bookstore, adult novelty store or adult video store;



   (C)   Adult cabaret;



   (D)   Adult motel;



   (E)   Adult motion picture theater;



   (F)   Adult theater;



   (G)   Massage parlor;



   (H)   Sexual encounter establishment;



   (I)   Escort agency; or



   (J)   Nude model studio.



(Ord. 98-5, passed 7-27-98)



§ 112.04  MEASUREMENT OF DISTANCE.



   As regarding § 112.03 distance between any two sexually oriented
businesses shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to
intervening structures, from the closest exterior structural wall of each
business. The distance between any sexually oriented business and any
religious institution, public or private elementary or secondary school,
boys’ club, girls’ club, or similar existing youth organization, or
public park or public building or any properties zoned for residential use or
used for residential purposes shall also be measured in a straight line,
without regard to intervening structures or objects from the nearest portion
of the building or structure used as part of the premises where the sexually
oriented business is conducted, to the nearest property line of the premises
of a religious institution, public or private elementary or secondary school,
boys’ club, girls’ club, or similar existing youth organization, or
public park or public building or any properties zoned for residential use or
used for residential purposes.



(Ord. 98-5, passed 7-27-98)



§ 112.05  LOCATION OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES.



   The Zoning Ordinance shall designate those areas in which sexually
oriented businesses are permitted and this chapter shall govern their
location and land use. In addition, any sexually oriented business not
already in operation at the time of adoption of this chapter shall be subject
to the following restrictions:



   (A)   The person commits an infraction, if he operates or causes to
be operated a sexually oriented business except as provided by this chapter.



   (B)   The person commits an infraction if he operates or causes to
be operated a sexually oriented business within 1,000 feet of:



      (1)   Any religious institution;



      (2)   Any school;



      (3)   The boundary of any residential district;



      (4)   A public park adjacent to any residential district;



      (5)   A property line of a lot devoted to residential use; or



      (6)   A boys’ club, girls’ club, or similar existing youth
organization.



   (C)   A person commits an infraction if he operates or causes to be
operated a sexually oriented business within 1,000 feet of another such
business, which will include, any adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult video
store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult
theater, massage parlor or any sexual encounter establishment.



   (D)   A person commits an infraction if he causes or permits the
operation, establishment, or maintenance of more than one sexually oriented
business within the same building, structure, or portion thereof, or causes
the substantial enlargement of any sexually oriented business in any
building, structure or portion thereof containing another sexually oriented
business.



   (E)   It is a defense to prosecution under this section that a
person appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated:



      (1)   By a proprietary school, licensed by the State of
Indiana; a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or
partly by taxation;



      (2)   By a private college or university which maintains and
operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college,
junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or



      (3)   In a structure:



         (a)    Which has no sign visible from the exterior of
the structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude person is
available for viewing; and



         (b)    Where, in order to participate in a class a
student must enroll at least three days in advance of the class; and



         (c)   Where no more than one nude model is on the
premises at any one time.



(Ord. 98-5, passed 7-27-98)



§ 112.06  REGULATIONS GOVERNING EXISTING SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES.



   (A)   A sexually oriented business already in operation at the time
of adoption of this chapter is exempt from this chapter, and must comply only
with those laws established in the State of Indiana for the ownership and
operation of sexually oriented businesses, establishments which serve
alcoholic beverages, or any other law of general application. If a sexually
oriented business already in operation at the time of adoption of this
chapter should ever change locations, or add to its present location so as to
change the facade or frontage of the building from which it operated at the
time of adoption of this chapter, or to increase the size of the building it
currently inhabits, it will be subject to the chapter upon the opening of its
new location and will be required to submit to the permit process as would
any other sexually oriented business.



   (B)   A sexually oriented business lawfully operating as a
conforming use is not rendered a non-conforming use by the location,
subsequent to the grant or renewal of a sexually oriented business permit
and/or license, of a church, public or private elementary or secondary
school, public park, public building, residential district, or residential
lot within 1,000 feet of the sexually oriented business. This provision
applies only to the renewal of a valid permit and/or license and does not
apply when an application for a permit and/or license is submitted after a
permit and/or license has expired or has been revoked.



   (C)   Any establishment subject to the provision of this section
shall apply for the permit provided for by § 112.22 within 30 days of the
effective date of this chapter.



(Ord. 98-5, passed 7-27-98)



§ 112.07  INJUNCTION.



   A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented
business subject to this chapter, without having a valid permit due to
location restrictions, is subject to a suit for injunction as well as
prosecution for the criminal violation. Such violation shall be punishable by
a fine of $1,000 and/or 30 days imprisonment, and if any injunction must be
sought, attorneys fees and costs will be assessed at the discretion of the
court against the sexually oriented business.



(Ord. 98-5, passed 7-27-98)



SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS PERMITS



§ 112.20  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate sexually oriented
businesses to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the
citizens of the city, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to
prevent deleterious effects of sexually oriented businesses within the city.
The provisions of this chapter have neither the purpose nor effect of
imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative
materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the
intent nor effect of this chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to
sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny
access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment
to their intended market. Neither is it the intent or effect of this chapter
to in any way condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene or harmful to
minors’ material.



(Ord. 98-5, passed 7-27-98)



§ 112.21  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   No sexually oriented business not already established at the
time of enactment of this chapter shall be permitted to operate without a
valid sexually oriented business permit issued by the city for the particular
type of business. It shall be unlawful and a person commits an infraction if
he/she operates or causes to be operated a non-exempt sexually oriented
business without said permit.



   (B) The mayor and his or her designee is responsible for granting,
denying, revoking, renewing, suspending, and cancelling sexually oriented
business permits for proposed or existing sexually oriented businesses. The
Mayor or his or her designee is also responsible for ascertaining whether a
proposed sexually oriented business for which a permit is being applied for
complies with all locational requirements of §§ 112.03, 112.05, and 112.06
and all applicable zoning laws and/or regulations now in effect or as amended
or enacted subsequent to the effective date of this chapter in the city. Such
applicable zoning laws and regulations shall include the city’s Master Plan
Chapter and the Zoning Ordinance for the city, as amended. 



      (1)   The Frankfort Police Department is responsible for
providing information on whether an applicant has been convicted of a
specified criminal act during the time period set forth.



      (2)   The city’'s Engineering and Building Inspector
Department is responsible for inspecting a proposed, permitted or
non-permitted sexually oriented business in order to ascertain whether it is
in compliance with applicable statutes and chapters.



   (C)   An application for a permit must be made on a form provided by
the city.  Any person desiring to operate a sexually oriented business shall
file with the city an original and two copies of a sworn permit application
on the standard application form supplied by the city or designee.



   (D)   The completed application shall contain the following
information and shall be accompanied by the following documents:



      (1)   If the applicant is:



         (a)   An individual, the individual shall state his or
her legal name and any aliases and submit satisfactory proof that he or she
is 18 years of age;



         (b)   A partnership, the partnership shall state its
complete name, the names of all partners, whether the partnership is general
or limited, and a copy of the partnership agreement, if any;



         (c)   A corporation, the corporation shall state its
complete name, the date of its incorporation, evidence that the corporation
is in good standing under the laws of Indiana, the names and capacity of all
officers, directors and principal stockholders, and the name of the
registered corporate agent and the address of the registered office for
service of process.



      (2)   If the applicant intends to operate the sexually
oriented business under a name other than that of the applicant, he or she
must state the sexually oriented business’s fictitious name and submit the
required Indiana registration documents.



      (3)   Whether the applicant or any of the other individuals
listed pursuant to § 112.21 chapter has, within the two or five year period
as specified in § 112.23 immediately preceding the date of the application,
been convicted of a specified criminal act, and, if so, the specified
criminal act involved, the date of conviction and the place of conviction.



      (4)   Whether the applicant or any of the other individuals
pursuant to § 112.21 and/or licenses has had a previous permit under this
chapter or other similar sexually oriented business chapters from another
city or county denied, suspended or revoked, including the same and location
of the sexually oriented business for which the permit was denied, suspended
or revoked, as well as the date of the denial, suspension or revocation, and
whether the applicant or any other individuals listed pursuant to § 112.21
has been a partner in a partnership or an officer, director or principal
stockholder of a corporation that is permitted under this chapter whose
permit has previously been denied, suspended or revoked, including the name
and location of the sexually oriented business for which the permit was
denied, suspended or revoked as well as the date of denial, suspension or
revocation.



      (5)   Whether the applicant or any other individual listed
pursuant to § 112.21 holds any other permits and/or licenses under this
chapter or other similar sexually oriented business ordinance from another
city or county and, if so, the names and locations of such other permitted
businesses.



      (6)   The single classification of permit for which the
applicant is filing.



      (7)   The location of the proposed sexually oriented business,
including a legal description of the property, street address, and telephone
number(s), if any.



      (8)   The applicant’s mailing addresses and residential
address.



      (9)   A recent photograph of the applicant(s).



      (10)   The applicant’s driver’s permit number, social
security number, and/or his or her state or federally issued tax
identification number.



      (11)   A sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the
premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the
business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared, but it
must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the
interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches.



      (12)   In the case of an adult cabaret, any performers who
appear in a state of semi-nudity must remain at least ten feet from customer
seating areas.



      (13)   A current certificate and straight-line drawing
prepared within 30 days prior to application by an Indiana registered land
surveyor depicting the property lines and the structures containing any
established existing uses regulated by this chapter within 1,000 feet of the
property to be certified; the property lines of any established religious
institution, synagogue, school, or public park or recreation area within
1,000 feet of the property to be certified; and the property lines of any
residentially zoned area or residential property within 1,000 feet of the
property to be certified. For purposes of this section, a use shall be
considered existing or established if it is in existence at the time an
application is submitted.



      (14)   If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented
business is an individual, he or she must sign the application for a permit
as applicant. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business
is other than an individual, each individual who has a 10% or greater
interest in the business must sign the application for a permit as applicant.
If a corporation is listed as owner of a sexually oriented business or as the
entity which wishes to operate such a business, each individual having a 10%
or greater interest in the corporation must sign the application for a permit
as applicant.



      (15)   Viewing areas of any sexually oriented business which
shall exhibit on the premises films, video cassettes, or other video
reproductions which depict specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas, shall be open from at least one side.



   (E)   Applicants for a permit under this section shall have a
continuing duty to promptly supplement application information required by
this section in the event that said information changes in any way from what
is stated on the application. The failure to comply with said continuing duty
within 30 days from the date of such change, by supplementing the application
on file with the Mayor or his or her designee, shall be grounds for
suspension of a permit.



   (F)   In the event that the Mayor or his or her designee determines
or learns at any time that the applicant has improperly completed the
application for a proposed sexually oriented business, he or she shall
promptly notify the applicant of such fact and allow the applicant ten days
to properly complete the application. (The time period for granting or
denying a permit shall be stayed during the period in which the applicant is
allowed an opportunity to properly complete the application.)



   (G)   The applicant must be qualified according to the provisions of
this chapter and the premises must be inspected and found to be in compliance
with health, fire and building codes and laws.



   (H)   The applicant shall be required to pay a non-refundable
application fee of $100 at the time of filing an application under this
section.



   (I)   Prior to obtaining any permit or license to operate any
sexually oriented business defined in this chapter, and as part of any
application for a permit under this section, the applicant shall obtain from
the city or its designee a certification that the proposed location of such
business complies with the locational requirements of §§ 112.05 and 112.06.



   (J)   The fact that a person possesses other types of state or city
permits and/or licenses does not exempt him or her from the requirement of
obtaining a sexually oriented business permit.



   (K)   By applying for a permit under this chapter, the applicant
shall be deemed to have consented to the provisions of this chapter and to
the exercise by the Mayor or his or her designee, the Frankfort Police
Department and all other city agencies charged with enforcing the laws,
ordinances and codes applicable in the city of their respective
responsibilities under this chapter.



   (L)   The applicant shall be required to provide the city with the
names of any and all employees who are required to be licensed under Indiana
law pursuant to § 112.31. The applicant also agrees to allow a
representative of the city to conduct an inspection of the names, ages and
dates of birth of all employees who are working at any reasonable time while
the establishment is open. This shall be a continuing requirement even after
a permit is granted or renewed.



(Ord. 98-5, passed 7-27-98)



§ 112.22  INVESTIGATION AND APPLICATION.



   (A)   Upon receipt of an application properly filed with the city
and upon payment of the non-refundable application fee, the city or its
designee, shall immediately stamp the application as received and shall
immediately thereafter send photocopies of the application to the Frankfort
Police Department and any other city agencies responsible for enforcement of
health, fire and building codes and laws. Each department or agency shall
promptly conduct an investigation of the applicant, application and the
proposed sexually oriented business in accordance with its responsibilities
under law and as set forth in this chapter. Said investigation shall be
completed within 20 days of receipt of the application by the city or its
designee. At the conclusion of its investigation, each department or agency
shall indicate on the photocopy of the application its approval or
disapproval of the application, date it, sign it, and, in the event it
disapproves, state the reasons therefor. The Frankfort Police Department
shall only be required to certify the NCIC records request check mentioned at
§ 112.23. The Frankfort Police Department shall not be required to approve
or disapprove applications.



   (B)   A department or agency shall disapprove an application if it
finds that the proposed sexually oriented business will be in violation of
any provision of any statute, code, ordinance, regulation or other law in
effect in the city. After its indication of approval or disapproval, each
department or agency shall immediately return the photocopy of the
application to the city or it designee.



(Ord. 98-5, passed 7-27-98)



§ 112.23  ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.



   (A)   The Mayor or his or her designee, shall grant or deny an
application for a permit within 30 days from the date of its proper filing.
Upon the expiration of the thirtieth day, unless the applicant requests and
is granted a reasonable extension of time, the applicant shall be permitted
to begin operating the business for which the permit is sought, unless and
until the city or its designee, notifies the applicant of a denial of the
application and states the reason(s) for that denial.



   (B)   Grant of application for permit.



      (1)   The Mayor or his or her designee shall grant the
application unless one or more of the criteria set forth in division (C)
below is present.



      (2)   The permit, if granted, shall state on its face the name
of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date, and the
address of the sexually oriented business. The permit shall also indicate
that the sexually oriented business whether permitted or not may be subject
to indecency pursuant to the United States Supreme Court decision in Barnes
v. Glen Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S., 111 S.Ct. 2456 (June 21, 1991). The permit
shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the
sexually oriented business so that it can be read easily at any time.



   (C)   Denial of application for permit.



      (1)   The Mayor or his or her designee shall deny the
application for any of the following reasons:



         (a)   An applicant is under 18 years of age.



         (b)    An applicant or an applicant's spouse is overdue
on his or her payment to the city of taxes, fees, fines, or penalties
assessed against him or her or imposed upon his or her in relation to a
sexually oriented business.



         (c)   An applicant is residing with a person who has
been denied a permit by the city to operate a sexually oriented business
within the preceding 12 months, or residing with a person whose permit to
operate a sexually oriented business has been revoked within the preceding 12
months.



         (d)   An applicant has failed to provide information
required by this section or permit application for the issuance of the permit
or has knowingly falsely answered a question or request for information on
the application form.



         (e)   The premises to be used for the sexually oriented
business have not been approved as being in compliance with health, fire and
building codes by the department or agency responsible under law for
investigating said compliance.



         (f)   The application or permit fees required by this
chapter have not been paid.



         (g)   An applicant of the proposed business is in
violation of, or is not in compliance with, any of the provisions of this
chapter including but not limited to the zoning locational requirements for a
sexually oriented business under §§ 112.03, 112.05, and 112.06.



         (h)   The granting of the application would violate a
statute, ordinance, or court order.



         (i)   The applicant has a permit under this chapter
which has been suspended or revoked.



         (j)   An applicant has been convicted of a “specified
criminal” act for which:



            1.   Less than two years have elapsed since the
date of conviction or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the
later date, if the conviction is of an infraction offense for the
“specified criminal” acts which are sexual crimes against children,
sexual abuse, rape or crimes connected with another sexually oriented
business including but not limited to distribution of obscenity or material
harmful to minors, prostitution, pandering, or tax violations;



            2.   Less than five years have elapsed since the
date of conviction or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the
later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; for the “specified
criminal” acts which are sexual crimes against children, sexual abuse, rape
or crimes connected with another sexually oriented business including, but
not limited to, distribution of obscenity or material harmful to minors,
prostitution, pandering, or tax violations;



            3.   Less than five years have elapsed since the
date of conviction or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the
later date, if the convictions are of two or more misdemeanor offenses for
“specified criminal” acts which are sexual crimes against children,
sexual abuse, rape or crimes connected with another sexually oriented
business including, but not limited to, distribution of obscenity or
materials harmful to minors, prostitution, pandering or tax violations;
offenses occurring within any 24 month period;



            4.   The fact that a conviction is being appealed
shall have no effect on the disqualification of the applicant;



            5.   An applicant who has been convicted of the
above described “specified criminal acts” may qualify for a sexually
oriented business permit only when the time period required above in division
(C)(1)(j) has elapsed.



         (k)   An applicant knowingly has in his or her employ an
employee who does not have a valid license as required by this chapter.



      (2)   If the Mayor or his or her designee denies the
application, he or she shall notify the applicant of the denial and state the
reason(s) for the denial. The denied applicant shall have an opportunity for
appeal of the Mayor or his or her designee’s decision as set forth on §
112.29 of this chapter.



      (3)   If a person applies for a permit for a particular
location within a period of 12 months from the date of denial of a previous
application for a permit at the location, and there has not been an
intervening change in the circumstances which could reasonably be expected to
lead to a different decision regarding the former reasons for denial, the
application shall be denied.



(Ord. 98-5, passed 7-27-98)



§ 112.24  ANNUAL PERMIT FEE.



   The annual fee for a sexually oriented business permit is $1,000.



(Ord. 98-5, passed 7-27-98)



§ 112.25  INSPECTION.



   (A)   An applicant or permittee shall permit representatives of the
city’s Engineering and Building Inspector Department, the County Health
Department, and the Fire Department to inspect the premises of a sexually
oriented business for the purpose of insuring compliance with the law, at any
time it is occupied or open for business.



   (B)   A person who operates a sexually oriented business, regardless
of whether or not a permit has been issued for said business under this
chapter, commits an infraction if he or she refuses to permit such lawful
inspection of the premises at any time that it is occupied or open for
business.



(Ord. 98-5, passed 7-27-98)



§ 112.26  EXPIRATION OF PERMIT.



   Each permit shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be
renewed only by making application as provided in § 112.23 (for renewals,
filing of the original survey [if applicable] shall be sufficient).
Application for renewal shall be made at least 30 days before the expiration
date, and when made less than 30 days before the expiration date, the
expiration of the permit will not be affected.



(Ord. 98-5, passed 7-27-98)



§ 112.27  SUSPENSION OF PERMIT.



   The Mayor or his or her designee shall suspend a permit for a period
not to exceed 30 days if he or she determines that a permittee, or his or her
designee or employee, has:



   (A)   Violated or is not in compliance with any section of this
chapter;



   (B)   Been charged with or convicted of being under the influence of
alcoholic beverages while working in the sexually oriented business premises;



   (C)   Refused to allow an inspection of sexually oriented business
premises as authorized by this chapter;



   (D)   Knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the sexually
oriented business premises;



   (E)   Operated the sexually oriented business in violation of a
building, fire, health, or zoning statute, code, ordinance, or regulation,
whether federal, state or local, said determination being based on
investigation by the division, department or agency charged with enforcing
said rules or laws. In the event of such statute, code, ordinance or
regulation violation, the city or it designee, shall promptly notify the
permittee of the violation and shall allow the permittee a seven day period
in which to correct the violation. If the permittee fails to correct the
violation before the expiration of the seven day period, the city or it
designee, shall forthwith suspend the permit and shall notify the permittee
of the suspension;



   (F)   Engaged in permit transfer contrary to § 112.30. In the event
that the city or its designee suspends a permit on the ground that a
permittee engaged in a permit transfer contrary to § 112.30, the Mayor or
his or her designee shall forthwith notify the permittee of the suspension.
The suspension shall remain in effect until the applicable section of this
chapter has been satisfied;



   (G)   Operated the sexually oriented business in violation of the
hours stipulated by Indiana law which pertain to the sale or consumption of
alcoholic beverages.  The suspension shall remain in effect until the
violation of the statute, code, ordinance or regulation in question has been
corrected; or



   (H)   Knowingly employs a person who does not have a valid license
as required in § 112.31.



(Ord. 98-5, passed 7-27-98)



§ 112.28  REVOCATION OF PERMIT.



   (A)   The Mayor or his or her designee shall revoke a permit if a
cause of suspension in § 112.27  occurs and the permit has been suspended
for any reason within the preceding 12 months.



   (B)   The Mayor or his or her designee shall revoke a permit upon
determining that:



      (1)   A permittee gave false or misleading information in the
material submitted during the application process which was intended to
enhance the applicant's opportunity for obtaining a permit;



      (2)   A permittee or an employee has knowingly allowed
possession, use or sale of controlled substances in or on the premises;



      (3)   A permittee or an employee has knowingly allowed
prostitution on the premises;



      (4)   A permittee or an employee knowingly operated the
sexually oriented business during a period of time when the permittee’s
permit was suspended;



      (5)   A permittee has been convicted of a “specified
criminal act” for which the time period required in § 112.23 has not
elapsed;



      (6)   On two or more occasions within a 12 month period, a
person or persons committed an offense, occurring in or on the permitted
premises, constituting a specified criminal act for which a conviction has
been obtained, and the person or persons were employees of the sexually
oriented business at the time the offenses were committed. The fact that a
conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the
permit;



      (7)   A permittee is convicted of tax violations for any taxes
or fees related to a sexually oriented business;



      (8)   A permittee or an employee has knowingly allowed any act
of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or any other
specified sexual activities to occur in or on the permitted premises; or



      (9)   A permittee has been operating more than one sexually
oriented business under a single roof, without proper permit, within the
territorial or zoning jurisdiction of the city.



   (C)   When the Mayor or his or her designee revokes a permit, the
revocation shall continue for one year and the permittee shall not be issued
a sexually oriented business permit for one year from the date revocation
became effective. If, subsequent to revocation, the Mayor or his or her
designee finds that the basis for revocation under § 112.28 has been
corrected, the applicant shall be granted a permit if at least 90 days have
elapsed since the date revocation became effective. If the permit was revoked
under § 112.28, an applicant may not be granted another permit until the
number of years required under § 112.28 have elapsed.



(Ord. 98-5, passed 7-27-98)



§ 112.29  JUDICIAL REVIEW OF PERMIT DENIAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.



   After denial of an application, or denial of a renewal of an
application, or suspension or revocation of a permit, the applicant or
permittee may seek prompt review of such administrative action through the
City Council or special City Review Board if one is established by the city.
If the denial, suspension or revocation is affirmed upon review, the
administrative action shall be promptly reviewed by a court having
jurisdiction over the parties.



(Ord. 98-5, passed 7-27-98)



§ 112.30  TRANSFER OF PERMIT.



   (A)   A permittee shall not operate a sexually oriented business
under the authority of a permit at any place other than the address
designated in the application for permit.



   (B)   A permittee shall not transfer his or her permit to another
person unless and until such other person satisfies the following
requirements:



      (1)   Obtains an amendment to the permit from the Mayor or his
or her designee, which provides that he or she is now the permittee, which
amendment may be obtained only if he or she has completed and properly filed
an application with the Mayor or his or her designee, setting forth the
information called for under § 112.23 in the application; and



      (2)   Pays the transfer fee of 20% of the annual permit fee
set by this chapter.



   (C)    No permit may be transferred when the Mayor or his or her
designee has notified the permittee that suspension or revocation proceedings
have been or will be brought against the permittee.



   (D)   A permittee shall not transfer his or her permit to another
location.



   (E)   Any attempt to transfer a permit either directly or indirectly
in violation of this section is hereby declared void and the permit shall be
deemed revoked.



(Ord. 98-5, passed 7-27-98)



§ 112.31  PROHIBITIONS REGARDING MINORS AND SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES.



   A person commits an infraction if he or she operates or causes to be
operated a sexually oriented business, regardless of whether or not a permit
has been issued for said business under this chapter, and knowingly or with
reasonable cause to know, permit, suffer, or allow:



   (A)   Admittance of a person under 18 years of age to the business
premises;



   (B)   A person under 18 years of age to remain at the business
premises;



   (C)   A person under 18 years of age to purchase goods or services
at the business premises; or



   (D)   A person who is under 18 years of age to work at the business
premises as an employee.



(Ord. 98-5, passed 7-27-98)



§ 112.32  ADVERTISING REGULATIONS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful and a person commits an infraction if he
or she operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business,
regardless of whether or not a permit has been issued for said business under
this chapter, and advertises the presentation of any activity prohibited by
any applicable state statute or local ordinance.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful and a person commits an infraction if he
or she operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business,
regardless of whether or not a permit has been issued for said business under
this chapter, and displays or otherwise exhibits the materials and/or
performances at such sexually oriented business in any advertising which is
visible outside the premises. This prohibition shall not extend to
advertising of the existence or location of such sexually oriented business.



   (C)   The permittee shall not allow any portion of the interior
premises germane to adult entertainment to be visible from outside the
premises.



   (D)   All off-street parking areas and premise entries of the
sexually oriented business shall be illuminated from dusk to closing hours of
operation with a lighting system which provides an average maintained
horizontal illumination of one foot candle of light on the parking surface
and/or walkways. This required lighting level is established in order to
provide sufficient illumination of the parking areas and walkways serving the
sexually oriented business for the personal safety of patrons and employees
and to reduce the incidence of vandalism and criminal conduct. The lighting
shall be shown on the required sketch or diagram of the premises.



   (E)   Nothing contained in this section of the chapter shall relieve
the operator(s) of a sexually oriented business from complying with the
requirements of the city, commonly known as the Sexually Oriented Business
chapter, as it may be amended from time to time, or any subsequently enacted
city ordinance or regulations.



(Ord. 98-5, passed 7-27-98)



§ 112.33  HOURS OF OPERATION.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful and a person commits an infraction if he
or she operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business,
regardless of whether or not a permit has been issued for said business under
this chapter, and allows such business to remain open for business, or to
permit any employee to engage in a performance, solicit a performance, make a
sale, solicit a sale, provide a service, or solicit a service, between the
hours of 1:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. of any particular day.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful and a person commits an infraction if,
working as an employee of a sexually oriented business, regardless of whether
or not a permit has been issued for said business under this chapter, said
employee engages in a performance, solicits a performance, makes a sale,
solicits a sale, provides a service, or solicits a service, except during
lawful hours of operation as provided by the Indiana Alcoholic Beverage
Commission.



(Ord. 98-5, passed 7-27-98)



§ 112.34  NUDITY AT SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES NOT OFFERING FOR SALE
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.



   (A)   The United States Supreme Court decision in Barnes v. Glen
Theatre,Inc. 501 U.S., 111 S.Ct. 2456, (June 21, 1991) which upheld the
rights of cities to prohibit live public exposure of a person’s private
parts, specifically applies to sexually oriented businesses (regardless of
whether or not a permit has been issued to said businesses under this
chapter), including said businesses where no alcoholic beverages are sold,
served, or consumed at the premises.



   (B)   Public nudity is prohibited within the city, including any
sexually oriented business. Any sexually oriented business which if found in
violation of this section shall have its permit suspended pursuant to the
provisions of § 112.27.



(Ord. 98-5, passed 7-27-98)



§ 112.35  ADDITIONAL CRIMINAL PROHIBITIONS FOR THE OPERATION OF A SEXUALLY
ORIENTED BUSINESS WITHOUT A VALID PERMIT.



   In addition to the criminal provisions found at other sections of this
chapter, the following additional criminal provisions shall also apply to
sexually oriented businesses.  If a sexually oriented business is subject to
this chapter, it shall be unlawful and a person commits an infraction if he
or she operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business,
regardless of whether or not a permit has been issued for the business under
this chapter, and the person knows or should know that:



   (A)   The business does not have a sexually oriented business permit
under this chapter for any applicable classification;



   (B)   The business has a permit which is under suspension;



   (C)   The business has a permit  which has been revoked; or



   (D)   The business has a permit which has expired.



(Ord. 98-5, passed 7-27-98)



§ 112.36  EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   It is a defense to prosecution for any violation of this
chapter that a person appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling
class operated:



      (1)   By a college, junior college, or university supported
entirely or partly by taxation;



      (2)   By a private college or university which maintains and
operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college,
junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or



      (3)   In a structure:



         (a)   Which has a sign visible from the exterior of the
structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude person is available
for viewing;



         (b)   Where, in order to participate in a class a
student must enroll at least three days in advance of the class; and



         (c)   Where no more than one nude model is on the
premises at any one time.



   (B)   It is a defense to prosecution for a violation of this chapter
that an employee of a sexually oriented business, regardless of whether or
not it is permitted under this chapter, exposed any specified anatomical area
during the employee’s bona fide use of a restroom, or during the
employee’s bona fide use of a dressing room which is accessible only to
employees.



   (C)   Schools and libraries are exempt from the regulations of this
chapter.



   (D)   This chapter is not applicable to any community theater that
shows films rated G, PG, or R by the motion picture industry and where no
more than 5% of its revenues are derived from films not covered by these
ratings.



   (E)   It is defense to this chapter that a sexually oriented
business is lawfully in operation prior to the date of enactment of this
chapter.



(Ord. 98-5, passed 7-27-98)



§ 112.37  CRIMINAL PENALTIES AND ADDITIONAL LEGAL, EQUITABLE, AND
INJUNCTIVE RELIEF.



   (A)   In addition to whatever penalties are applicable under the
State of Indiana Penal Code, if any person fails or refuses to obey or comply
with or violates any of the provisions of this chapter, such person upon
conviction of such offense, shall be guilty of an infraction and shall be
punished by a fine not to exceed $2,000 in the discretion of the court. Each
violation or non-compliance shall be considered a separate and distinct
offense. Further, each day of continued violation or non-compliance shall be
considered as a separate offense.



   (B)   Nothing herein contained shall prevent or restrict the city
from taking such other lawful action in any court of competent jurisdiction
as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation or non-compliance. Such
other lawful actions shall include, but shall not be limited to, an equitable
action for injunctive relief or an action at law for damages.



   (C)   All remedies and penalties provided for in this section shall
be cumulative and independently available to the city and the city shall be
authorized to pursue any and all remedies set forth in this section to the
full extent allowed by law.



(Ord. 98-5, passed 7-27-98)



§ 112.38  IMMUNITY FROM PROSECUTION.



   The city and its designee, the Frankfort Police Department and all
other departments and agencies, and all other city officers, agents and
employees, charged with enforcement of state and local laws and codes shall
be immune from prosecution, civil or criminal, for reasonable, good faith
trespass upon a sexually oriented business while acting within the scope of
authority conferred by this chapter.



(Ord. 98-5, passed 7-27-98)



§ 112.39  PROHIBITION OF DISTRIBUTION OF SEXUAL DEVICES.



   (A)   It is unlawful for anyone to distribute, for commercial
purposes, sell or offer for sale any device, instrument or paraphernalia
designated or marketed primarily for stimulation of human genital organs or
for sadomasochistic use or abuse of themselves or others.



   (B)   Such devices, instruments or paraphernalia include but are not
limited to: phallic shaped vibrators, dildoes, muzzles, whips, chains, bather
restraints, racks, non-medical enema kits, body piercing implements
(excluding earrings or other decorative jewelry) or other tools of
sadomasochistic abuse.



   (C)   A violation of this section is an infraction punishable by a
fine of up to $1,000 for each day that the violator is found to be in
violation.



(Ord. 98-5, passed 7-27-98)



TITLE XIII:  GENERAL OFFENSES



   Chapter



      130.   OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY



      131.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE AND SAFETY



CHAPTER 130:  OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY



Section



   130.01   Posting handbills and advertisements on poles or posts



   130.02   Painting or marking on utility poles or pavement



   130.03   Alcoholic beverages prohibited in city parks



 



   130.99   Penalty



§ 130.01  POSTING HANDBILLS AND ADVERTISEMENTS ON POLES OR POSTS.



   It shall be unlawful to paint, print, post, stencil, or otherwise mark
upon in any manner, nail, suspend, or affix to any telegraph, telephone,
electric light or fire alarm pole, or lamp post, or any other post or pole or
structure permitted in the city any word, letter, character, figure,
sentence, or device or any handbill, poster, notice, or advertisement of any
character.



('75 Code, § 31.01)  (Ord. 69, passed 3-9-10)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.02  PAINTING OR MARKING ON UTILITY POLES OR PAVEMENT.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to mark,
paint, or post any sign, notice, advertisement, bill, or placard, or in any
manner to mark or paint on the utility poles or on the pavement of any public
or private walk in the city.  This section shall not apply to the marking or
painting of signs or advertisements on the public walk in front of and
adjoining any business room by the occupant thereof.



('75 Code, § 31.03)  (Ord. 177, passed 9-1-64)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.03  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES PROHIBITED IN CITY PARKS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to drink, partake,
consume, transport, deliver or possess alcohol or any alcoholic beverage in
any city park area that is owned, maintained or managed by the city. The
section includes any and all city parks within the corporate limits of the
city.  This section is a zero tolerance section.



   (B)   A person who violates this section shall be imprisoned for a
fixed term of not more than 60 days; in addition, may be fined not more than
$500.



(Ord. PO-97-1, passed 6-9-97)



§ 130.99  PENALTY.



   Any person, firm, corporation, association, or organization who shall
violate a provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be
subject to a fine as follows:



   (A)   For a first offense, the fine shall be not less than $50 nor
more than $100, together with the court costs, as determined by the court.



   (B)   For a second offense, the fine shall be not less than $150 nor
more than $250, together with court costs, as determined by the court.



   (C)   For the third offense, the fine shall be not less than $350
nor more than $2,500, together with court costs, as determined by the court.



('75 Code, §§ 31.02, 31.04)  (Ord. 69, passed 3-9-10; Am. Ord. 177, passed
9-1-64; Am. Ord. PO-77-2, passed 12-21-77; Am. Ord. 06-4, passed 2-13-06)



CHAPTER 131:  OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE AND SAFETY



Section



General Provisions



   131.01   Discharge of air guns prohibited



   131.02   Interference with city official



Curfew



   131.10   Applicable to minors; hours



   131.11   Duty of parent or guardian



Disorderly Conduct



   131.15   Congregating in public places



   131.16   Disturbing the peace



   131.17   Disturbing place of worship or meeting



Drive-In Restaurants; Private Parking Lots



   131.25   Definitions



   131.26   Operator or owner to post sign



   131.27   Congregation and loitering prohibited



   131.28   Vehicles not to be left unoccupied



   131.29   Unnecessary vehicle noise prohibited



   131.30   Alcoholic beverage consumption prohibited



 



   131.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   False fire alarms, see §  93.086



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 131.01  DISCHARGE OF AIR GUNS PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge an air gun within the
boundaries or the territorial limits of the city, and such an act is hereby
prohibited.



('75 Code, §  32.01)  (Ord. 108, passed 3-25-18)  Penalty, see § 131.99



§ 131.02  INTERFERENCE WITH CITY OFFICIAL.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally impede or
interfere, or attempt to impede or interfere with any policeman, fireman, or
any other city official in the performance of his duty or emergency functions
as fireman, policeman, or city official.



('75 Code, §  44.06)  (Ord. PO-70-1, passed 4-1-70)  Penalty, see §
131.99



Cross-reference:



   Enforcement violation for interfering with Code Enforcement Officers,
see § 96.40



CURFEW



§ 131.10  APPLICABLE TO MINORS; HOURS.



   (A)   It is a curfew violation for a child 15, 16, or 17 years of
age to be in a public place at the following times.



      (1)   Between 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. on Saturday or Sunday.



      (2)   After 11:00 p.m. on Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday,
or Thursday; or



      (3)   Before 5:00 a.m. on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday,
Thursday, or Friday.



   (B)   It is a curfew violation for a child under 15 years of age to
be in a public place after 1l:00 p.m. or before 5:00 a.m. on any day.



   (C)   This section does not apply to a child under the following
circumstances.



      (1)   Accompanied by his parent, guardian, or custodian.



      (2)   Accompanied by an adult specified by his parent,
guardian, or custodian.



      (3)   Participating in, going to, or returning from the
following.



         (a)   Lawful employment.



         (b)   A school sanctioned activity.



         (c)   A religious event.



(I.C. 31-6-4-2)  Penalty, see § 131.99



§ 131.11  DUTY OF PARENT OR GUARDIAN.



   It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian, or other adult person
having the care or custody of any person under the age of 18 years knowingly
to permit the minor person to be upon the streets, alleys, public places,
public grounds, or public thoroughfares of this city during the hours
mentioned in § 131.10.  The provisions of this section shall not apply
under the excepted circumstances listed in§ 131.10(C).



('75 Code, §  44.02)  (Ord. 56, passed 4-22-04; Am. Ord. 148, passed
1-14-44; Am. Ord. PO-70-1, passed 4-1-70)  Penalty, see § 131.99



DISORDERLY CONDUCT



§ 131.15  CONGREGATING IN PUBLIC PLACES.



   It is unlawful for any person to congregate or cause to be congregated
a crowd of three or more persons upon any public street, alley, sidewalk,
parking lot, school, school grounds, building, or other public place within
this city so as to obstruct the same, hinder or annoy passersby or occupants
of adjacent premises, or interfere with the activities normally carried on on
the premises  without a permit.



('75 Code, §  44.03)  (Ord. PO-70-1, passed 4-1-70)  Penalty, see §
131.99



§ 131.16  DISTURBING THE PEACE.



   It is unlawful for any person to disturb the peace and quiet of this
city or of its lawful inhabitants by:  loud talking or the making of unusual
noises; the crying of any alarm without good cause; threatening any person,
challenging him to fight, or menacing him with physical harm or pecuniary
loss.



('75 Code, §  44.04)  (Ord. PO-70-1, passed 4-1-70)  Penalty, see §
131.99



§ 131.17  DISTURBING PLACE OF WORSHIP OR MEETING.



   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons within this city by any
loud or unnecessary talking or shouting or by any threatening, abusive,
profane, or obscene language, violent action, or by any other rude behavior,
to interrupt, molest, annoy, or disturb any group of persons convened for the
purpose of worship or in like manner to interrupt, molest, annoy, or disturb
any meeting of persons met together for any lawful purpose.



('75 Code, §  44.05)  (Ord. PO-70-1, passed 4-1-70)  Penalty, see §
131.99



DRIVE-IN RESTAURANTS; PRIVATE PARKING LOTS



§ 131.25  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of §§ 131.25 through 131.30, the following
definitions shall aply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



   DRIVE-IN RESTAURANT.  Any establishment selling foods, frozen
desserts, or beverages to consumers, the establishment being designed,
intended, or used for the consumption of such items on the premises outside
of the building in which they are prepared.



   PRIVATE PARKING AREA.  Any parking lot constructed or maintained by
any church, business establishment, or city agency designed for the purpose
of parking any vehicle while conducting business with the establishment.



('75 Code, §  27.08)  (Ord. PO-68-3, passed 11-13-68)



§ 131.26  OPERATOR OR OWNER TO POST SIGN.



   It shall be the duty of drive-in restaurant operators and owners of
private parking areas to post on the premises in a conspicuous location one
or more signs bearing the following legend:



   "Cruising in or congregating and lingering outside of a motor vehicle
is unlawful.  No unoccupied vehicle may be left on these premises without
the consent of the owner and operator."



('75 Code, §  27.09)  (Ord.  PO-68-3, passed 11-13-68)  Penalty, see §
131.99



§ 131.27  CONGREGATION AND LOITERING PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for a group of three or more persons to congregate
and linger at any location on the premises of a drive-in restaurant or
private parking area other than in the drive-in building or in a legally
parked automobile or motor vehicle.  Persons so congregating and lingering
shall be guilty of loitering.  No person shall drive a motor vehicle onto
the premises of a drive-in restaurant and then from the premises without
parking the motor vehicle, unless there is no unoccupied space available on
the premises.



('75 Code, §  27.10)  (Ord.  PO-68-3, passed 11-13-68)  Penalty, see §
131.99



§ 131.28  VEHICLES NOT TO BE LEFT UNOCCUPIED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to leave any unoccupied motor
vehicle on any drive-in restaurant parking lot or private parking area and to
leave the premises thereof except with the knowledge and consent of the
operator of the drive-in restaurant or private parking area.



('75 Code, §  27.11)  (Ord. PO-68-3, passed 11-13-68)  Penalty, see §
131.99



§ 131.29  UNNECESSARY VEHICLE NOISE PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person while on or adjacent to the
premises of a drive-in restaurant to race the motor of any vehicle, to
suddenly start or stop any vehicle, or to make or cause to be made any other
loud or unseemly noise.  It shall be unlawful for any person parked on the
premises of a drive-in restaurant or private parking area to blow or cause to
be blown any automobile horn, motorcycle horn, or the horn of any other
vehicle in an obnoxious or bothersome manner at any time while so parked.



('75 Code, §  27.12)  (Ord. PO-68-3, passed 11-13-68)  Penalty, see §
131.99



Cross-reference:



   Vehicle noise control regulations, see Ch. 95



§ 131.30  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONSUMPTION PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person on the premises of a drive-in
restaurant or private parking area, whether in or out of an automobile, to
drink any intoxicating beverage.



('75 Code, §  27.13)  (Ord. PO-68-3, passed 11-13-68)  Penalty, see §
131.99



§ 131.99  PENALTY.



   Any person, firm, corporation, association, or organization who shall
violate a provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be
subject to a fine as follows:



   (A)   For a first offense, the fine shall be not less than $50 nor
more than $100, together with the court costs, as determined by the court.



   (B)   For a second offense, the fine shall be not less than $150 nor
more than $250, together with court costs, as determined by the court.



   (C)   For the third offense, the fine shall be not less than $350
nor more than $2,500, together with court costs, as determined by the court.



('75 Code, §§  27.22, 32.02, 44.07)  (Ord. PO-77-2, passed 12-21-77; Am.
Ord. 06-4, passed 2-13-06)



TITLE XV:  LAND USAGE



   Chapter



      150.   UNSAFE BUILDING CODE



      151.   MASTER PLAN



      152.   MANUFACTURED HOUSING



      153.   SUBDIVISION CONTROL



         APPENDIX A:  DIAGRAMS



         APPENDIX B:  REQUIRED CERTIFICATES



      154.   THOROUGHFARE PLAN



         APPENDIX:  THOROUGHFARE DEVELOPMENT PLAN



      155.   ZONING CODE



         APPENDIX A:  ZONING CHARTS



         APPENDIX B:  ZONING DEVELOPMENT PLAN



      156.   BUILDING CODE



      157.   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS



CHAPTER 150:  UNSAFE BUILDING CODE



Section



   150.01   Title



   150.02   Purpose



   150.03   Adoption by reference



   150.04   Definitions



   150.05   Reliance upon administrative officers



   150.06   Applicability of building code



   150.07   Unsafe building fund



 



   150.99   Penalty



§ 150.01  TITLE.



   This subchapter, and all ordinances supplemental or amendatory hereto,
shall be known as the “Unsafe Building Code of the City of Frankfort,
Indiana”, may be cited as such, and will be referred to herein as “this
subchapter”.



(Ord. 83-9, passed 8-8-83)



§ 150.02  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this code is to provide for the protection of life,
limb, health, property, public safety, and welfare of citizens; and abatement
of unsafe premises by repair, vacation, sealing, or the removal of an unsafe
building, or buildings, in or upon unsafe premises; or, the extermination of
vermin or about unsafe premises.



(Ord. 83-9, passed 8-8-83)



§ 150.03  ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.



   I.C. 36-7-9-1 through 36-7-9-28, now existing or as hereafter amended,
hereinafter referred to as “The Indiana Statutes”, is hereby adopted by
this code and becomes a part of this code.



(Ord. 83-9, passed 8-8-83)



§ 150.04  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the definitions described in The
Indiana Statutes are hereby adopted, and supplemented as follows:



   DEPARTMENT.  The City Department of Engineering.



   ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY.  The City Engineer, as the chief administrative
officer of the Department of Engineering.



   HEARING AUTHORITY. All members of the Board of Public Works and Safety
and two additional members designated and appointed by the Mayor.



   SUBSTANTIAL PROPERTY INTEREST.  Defined as stated in I.C. 36-7- 9-2.



   UNSAFE BUILDING or UNSAFE PREMISES.  Defined as stated in I.C.
36-7-9-4.



(Ord. 83-9, passed 8-8-83; Am. Ord. 15-01, passed 3-23-15)



§ 150.05  RELIANCE UPON ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICERS.



   The Department of Engineering, or any of its officers, may rely upon
any officer of the County Board of Health in making a determination that a
building or premises is unsanitary, unfit for human habitation, or in such a
condition that it is likely to cause sickness or disease.  The Department,
or any of its officers may rely upon the Fire Chief or Assistant Fire Chief
of the City Fire Department in determining that a building or premises is a
fire hazard.



(Ord. 83-9, passed 8-8-83)



Cross-reference:



   Fire Inspection and Investigation, see §§  93.15 through 93.21



   Enforcement Procedures, see §§  93.30 through 93.39



   General requirements for Fire Safety of Buildings, see §§  93.45
through 93.60



§ 150.06  APPLICABILITY OF BUILDING CODE.



   All repairs, improvements, alterations, changes or adjustments to or
upon unsafe premises shall be accomplished in accordance with the City
Building Code.



(Ord. 83-9, passed 8-8-83)



§ 150.07  UNSAFE BUILDING FUND.



   In accordance with Indiana Statutes, the unsafe building fund is
established in the operating budget of the Board of Public Works and
Safety.  The fund shall be administered in accordance with Indiana Statutes.



(Ord. 83-9, passed 8-8-83; Am. Ord. 85-22, passed 1-27-86)



§ 150.99  PENALTY.



   A person who remains in, uses, or enters a building in violation of an
order made under §§ 150.01 through 150.07; knowingly interferes with or
delays the carrying out of an order made under those sections; knowingly
obstructs, damages, or interferes with persons engaged or property used in
performing any work or duty under those sections; or fails to comply with
I.C. 36-7-9-27, shall, on conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than
$500.  Each day that the violation continues constitutes a separate
offense.  (I.C. 36-7-9-28)



CHAPTER 151:  MASTER PLAN



Section



   151.01   Designation



   151.02   Purpose



   151.03   Content



   151.04   Authority of master plan



   151.05   Effect of master plan



   151.06   Continuing authority of the City Plan Commission



   151.07   Master plan on file



   151.08   Responsibility of the Clerk-Treasurer



   151.09   Amendments



§ 151.01  DESIGNATION.



   The ordinances, as amended, comprising Chapter 151 of this code shall
hereafter be referred to as the "Master Plan Chapter of Frankfort, Indiana,
1967."



(Ord. CO-67-3, passed 2-21-67)



§ 151.02  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to establish a single unified code
consisting of all plans, reports, and ordinances plus supplemental details as
contained in the report of the City Plan Commission entitled "Development
Plan of the City of Frankfort, Indiana," dated 1965, that deal with the
subject of planning and zoning, as a comprehensive guide to the future growth
and development of the city and territory within the jurisdiction of the
Commission.



(Ord. CO-67-3, passed 2-21-67)



§ 151.03  CONTENT.



   The master plan consists of a report dated 1965 and entitled
"Development Plan of the City of Frankfort, Indiana," and a separate plan
entitled "Development Plan, Frankfort, Indiana, dated 1967," together with
the provisions of the maps, charts, plans, and ordinances which have
heretofore or may hereafter be enacted concerning the following subjects: 
zoning, subdivision control, thoroughfares enforcement, parking, school,
park, recreation, and public areas, as well as other related subjects.



(Ord. CO-67-3, passed 2-21-67; Am. Ord. 85-5, passed 5-28-85)



§ 151.04  AUTHORITY OF MASTER PLAN.



   The layout, location, relocation, extension, or widening of
thoroughfares; the general design of neighborhoods and their street patterns;
the use of land; and the location of sites for schools, parks, recreation and
other public uses, shopping centers, off-street parking lots, and community
facilities shall conform to the principles, policies, and provisions of the
master plan.



(Ord. CO-67-3, passed 2-21-67)



§ 151.05  EFFECT OF MASTER PLAN.



   The City Council and all municipal boards, commissions, and other
agencies of the city shall be guided by and give consideration to the general
policy and pattern of development set out in the master plan prior to the
authorization, construction, alteration, or abandonment of any public
installation required or necessitated in the interest of the physical
development of the city and its jurisdictional area.



(Ord. CO-67-3, passed 2-21-67)



§ 151.06  CONTINUING AUTHORITY OF THE CITY PLAN COMMISSION.



   The City Plan Commission shall from time to time consider and review
proposals with respect to changes and amendments in the master plan and, on
conclusion of such consideration including a public hearing thereon, shall
certify to the City Council reports on such matters.



(Ord. CO-67-3, passed 2-21-67)



§ 151.07  MASTER PLAN ON FILE.



   The maps, charts, plans, and ordinances which comprise the master plan
are on file in the office of the Clerk-Treasurer in the city hall, and are
available for public inspection during all regular office hours of the
Clerk-Treasurer.



(Ord. CO-67-3, passed 2-21-67)



§ 151.08  RESPONSIBILITY OF THE CLERK-TREASURER.



   The Clerk-Treasurer of the city is ordered and directed to keep on
file, for public inspection during all regular office hours, two copies of
the master plan including maps, charts, plans, and ordinances referred to
herein.



(Ord. CO-67-3, passed 2-21-67)



§ 151.09  AMENDMENTS.



   The master plan may be amended from time to time according to the
procedure set forth in I.C. 36-7-4-500 through 36-7-4-509, and 36-7-4-511, as
amended, except that, if the City Council desires an amendment it may direct
the City Plan Commission to prepare an amendment and submit it to a public
hearing within 60 days after formal written request by the City Council. 
The City Plan Commission may on its own motion, initiate a petition for a
change in this chapter.



(Ord. CO-67-3, passed 2-21-67)



CHAPTER 152:  MANUFACTURED HOUSING



Section



   152.01   Intent



   152.02   Definitions



   152.03   Standards



   152.04   Appeal



 



   152.98   Remedies for violation; removal



   152.99   Penalty



§ 152.01  INTENT.



   It is the intent of this chapter to encourage provision of alternative
modes income housing in general residential areas by permitting the use of
certain manufactured homes, as defined herein, in all districts in which
similar dwellings constructed on site are permitted, subject to the
requirements set forth herein to assure acceptable similarity in exterior
appearance between such manufactured homes and dwellings that have been or
might be constructed under these and other lawful regulations on adjacent or
nearby lots in the same district.



(Ord. CO-82-6, passed 7-26-82)



§ 152.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   EXPANDO ROOM.  An expandable manufactured housing unit.



   MANUFACTURED HOME.  A dwelling unit fabricated on or after June 15,
1976, in an off-site manufacturing facility for installation or assembly at
the building site, bearing a seal certifying that it is built in compliance
with the federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Code
or Indiana Public Law 360, Acts of 1971, as promulgated by the Indiana
Administrative Building Council.



   MANUFACTURED HOUSING CONSTRUCTION AND SAFETY STANDARDS CODE. Title IV
of the 1974 Housing and Community Development Act (42 U.S. C 5401 et seq.),
as amended (previously known as the federal Mobile Home Construction and
Safety Act), rules and regulations adopted thereunder, which include H.U.D.
approved information supplied by the home manufacturer, and regulations and
interpretations of said code by the Indiana Administrative Building Council.



   MOBILE HOME.  A transportable structure built prior to June 15, 1976,
the effective date for the federal Mobile Home Construction and Safety Act of
1974, larger than 320 square feet, and designed to be used as a year-round
residential dwelling.



   ONE- AND TWO-FAMILY DWELLING CODE, INDIANA.  The mandatory statewide
building code adopted by the Indiana Administrative Building Council for one-
and two-family residential dwellings.



   PUBLIC LAW 360, ACTS OF 1971.  Enabling legislation requiring the
Indiana Administrative Building Council to adopt rules and regulations for
the construction, repair or maintenance of factory- constructed one- or
two-family residential dwellings.



   SPECIAL EXCEPTION PERMIT.  A device for permitting a use within a
district other than a principally permitted use.



(Ord. CO-82-6, passed 7-26-82)



§ 152.03  STANDARDS.



   (A)   Permitted placement.  The establishment, location, and use of
manufactured homes as scattered- site residences shall be permitted in any
zone permitting installation of a dwelling unit subject to requirements and
limitations applying generally to such residential use in the district, and
provided such homes shall meet the following requirements and limitations.



      (1)   The home shall meet all requirements applicable to
single-family dwellings and possess all necessary improvement location,
building and occupancy permits and other certifications required by the code.



      (2)   The home shall be larger than 950 square feet of
occupied space.



      (3)   The home shall be attached and anchored to a permanent
foundation in conformance with the regulations in the Indiana One- and
Two-Family Dwelling Code and with manufacturer's installation specifications.



      (4)   The home shall be covered with an exterior material
customarily used on site built residential dwellings, and such material shall
extend over the top of the foundation.



      (5)   The home shall have a roof composed of a material
customarily used on site built residential dwellings, such as asbestos,
fiberglass, shake, asphalt, or tile, which shall be in-stalled onto a surface
appropriately pitched for the materials used.



      (6)   The home shall have been constructed after January 1,
1981.



   (B)   Placement with permit.  Manufactured homes not meeting the
terms of division (A) above, and mobile homes, shall be permitted within the
city only after receiving a special exception permit from the Board of Zoning
Appeals.



   (C)   Structural alteration.  Due to its integral design, any
structural alteration or modification of a manufactured or mobile home after
it is placed on the site must be approved by the authorized building
administrator (or other designee) of the city.



(Ord. CO-82-6, passed 7-26-82)  Penalty, see § 152.99



Statutory reference:



   Manufactured housing, see I.C. 36-7-4-1106



§ 152.04  APPEAL.



   An action to review any order, requirement, decision, or determination
made by an administrative official or board charged with enforcement of the
zoning ordinance shall be pursuant to I.C. 36-7-4-919.



(Ord. CO-82-6, passed 7-26-82)



§ 152.98  REMEDIES FOR VIOLATION; REMOVAL.



   (A)   A home, sited upon property in violation of this chapter,
shall be subject to removal from such property.  However, the home owner
must be given a reasonable opportunity to bring the property into compliance
before action for removal can be taken.  If action finally is taken by the
appropriate authority to bring compliance, the expenses involved may be made
a lien against the property.



   (B)   The Board of Zoning Appeals or its designated administrator
may institute a suit in an appropriate court for injunctive relief to cause
such violation to be prevented, abated, or removed.



(Ord. CO-82-6, passed 7-26-82)



§ 152.99  PENALTY.



   Any person, firm, corporation, association or organization who shall
violate a provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be
subject to a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $2,500, together with
court costs, as determined by the court.  each day of a violation that
continues after the time specified for compliance shall constitute a separate
offense for purposes of this section.



(Ord. CO-82-6, passed 7-26-82; Am. Ord. 06-8, passed 2-13-06)



CHAPTER 153:  SUBDIVISION CONTROL



Section



General Provisions



   153.01   Definitions



   153.02   Variances



   153.03   Amendments



Plat Approval Procedure



   153.10   Plat approval required



   153.11   Application



   153.12   Provisional plat required



   153.13   Provisional plat approval



   153.14   Engineering plans and specifications



   153.15   Record plat required



   153.16   Record plat approval



Principles and Standards of Design



   153.25   Conformance required



   153.26   Streets



   153.27   Blocks



   153.28   Lots



   153.29   Easements



   153.30   Building setback lines



   153.31   Public open spaces



Standards of Improvements



   153.40   Conformance required



   153.41   Monuments and markers



   153.42   Streets



   153.43   Sanitary sewers



   153.44   Water



   153.45   Storm drainage



   153.46   Electric power



   153.47   Telephone and gas utilities



   153.48   Curbs and gutters



   153.49   Sidewalks



   153.50   Driveway entrances



   153.51   Street signs



   153.52   Construction control



   153.53   Improvement credit procedure



   Appendix A:   Diagrams



   Appendix B:   Required certificates



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 153.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALLEY.  A permanent service way providing a secondary means of access
to abutting lands.



   BLOCK.  A unit of property bounded by streets, or by streets or
railroad rights-of-way, waterways, or other barriers.



   BLOCK FRONTAGE.  Property abutting on one side of a street or place,
and lying between the two nearest intersecting or intercepting streets, or
nearest intersecting or intercepting street and railroad right-of- way,
waterway, or other barrier.



   BUILDING SETBACK LINE.  The line nearest the front of and across a lot
establishing the minimum open space to be provided between the front line of
buildings and structures and the front lot line.



   COMMISSION.  The City of Frankfort City Plan Commission.



   CUL-DE-SAC.  A residential street having one end open to traffic and
being permanently terminated by a vehicle turn-around. Also known as a COURT
or DEAD-END STREET.



   EASEMENT.  A grant by the property owner of the use of a strip of land
by the public, a corporation, or persons, for specified purposes.



   LOT.  A parcel, tract, or area of land accessible by means of a street
and for residential uses, abutting a street for at least 50% of the lot width
prescribed by the zoning code, Chapter 155, for the district in which the lot
is located.  It may be a single parcel separately described in a deed which
is recorded in the office of the County Recorder; or it may be a single
parcel separately described in a survey which is recorded in the office of
the County Recorder; or it may include a parcel contained in a plat or
subdivision of land which is recorded in the office of the County Recorder;
or it may include parts of or a combination of such parcels when adjacent to
one another and used as one. In determining lot area and boundary lines no
part thereof within the limits of a street, either existing or proposed,
shall be included.



   MASTER PLAN.  The complete plan, or any of its parts, for the
development of the city prepared by the Commission and adopted in accordance
with I.C. 36-7-4-500 et seq.



   OFFICIAL THOROUGHFARE PLAN.  The part of the master plan for the city,
now or hereafter adopted, which includes a major street and highway plan and
sets forth the location, alignment, dimensions, identification, and
classification of existing and proposed streets, highways, and other
thoroughfares.



   PLAT.  A map or chart indicating the subdivision or resubdivision of
land, intended to be filed for record.



   REPLAT.  A subdivision or plat, the site of which has heretofore been
platted or subdivided with lots or parcels of land. It may include all or any
part of a previous subdivision or plat.



   STREET.  A right-of-way, dedicated to the public use, which affords
the principal means of access to abutting property.  A street may be
designated as a highway, thoroughfare, parkway, boulevard, road, avenue,
lane, drive, place, or other appropriate name.  A street may also be
identified according to type of use as follows.



      (1)   ARTERIAL STREET.  A street designated for large volumes
of traffic movement.  Certain arterial streets may be classed as limited
access highways to which entrances and exits are provided only at controlled
intersections and access is denied to abutting properties.  Arterial streets
are divided into two categories: primary and secondary.



      (2)   FEEDER STREET.  A street planned to facilitate the
collection of traffic from residential streets and to provide circulation
within neighborhood areas and convenient ways for traffic to reach arterial
streets.



      (3)   RESIDENTIAL STREET.  A street designated primarily to
provide access to abutting properties, usually residential.  Certain
residential streets may be marginal access streets parallel to arterial
streets, which provide access to abutting property and ways for traffic to
reach access points on arterial streets.



   SUBDIVIDER.  Any person, firm, or corporation engaged in developing or
improving a tract of land which complies with the definition of a subdivision
as defined in this chapter.



   SUBDIVISION.  The division of any parcel of land, separately described
in a deed on record in the office of the County Recorder, into two or more
contiguous parcels, sites, or lots fronting on an existing street and any one
of which comprises less than five acres, for the purpose of immediate or
future transfer of ownership. Provided, if a new street or streets are
included to provide access to lots which are laid out for the purpose of
immediate or future transfer of ownership, but which do not front on an
existing street, the interior lots shall be considered as parts of the
subdivision even though they may exceed five acres in area.  (See § 4 of
Appendix A following this chapter.)



   ZONING ORDINANCE.  The part of the master plan, now or hereafter
adopted, which includes an ordinance and zone map which divides the
jurisdiction of the Commission into districts, with regulations and
requirements and procedures for the establishment of land use controls.



(Ord. CO-67-5, passed 2-21-67)



§ 153.02  VARIANCE.



   Where the subdivider can show that a provision of this chapter would
cause unnecessary hardship if strictly adhered to and where, in the opinion
of the City Plan Commission because of topographical or other conditions
peculiar to the site, a departure may be made without destroying the intent
of such provision, the City Plan Commission may authorize a variance.  Any
variance thus authorized is required to be entered in writing in the minutes
of the Commission and the reasoning on which the departure was justified
shall be set forth.



(Ord. CO-67-5, passed 2-21-67)



§ 153.03  AMENDMENTS.



   All amendments to this chapter shall be in conformance with I.C.
36-7-4-507 through 36-7-4-509, and 36-7-4-511.



(Ord. CO-67-5, passed 2-21-67)



PLAT APPROVAL PROCEDURE



§ 153.10  APPROVAL REQUIRED.



   No plat or replat of a subdivision of land located within the
jurisdiction of the City Plan Commission shall be recorded until it is
approved by the City Plan Commission, and such approval is entered in writing
on the plat by the President and Secretary of the Commission.



(Ord. CO-67-5, passed 2-21-67)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 153.11  APPLICATION.



   (A)   Submission of application.  A subdivider desiring approval of
a plat of a subdivision of any land lying within the jurisdiction of the City
Plan Commission shall submit a written application therefor to the
Commission.  The application shall be accompanied by the information,
requirements, and plans set forth in §§ 153.10 through 153.16, all in
accordance with the requirements set forth in this chapter.



   (B)   Application fee schedule.



 

Application for Overall Provisional and Record Plats
 
Fee


(1)   Overall provisional plat
 
$150.00 plus $1.00 for each lot


(2)   Resubmitted overall provisional plat (previously rejected)
 
$150.00 plus $1.00 for each lot


(3)   Record plat
 
$150.00 for plat having less than 10 lots; $100.00 plus $5.00 per lot for
plat having more than 9, but less than 50 lots; $55.00 per lot for plat
having 50 or more lots



 



(Ord. CO-67-5, passed 2-21-67; Am. Ord. 85-22, passed 1-27-86; Am. Ord.
CO-98-19, passed 1-11-99)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 153.12  PROVISIONAL PLAT REQUIRED.



   The subdivider shall provide a provisional plat of the subdivision, the
design of which shall conform with the policies of the master plan and its
provisions, showing the following.



   (A)   Proposed name of the subdivision, followed by the words
"Provisional Plat."



   (B)   A plan including the following.



      (1)   Streets and rights-of-way, on and adjoining the site of
the proposed subdivision, with names of streets which shall not duplicate
names of other streets in the community except in cases of extensions of
existing streets, and including roadway locations and widths, approximate
gradients, curbs, sidewalks, and other pertinent data.



      (2)   The layout of lots showing dimensions and numbers;
square foot area of each lot with irregular sides (not rectangular); and the
block number, distances, radii, and chords.



      (3)   Parcels of land proposed to be dedicated or reserved for
schools, parks, playgrounds, or other public, semipublic, or community
purposes.



      (4)   Building setback or front yard lines.



      (5)   Easements:  locations, widths, and purposes.



      (6)   Names and addresses of the owner of the land, the
subdivider and the city planner, land planning consultant, landscape
architect, engineer, land surveyor, or other person who prepared the plan.



   (C)   Contours at vertical intervals of two feet or less if the
general slope of the site is less than 10% and at vertical intervals of five
feet if the general slope of the site is 10% or greater.



   (D)   Tract boundary line showing dimensions, bearings, angles, and
references to section, township, and range lines or corners.



   (E)   Statement concerning the location and approximate size or
capacity of utilities to be installed.



   (F)   Other features or conditions which would affect the
subdivision favorably or adversely.



   (G)   Title, scale, north point, legend, notes, and date.  The
provisional plat of the subdivision shall be drawn to scale of 50 feet to 1
inch, or 100 feet to 1 inch.  However, if the resulting drawing would be
over 36 inches in shortest dimension, a scale as recommended by the City Plan
Commission may be used.



(Ord. CO-67-5, passed 2-21-67)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 153.13  PROVISIONAL PLAT APPROVAL.



   (A)   Within 30 days after the City Plan Commission meeting next
following submission to the Building Inspector of an application for approval
of a plat of a subdivision, together with four copies of all maps and data,
the Commission shall review the application and shall study the provisional
plat to see if it conforms to the minimum standards and requirements as
outlined in this chapter, and shall accept the application and plat or return
them to the subdivider with suggestions for changes, within 60 days after
submission of the application to the Commission.  If the Commission does not
act within 60 days after submission of the application to the Commission, the
provisional plat shall be deemed to be accepted, provided that the subdivider
may agree to an extension of time.



   (B)   After the Commission has given tentative approval of the
application, it shall set a date for a hearing, notify the applicant in
writing, and notify by general publication or otherwise, any person or
governmental unit having a probable interest in the proposed plat. At least
ten days prior to the date set for hearing, the Commission shall publish in a
newspaper of general circulation in the city a notice of the time and place
of the hearing.



   (C)   Within a reasonable time following the hearing on the
provisional plat, the Commission will notify the applicant in writing that it
has approved the provisional plat and is ready to receive the record plat, or
will advise the applicant of any further changes in the provisional plat
which are required or should have consideration before approval will be
given.  The approval of the provisional plat by the Commission does not
constitute approval of the subdivision, but is merely an authorization to
proceed with the preparation of the record plat.



   (D)   One copy of the provisional plat approved by the Commission
and signed by the President and Secretary shall be retained in the Building
Inspector's office.  One copy shall be sent to the subdivider and is
authorization for the subdivider to proceed with the preparation of the
record plat.



   (E)   An approval of the provisional plat shall be effective for a
period of four years unless, on request of the applicant, the Commission
grants an extension of time.  The application for the record plat shall be
submitted to the Commission, and if it is not received within the period of
time specified above, all previous actions by the Commission with respect to
the plat shall be deemed to be null and void.



(Ord. CO-67-5, passed 2-21-67; Am. Ord. CO-98-19, passed 1-11-99)



§ 153.14  ENGINEERING PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS.



   Before application may be made for approval of the record plat, the
subdivider shall submit the following engineering plans and specifications
and other required information to the City Plan Commission for approval:



   (A)   Profiles, typical cross sections, and specifications for
proposed street improvements.



   (B)   Profiles and locations and other explanatory data concerning
the installation of sanitary and storm sewerage systems and water
distribution systems.



   (C)   A description of the portion of the provisional plat intended
to be filed for record, including a program for the progressive development
of the entire area contained in the provisional plat.



   (D)   A statement of the estimated amount of money sufficient to
complete the improvements and installations by the subdivider and attested to
by a registered land surveyor or a registered professional engineer.



(Ord. CO-67-5, passed 2-21-67)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 153.15  RECORD PLAT REQUIRED.



   The subdivider shall provide a record plat of the subdivision which
shall meet the following specifications.



   (A)   The record plat may include all or any part of the provisional
plat which has received approval, provided the requirements set forth in §
153.14 have been met.



   (B)   The original drawing of the record plat of the subdivision
shall be provided and drawn to a scale of 50 feet to one inch, provided that
if the resulting drawing would be over 36 inches in shortest dimension, a
scale of 100 feet to one inch may be used.  Four black or blue line prints
shall be submitted with the original record plat, or, in order to conform to
modern drafting and reproduction methods, four black line prints and a
reproducible print shall be submitted.  For record purposes, four black line
prints and a reproducible print shall be provided so as not to exceed a sheet
size for the record plat of 17 inches by 20 inches.



   (C)   Accurate boundary lines, with dimensions and angles, which
provide a survey of the tract, closing with an error of not more that 1 foot
in 5,000 feet.



   (D)   Accurate distances and directions to the nearest established
street corners or official monuments.  Reference corners shall be accurately
described on the plat.



   (E)   Accurate locations of all existing and recorded streets
intersecting the boundaries of the tract.



   (F)   Accurate metes and bounds description  of the boundary.



   (G)   Source of title to the land to be subdivided as shown by the
books of the County Recorder.



   (H)   Street names.



   (I)   Complete curve notes for all curves included in the plat.



   (J)   Street lines with accurate dimensions in feet and hundredths
of feet, with angles to street, alley, and lot lines.



   (K)   Lot numbers and dimensions.



   (L)   Accurate locations of easements for utilities and any
limitations on such easements.



   (M)  Accurate dimensions for any property to be dedicated or reserved
for public, semipublic, or community use.



   (N)   Building setback lines and dimensions.



   (O)   Location, type, material, and size of all monuments and lot
markers.



   (P)   Plans and specifications for the improvements required in this
chapter.



   (Q)   Restrictions of all types which will run with the land and
become covenants in the deeds for lots.



   (R)   Name of the subdivision, followed by the words “Record
Plat.”



   (S)   Name and address of the owner and the subdivider.



   (T)   North point, scale, and date.



   (U)   Certification by a registered land surveyor.



   (V)   Certification of dedication of streets and other public
property.



   (W)  Certificate for approval by the City Plan Commission.



   (X)   Certificate for approval of any improvements by the Board of
Public Works and Safety.



(Ord. CO-67-5, passed 2-21-67; Am. Ord. 85-5, passed 5-28-85) Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 153.16  RECORD PLAT APPROVAL.



   (A)   When the record plat is submitted to the City Plan Commission,
it shall be accompanied by a notice from the Board of Public Works and
Safety, stating that there has been filed with and approved by that body, one
of the following.



      (1)   A certificate signed by a registered professional
engineer, or registered land surveyor, who has been approved by the Board of
Public Works and Safety, stating that he has inspected the improvements and
installations for the subdivision required for its approval, during and after
their construction and installation and they have been made or installed in
accordance with the approved specifications.



      (2)   A bond which shall meet the following requirements.



         (a)   Run to the city.



         (b)   Be in an amount determined by the Commission and
the Board of Public Works and Safety to be sufficient in amount to complete
the improvements and installations in compliance with this chapter.  A
statement of the estimated amount sufficient to complete the improvements and
installations shall be furnished by the subdivider and attested to by a
registered professional engineer or a registered land surveyor.



         (c)   Be with surety satisfactory to the Commission.



         (d)   Specify the time for the completion of the
improvements and installations.



   (B)   The performance bond referred to in division (A) (2) above
shall not be released until a certificate signed by a registered professional
engineer or registered land surveyor, as the case may be, who has been
approved by the Board of Public Works and Safety, shall have been filed
stating that the engineer or surveyor has inspected the improvements and
installations and that they have been made and installed in accordance with
the approved specifications.



   (C)   Within a reasonable time after application for approval of the
record plat, the Commission shall approve or disapprove it.  If the
Commission approves, it shall affix the Commission's seal on the plat,
together with the certifying signatures of its President and Secretary.  If
it disapproves, it shall set forth the reasons for such disapproval in its
own records and provide the applicant with a copy.



(Ord. CO-67-5, passed 2-21-67)



PRINCIPLES AND STANDARDS OF DESIGN



§ 153.25  CONFORMANCE REQUIRED.



   The provisional and record plats of the subdivision shall con-form to
the principles and standards of design set forth in §§ 153.25 through
153.31.  The subdivision plan shall conform to the principles and standards
which are generally exhibited in the master plan.



(Ord. CO-67-5, passed 2-21-67)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 153.26  STREETS.



   (A)   Proposed streets should be adjusted to the contour of the land
so as to produce usable lots and streets of reasonable gradient.



   (B)   The street and alley layout shall conform to the thoroughfare
plan for the development of the neighborhood in which the proposed
subdivision is located and shall provide access to all lots and parcels of
land within the subdivision.  Where streets cross other streets, jogs shall
not be created.  The minimum distance between center lines of parallel or
approximately parallel streets intersecting a cross street should be 120 feet.



   (C)   Certain proposed streets, where appropriate, shall be extended
to the boundary line of the tract to be subdivided so as to provide for
normal circulation of traffic within the vicinity.



   (D)   Wherever there exists a dedicated or platted portion of a
street or alley adjacent to the proposed subdivision, the remainder of the
street or alley to the prescribed width shall be platted within the proposed
subdivision.



   (E)   Widths of streets shall conform to the widths specified
according to type of use in the thoroughfare plan, the minimum right-of-way
of residential streets being 60 feet.



   (F)   The minimum right-of-way of marginal access streets or
cul-de-sacs, shall be 60 feet.  All cul-de- sacs shall terminate in a
circular right-of-way with a minimum diameter of 100 feet, or other
arrangement for the turning of all vehicles conveniently within the
right-of-way.



   (G)   Alleys shall be discouraged in residential districts but
should be included in commercial and industrial areas where needed for
loading and unloading or access purposes, and where platted, shall be at
least 20 feet in width.



   (H)   The center lines of streets should intersect as nearly at
right angles as possible.



   (I)   At intersections of streets and alleys, property line corners
shall be rounded by arcs of at least 20 feet radii or by chords of such arcs.



   (J)   At intersections of streets the property line corners shall be
rounded by arcs with radii of not less than 15 feet, or by chords of such
arcs.



   (K)   If the smaller angle of intersection of two streets is less
than 60 degrees, the radius of the arc at the intersection of property lines
shall be increased as deemed advisable by the City Plan Commission.



   (L)   Intersections of more than two streets at one point shall be
avoided.



   (M)  Where parkways or special types of streets are involved, the
Commission may apply special standards to be followed in their design.



   (N)   Whenever the proposed subdivision contains or is adjacent to a
railroad right-of-way or a highway designated as a "limited access highway"
by the appropriate highway authorities, provision shall be made for a
marginal access street, or a parallel street at a distance acceptable for the
appropriate use of the land between the highway or railroad and those streets.



   (O)   Unobstructed sight distances measured from a point five feet
above the proposed grade line, to permit horizontal visibility on all
streets, must be established along the center line of the streets as follows.



      (1)   Arterial streets:   500 feet.



      (2)   Feeder streets, residential streets, and
parkways:   300 feet.



   (P)   Curvature measured along the center line shall have a minimum
radius as follows.



      (1)   Arterial streets:   500 feet.



      (2)   Feeder streets and parkways:   300 feet.



      (3)   Residential streets:   150 feet.



   (Q)   Between reversed curves on arterial streets there shall be a
tangent of not less than 100 feet and on feeder and residential streets and
parkways the tangent shall be not less than 40 feet.



   (R)   Maximum grades for streets shall be as follows:



      (1)   Arterial streets and parkways, not greater than 6%.



      (2)   Feeder and residential streets and alleys, not greater
than 10%.



   (S)   The minimum grade of any street gutter shall not be less than
0.3%.



(Ord. CO-67-5, passed 2-21-67)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 153.27  BLOCKS.



   (A)   Blocks should not exceed 1,500 feet in length.



   (B)   Blocks shall be of sufficient width to permit two tiers of
lots of appropriate depth, except where an interior street parallels a
limited access highway or an arterial street or a railroad right-of-way.



(Ord. CO-67-5, passed 2-21-67)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 153.28  LOTS.



   (A)   All lots shall abut a street.



   (B)   Side lines of lots shall be approximately right angles to
straight streets and on radial lines on curved streets.  Some variation from
this rule is permissible, but pointed or very irregular lots should be
avoided.



   (C)   Double frontage lots should not be platted, except that where
desired along arterial streets, lots may face on an interior street and back
on those thoroughfares.



   (D)   Widths and areas of lots shall be not less than that provided
in the zoning code, Chapter 155, for single-family dwellings for the district
in which the subdivision is located.



   (E)   Wherever possible, unit shopping centers based on sound
development standards should be designed in contrast to the platting of lots
for individual commercial use.



   (F)   Corner residential lots shall be wider than normal in order to
permit appropriate setbacks from both streets.



(Ord. CO-67-5, passed 2-21-67; Am. Ord. 85-5, passed 5-28-85)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 153.29  EASEMENTS.



   Where alleys are not provided, easements for utilities shall be
provided in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.  The easements
shall have minimum widths of 15 feet, and where located along lot lines,
one-half of the width shall be taken from each lot. Before determining the
location of easements, the plan shall be approved by the local public utility
companies to assure their proper placing for the installation of such
services.



(Ord. CO-67-5, passed 2-21-67)



§ 153.30  BUILDING SETBACK LINES.



   Building setback lines shall be as provided in the zoning code, Chapter
155,  or as provided by the City Plan Commission.



(Ord. CO-67-5, passed 2-21-67)



§ 153.31  PUBLIC OPEN SPACES.



   Where sites for parks, schools, playgrounds, or other public uses are
located within the subdivision area as shown on the master plan, the City
Plan Commission may request their dedication for such purposes or their
reservation for a period of one year following the date of the approval of
the record plat.  In the event a governmental agency concerned passes a
resolution expressing its intent to acquire the land so reserved, the
reservation period shall be extended for an additional six months.



(Ord. CO-67-5, passed 2-21-67)



STANDARDS OF IMPROVEMENTS



§ 153.40  CONFORMANCE REQUIRED.



   The record plat of the subdivision shall conform to the standards of
improvements set forth in §§ 153.40 through 153.52.



(Ord. CO-67-5, passed 2-21-67)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 153.41  MONUMENTS AND MARKERS.



   (A)   Monuments and markers shall be placed so that the center of
the pipe or marked point shall coincide exactly with the intersection of
lines to be marked and shall be set so that the top of the monument or marker
is level with the finished grade.



   (B)   Monuments shall be set as follows.



      (1)   At the intersection of lines forming angles in the
boundary of the subdivision, provided that not more than eight monuments
shall be required.



      (2)   At the intersection of street property lines.  Not more
than one monument shall be required at an intersection.



   (C)   Markers shall be set as follows.



      (1)   At the beginning and ending of all curves along street
property lines.



      (2)   At all points where lot lines intersect curves, either
front or rear.



      (3)   At all angles in property lines of lots.



      (4)   At all other lot corners not established by a monument.



   (D)   Monuments shall be of stone, precast concrete, or concrete
poured in place with minimum dimensions of six inches by six inches by 36
inches, set vertically in place with an iron or copper dowel 3/8 inch in
diameter, at least 2-1/2 inches in length embedded so that the top of the
dowel shall be not more than 1/4 inch above the surface and at the center of
the monument.  Markers shall consist of galvanized or wrought iron pipe or
iron or steel bars at least three feet in length, and not less than 5/8 inch
in diameter.



(Ord. CO-67-5, passed 2-21-67)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 153.42  STREETS.



   (A)   All streets shall be filled or excavated to the grade as set
forth on the approved subdivision plans and further in accordance with §
153.26, and the roadway shall be improved by surfacing as herein required.



   (B)   The work performed and the materials used shall meet the
requirements of various and applicable sections of the State Highway
Commission Standard Specification for Road and Bridge Construction and
Maintenance, latest edition, herein referred to as the "Standard
Specifications".  Copies of the Standard Specifications shall be kept on
file in the office of the City Engineer.  Subsequent revisions of the
Standard Specifications shall go into effect at such times as the Indiana
State Highway Commission effects such revisions.



   (C)   The general street classifications with their respective
minimum dimensions and characteristics are as follows.



      (1)   Primary arterial thoroughfares.  Surfacing shall be
portland cement concrete or an approved equal bituminous surfacing may be
used wherever concrete pavement is subsequently called for in this section. 
All plans for street construction shall be submitted to the City Engineer for
approval.  Width of pavement shall be 36 feet back-to-back of curbs. 
Included in this class of streets are all of those having such traffic that
the pavement must be designed to carry an unlimited number of 22,000 pound
axle loads.  Pavements of this class shall be designed individually on the
basis of anticipated traffic.



      (2)   Parkway, secondary, arterial, and feeder streets.
Surfacing shall be portland cement concrete or an approved equal bituminous
surfacing may be used wherever concrete pavement is subsequently called for
in this section.  All plans for street construction shall be submitted to
the City Engineer for approval. Width of pavement shall be 36 feet
back-to-back of curbs.  Included in this class of streets are those having
such traffic that the pavement must be designed to carry an unlimited number
of 16,000 pound axle loads.  The minimum pavement shall be a seven-inch
plain concrete pavement, meeting construction details set out later in this
chapter.



      (3)   Residential streets.  Surfacing shall be portland
cement concrete or an approved equal bituminous surfacing may be used
wherever concrete pavement is subsequently called for in this section.  All
plans for street construction shall be submitted to the City Engineer for
approval.  Width of pavement shall be 32 feet back-to-back of curbs. 
Included in this class of streets are all residential streets, residential
cul-de-sac streets, residential marginal access streets, and alleys.  The
pavement for this class of street must be designed to carry an unlimited
number of 12,000 pound axle loads.  The minimum pavement is a six- inch
plain concrete pavement, meeting the construction details set out later in
this chapter.  Cul-de-sacs shall be paved to within 15 feet of the property
line within the turn-around.



   (D)   The pavements as designed and constructed, in addition to the
above minimums, shall be designed in accordance with the widely accepted and
used design procedure as used by the State Highway Commission which takes
into account the following.



      (1)   Traffic, including axle weights and volume.



      (2)   Pavement design life.



      (3)   Subgrade strength and character.



      (4)   Concrete quality.



      (5)   Fatigue imparted by traffic which shall not exceed 100%
during the designed life of the pavement.



   (E)   When the following basic design conditions are met the minimum
pavement may be constructed; when not met the pavement and subgrade shall be
designed and constructed to meet the basic design conditions.



      (1)   The traffic, in the absence of data on traffic from
local studies, may be determined from the State Highway Commission loadmeter
and traffic volume studies in urban sections, wherein are tabulated the
number of axle loads by weight groups for each type of vehicle using the
particular class of street.



      (2)   The pavement design life is 30 years.  The subgrade
strength and characteristics, when constructed to the Standard Specifications
give K value of 100 and CBR value of 3, the values used in determining the
minimum pavement thicknesses herein.



      (3)   The concrete quality, when constructed to the Standard
Specifications and modification herein enumerated, will meet 650 pound
modulus of rupture strength, the value used in determining the minimum
pavement thickness herein.



      (4)   Fatigue will not exceed 100% when the design analysis
above required is used.



   (F)   Embankments and subgrades shall be constructed in accordance
with their respective sections, in the latest edition of the Indiana State
Highway Commission Standard Specifications.



   (G)   Concrete pavement and materials shall be constructed and
requirements complied with in their respective sections, in the latest
edition of the Indiana State Highway Commission Standard Specifications. 
Concrete shall be machine finished except where hand finishing is
specifically permitted by the Standard Specifications. Finishing machines or
vibrating strikeboards of design other than as specified in the Standard
Specifications will be permitted provided work of equal quality as set out in
the Standard Specifications is obtained.



   (H)   The pavement in parkway, secondary, arterial, feeder, and
residential streets shall be jointed with transverse contraction joints at no
greater than 20 feet spacing.  Contraction joints may be sawed, formed,
ribbon, or premolded type extending to one-fourth the pavement depth, meeting
joints in adjacent lanes and extending the full width of the street including
curbs.



      (1)   Longitudinal joints may be keyed construction joints or
deformed metal keyplate, or may be sawed, formed, or of ribbon or premolded
type for one-fourth the pavement depth.  A longitudinal joint shall be
constructed on centerline; other longitudinal joints where required shall be
placed as directed, but in no case shall longitudinal joints be more than 13
feet apart.



      (2)   Expansion joint material ½ inch thick extending the
full depth of the pavement shall be used only where fixed objects are to be
isolated from the pavement.  Included are where pavements abut buildings or
bridges and where castings, poles, utility boxes, and lighting and traffic
standards are abutting or partially or wholly within the pavement area.  All
joint installations shall be placed in a manner meeting the requirements of
the I.S.H.C. Standard Specifications.



   (I)   Prior to placing the street and all surfaces, adequate
subsurface drainage for the street shall be provided by the subdivider. 
Subsurface drainage pipe, when required, shall be not less than four inches
in diameter approved by the City Engineer.  Upon the completion of the
street and alley improvement, plans and profiles as built shall be filed with
the Commission.



   (J)   Bituminous paving of an approved design may be used in lieu of
portland cement concrete pavement or plain concrete pavement for any use in
divisions (A) through (I) above.



(Ord. CO-67-5, passed 2-21-67; Am. Ord. CO-77-20, passed 10-19-77; Am. Ord.
85-5, passed 5-28-85; Am. Ord. 85-22, passed 1-27-86) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 153.43  SANITARY SEWERS.



   (A)   In this section and § 153.44, the phrase THE SUBDIVIDER SHALL
PROVIDE shall be interpreted to mean that the subdivider shall install the
facility referred to, or the subdivider shall require, as a condition of the
sale of each lot or parcel in the subdivision, that the facilities referred
to in these sections shall be installed by the developer of the lots in
accordance with these regulations.



   (B)   The public sanitary sewers shall, if practicable, be laid in
the midpoint of the roadway as shown in § 2 in Appendix A following this
chapter, or in easements provided for that purpose.



   (C)   The subdivider shall provide the subdivision with a complete
sanitary sewer system, which shall connect with a sanitary sewer outlet
approved by the Board of Public Works and Safety.  A complete sanitary sewer
system to convey the sewage to a treatment plant, to be provided by the
subdivider in accordance with minimum requirements of the State Board of
Health and the Board of Public Works and Safety of the city.



   (D)   Service laterals shall be installed between the street sewer
collector and the property line before the street is paved.



   (E)   The plans for the installation of a sanitary sewer system
shall be provided by the subdivider and approved by the Board of Public Works
and Safety.  Upon the completion of the sanitary sewer installation, the
plans for the system as built shall be filed with the City Engineer.



(Ord. CO-67-5, passed 2-21-67; Am. Ord. 85-5, passed 5-28-85)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 153.44  WATER.



   (A)   In this section, the phrase THE SUBDIVIDER SHALL PROVIDE shall
have the same meaning as in § 153.43 (A).



   (B)   The subdivider shall provide the subdivision with a complete
water main supply system which shall be connected to a municipal or a
community water supply approved by the Board of Public Works and Safety and
the Superintendent of the Water Works.  The subdivider shall provide an
individual water supply on each lot in the subdivision in accordance with
minimum requirements of the State Health Department.



   (C)   Water mains shall, if practicable, be laid in immediately
behind the curb.  Water meters shall, if practicable, be installed within a
two-foot easement on the roadway side of the sidewalk.  See § 2 in Appendix
A following this chapter.  Otherwise, water service shall be laid in
easements provided for that purpose.



   (D)   The subdivider shall not provide fire hydrants in subdivisions
lying beyond the corporate limits of the city, except when authorized by the
Superintendent of the Water Works.



   (E)   The subdivider shall advance the City Water Works the funds
estimated by the Superintendent of the Water Works necessary to complete the
water main system for any subdivision located within the city, or for any
subdivision located beyond the city, proposing to connect with the water
supply system.



   (F)   The plans for the installation of a water main supply system
shall be provided by the subdivider and approved by the State Department of
Health, the Board of Public Works and Safety and the Superintendent of the
Water Works.  On the completion of the water supply installation, the plans
for the systems as built shall be filed with the Superintendent of the Water
Works.



(Ord. CO-67-5, passed 2-21-67; Am. Ord. 85-5, passed 5-28-85)



§ 153.45  STORM DRAINAGE.



   (A)   The subdivider shall provide the subdivision with an adequate
storm water sewer system whenever curb and gutter are installed and whenever
the evidence available to the City Plan Commission indicates that the natural
surface drainage is inadequate. A storm drainage analysis based upon a
ten-year, one-hour rainfall shall be used as a basis for the drainage
system.  A copy of the analysis shall be submitted to the Commission with
the drainage facility plans.  When the surface drainage is adequate,
easements for surface drainage shall be provided.  Deep open ditches for
drainage are not permitted in the street, but where curb and gutters are not
provided, a shallow swale with its low point at least three inches below the
elevation of the subgrade of the pavement may be permitted by the Commission,
in accordance with § 3 in the Appendix following this chapter, provided that
where existing natural drainage ways offer a suitable means of storm
drainage, the street right-of-way be widened to accommodate them.



   (B)   Storm sewers shall, if practicable, be laid in the south and
east parkway of the street in accordance with § 2 in Appendix A following
this chapter.  Otherwise, storm sewers shall be laid in easements provided
for that purpose.



   (C)   In a subdivision where curbs and gutter are not provided, the
subdivider shall furnish to facilitate roadside drainage and to assure
suitable entrances for private driveways which are proposed to intersect the
roadway.  A corrugated iron pipe or a similar type pipe, at least 12 inches
in diameter and 14 feet in length to be placed where required for each
driveway.



   (D)   The plans for the installation of a storm drainage system
shall be provided by the subdivider and approved by the Board of Public Works
and Safety.  Upon the completion of the storm sewer installation, the plans
for the system as built shall be filed with the Commission.



(Ord. CO-67-5, passed 2-21-67; Am. Ord. 85-5, passed 5-28-85)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 153.46  ELECTRIC POWER.



   (A)   The subdivider shall provide or shall make arrangements to
provide the subdivision with an electric power distribution system, which
shall meet the approval of the Superintendent of the City Light and Power
Plant, and which shall be connected to a public electric utility system
approved by the Indiana Public Service Commission.



   (B)   Electrical underground cables or wires shall, if practicable,
be laid in the north and west parkway of the street as indicated in § 2 in
Appendix A following this chapter.  Otherwise, electric distribution lines
shall be placed in easements provided for that purpose.



   (C)   The plans for the installation of an electric power
distribution system shall be furnished by the subdivider and the plans for
the system as built shall be filed with the Superintendent of the City Light
and Power Plant.



(Ord. CO-67-5, passed 2-21-67)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 153.47  TELEPHONE AND GAS UTILITIES.



   When provided, telephone underground cables and gas lines shall, if
practicable, be laid in the south and east parkway of the street as indicated
in § 2 in the Appendix following this chapter.  Otherwise, telephone and
gas service lines shall be placed in easements provided for that purpose.



(Ord. CO-67-5, passed 2-21-67; Am. Ord. 85-5, passed 5-28-85)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 153.48  CURBS AND GUTTERS.



   (A)   Curbs and gutters shall be constructed by the subdivider on
both sides of all streets, provided, however, that the requirements of curb
and gutter may be waived at the discretion of the City Plan Commission.



   (B)   Curbs shall be constructed as one of the standard curbs as
designated in the Indiana State Highway Commission standards for curb, or as
indicated in § 1 in Appendix A following this chapter.  Rolled curb may be
constructed monolithically with the pavement.  Curbs shall be constructed to
meet the requirements in their respective section, in the latest edition of
the Indiana State Highway Commission Standard Specifications.



(Ord. CO-67-5, passed 2-21-67; Am. Ord. CO-77-20, passed 10-19-77; Am. Ord.
85-22, passed 1-27-86)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 153.49  SIDEWALKS.



   (A)   The City Plan Commission shall require sidewalks to be
installed on each side of the street in a subdivision proposed to be located
wholly or partly within the city, and in a subdivision in the remainder of
the area within the jurisdiction of the Commission if, in the judgment of the
Commission, sidewalks are necessary for the safety of access to places of
public assemblage including schools, parks, and churches.



   (B)   When sidewalks are provided they shall be constructed on both
sides of the street one foot from the property line to a width of four feet
and a depth of four inches, complying in full with their respective section,
in the latest edition of the Indiana State Highway Commission Standard
Specifications.



   (C)   When sidewalks are not provided, the street grade shall be
completed so that additional grading would not be necessary for any future
provision of sidewalks.



(Ord. CO-67-5, passed 2-21-67; Am. Ord. CO-77-20, passed 10-19-77; Am. Ord.
85-5, passed 5-28-85; Am. Ord. 85-22, passed 1-27-86)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 153.50  DRIVEWAY ENTRANCES.



   Driveway entrances shall be provided and installed in the street
between the roadway and the street property line by the subdivider in the
manner prescribed in § 3 in Appendix A following this chapter.



(Ord. CO-67-5, passed 2-21-67)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 153.51  STREET SIGNS.



   The subdivider shall provide the subdivision with standard city street
signs at the intersection of all streets.  The location and type of sign
shall meet the approval of the Board of Public Works and Safety.



(Ord. CO-67-5, passed 2-21-67)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 153.52  CONSTRUCTION CONTROL.



   (A)   The public improvements required in all subdivisions shall be
constructed in accordance with city standard plans and specifications for
public improvements.



   (B)   Construction, inspection, and testing shall all be performed
under the direction of the City Engineer or a qualified engineer or engineers
or inspection and testing laboratories as selected by him, with the approval
of the Board of Public Works and Safety.  The inspecting agency shall submit
daily reports to the City Engineer on forms approved or furnished by him
certifying compliance of all construction performed with city standard plans
and specifications for public improvements.



   (C)   The city shall pay the expenses of the inspection and the
subdivider or property owner shall reimburse the city for such expenses
incurred within 30 days after the final bill therefore is submitted to the
city.  Payment shall be made to the City Clerk-Treasurer, to the credit of
the General Fund of the city.



(Ord. CO-67-5, passed 2-21-67)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 153.53  IMPROVEMENT CREDIT PROCEDURE.



   Improvements set forth in §§ 153.40 through 153.52 and required to be
installed by the subdivider, which are of a public utility nature, may
provide benefits to other properties in the vicinity of the land to be
subdivided.  On the installation of such improvements which cross or adjoin
other properties and can be used by such properties, the subdivider and the
city may by contract agree that on the connection or use of the installation
made by the subdivider by others within a period of ten years following their
installation, the new user or users shall pay to the city a fee in an amount
agreed on by the subdivider and the city, the amount of the fee to be
credited to and paid to the subdivider.



(Ord. CO-67-5, passed 2-21-67)  Penalty, see § 10.99



APPENDIX A:  DIAGRAMS



Section



   1.   Curb and gutter detail



   2.   Typical arrangement of utilities and improvements in a
residential street



   3.   Typical driveway entrances



   4.   Typical subdivisions and other divisions of land



   5.   Street specifications for layer thickness for asphalt concrete
top and base courses and the foundation stone course



§ 1  CURB AND GUTTER DETAIL.







 



(Ord. CO-67-5, passed 2-21-67)



§ 2  TYPICAL ARRANGEMENT OF UTILITIES AND IMPROVEMENTS IN A RESIDENTIAL
STREET.







 



(Ord. CO-67-5, passed 2-21-67)



§ 3  TYPICAL DRIVEWAY ENTRANCES.







 



(Ord. CO-67-5, passed 2-21-67)



§ 4  TYPICAL SUBDIVISIONS AND OTHER DIVISIONS OF LAND.







 



   LEGEND FOR § 4 FIGURE



   (A)   NOT A SUBDIVISION - The 10A existing parcel is divided into
two parcels, but the remaining parcel is larger than 5A after the division.



   (B)   SUBDIVISION - The remaining parcel is less than 5A, so both
parcels or lots comprise the subdivision.



   (C)   SUBDIVISION - The proposed lA lot and the new street comprise
a subdivision, because in this case a new street is involved for access. 
The remaining parcel of 9A need not be included in the subdivision if
ownership is not intended to be transferred.



   (D)   NOT A SUBDIVISION - Proposed lots are not contiguous, because
they are separated by the remaining parcel of more than 5A.



   (E)   SUBDIVISION - The remaining parcel is reduced to less than 5A,
so the subdivision ends up with three contiguous lots.



   (F)   SUBDIVISION - The two proposed lA lots constitute a
subdivision because they are contiguous.



   (G)   NOT A SUBDIVISION - The two lots either proposed or remaining
have 5A, therefore this does not constitute a subdivision.



   (H)   NOT A SUBDIVISION - One of the two lots either proposed or
remaining has 5A.



   (I)   SUBDIVISION - The two lots having 4A and 3A would comprise a
subdivision.



   (J)   SUBDIVISION - Existing parcel ends up with two parcels or lots
each with less than 5A and they will be contiguous.



   (K)   SUBDIVISION - Existing parcel of 5A ends up being 4A,
therefore the two lots comprise the subdivision.



   (1)   NOT A SUBDIVISION - The existing parcel of 6A ends up being 5A.



   (M)  SUBDIVISION - Division of existing parcel includes a new street
for access.  All of the lots would comprise the subdivision, except that the
remaining parcel of 5A could be excluded if ownership is not intended for
transfer.



(Ord. CO-67-5, passed 2-21-67)



§ 5  STREET SPECIFICATIONS FOR LAYER THICKNESS FOR ASPHALT CONCRETE TOP AND
BASE COURSES AND THE FOUNDATION STONE COURSE.



   LEGEND FOR § 5 FIGURE



 



CBR VALUE
 
STREET TYPE
 
TOTAL PROFILE THICKNESS (in inches)
 
ASPHALT SURFACE COURSE

(in inches)
 
ASPHALT BASE COURSE

(in inches)
 
ROCK/STONE FOUNDATION COURSE

(in inches)


3
 
Resident
 
13 ½
 
1 ½
 
4
 
6 - - #2

6 - - #53-73


 
Collect       
 
17 ½
 
1 ½
 
3
 
13


 
Arterial
 
19 ½
 
1 ½
 
4
 
14


4
 
Resident
 
11 ½
 
1
 
2 ½
 
8


 
Collect
 
14 ½
 
1 ½
 
3
 
10


 
Arterial
 
18 ½
 
1 ½
 
4
 
13


5
 
Resident
 
9 ½
 
1
 
2 ½
 
6


 
Collect
 
13 ½
 
1 ½
 
3
 
9


 
Arterial
 
17 ½
 
1 ½
 
3
 
13


6
 
Resident
 
9
 
1
 
2
 
6


 
Collect
 
13
 
1 ½
 
2 ½
 
9


 
Arterial
 
14 ½
 
1 ½
 
3
 
10


7
 
Resident
 
8
 
1
 
2
 
5


 
Collect
 
12
 
1 ½
 
2 ½
 
8


 
Arterial
 
13 ½
 
1 ½
 
3
 
9


8
 
Resident
 
8
 
1
 
2
 
5


 
Collect
 
11 ½
 
1
 
2 ½
 
8


 
Arterial
 
13
 
1 ½
 
2 ½
 
9


10
 
Resident
 
7 ½
 
1
 
1 ½
 
5


 
Collect
 
9 ½
 
1
 
2 ½
 
6


 
Arterial
 
12
 
1 ½
 
2 ½
 
8


15
 
Resident
 
6 ½
 
1
 
1 ½
 
4


 
Collect
 
9
 
1
 
2
 
6


 
Arterial
 
11 ½
 
1
 
2 ½
 
8




 



   The surface course mixture shall consist of ISHC § 402, Type III, Hot
Asphalt Emulsion Pavement or § 403, No. 9 binder, Hot Asphalt Concrete
Pavement.



   When the thickness required exceeds 2 inches, the mixture used shall be
a base course, consisting of ISHC § 402, No. 53B, Hot Asphalt Concrete
Pavement.



(Ord. CO-98-18, passed 1-11-99)



APPENDIX B:  REQUIRED CERTIFICATES



Section



   1.   Commission certificate



   2.   Board of Public Works and Safety certificate



   3.   Registered land surveyor's certificate



   4.   Deed of dedication



§ 1  COMMISSION CERTIFICATE.



UNDER AUTHORITY PROVIDED BY CHAPTER 174 - ACTS OF 1947, ENACTED BY THE
GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE STATE OF INDIANA, AND ALL ACTS AMENDATORY THERETO,
AND AN ORDINANCE ADOPTED BY THE COMMON COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF FRANKFORT,
INDIANA, THIS PLAT WAS GIVEN APPROVAL BY THE CITY OF FRANKFORT, AS FOLLOWS:



Adopted by the City Plan Commission at a meeting held           , 19  .



                                         
                                         



                              FRANKFORT CITY
PLAN COMMISSION



                                         
                                         



                                       �
�  (President)           



                                         
                                         



                                       �
�  (Secretary)



(Ord. CO-67-5, passed 2-21-67)



§ 2  BOARD OF PUBLIC WORKS AND SAFETY CERTIFICATE.



   The following certificate shall be used for subdivisions that require
improvements or installations.



THIS PLAT WAS GIVEN APPROVAL BY THE BOARD OF PUBLIC WORKS AND SAFETY OF THE
CITY OF FRANKFORT, INDIANA, AT A MEETING HELD ON THE     DAY OF        
            , 19  .



                                         
                                         



                                       �
�  (President)           



                                         
                                         



                                       �
�  (Secretary)



(SEAL)



(Ord. CO-67-5, passed 2-21-67)



§ 3  REGISTERED LAND SURVEYOR'S CERTIFICATE.



"I                 , HEREBY CERTIFY THAT I AM A REGISTERED LAND
SURVEYOR, LICENSED IN COMPLIANCE WITH THE LAWS OF THE STATE OF INDIANA:



THAT THIS PLAT CORRECTLY REPRESENTS A SURVEY COMPLETED BY ME ON    
(date)    . THAT ALL THE MONUMENTS SHOWN THEREON ACTUALLY EXIST: AND THAT
ALL OTHER REQUIREMENTS SPECIFIED HEREIN, DONE BY ME, HAVE BEEN MET."



                                         
                                         



                                       �
�  (President)           



(SEAL)



(Ord. CO-67-5, passed 2-21-67)



§ 4  DEED OF DEDICATION.



   Each record plat submitted to the City Plan Commission for approval
shall carry a deed of dedication in substantially the following form.



"We the undersigned     (Names)    , owners of the real estate shown and
described herein, do hereby certify that we have laid off, platted and
subdivided, and hereby lay off, plat and subdivide, said real estate in
accordance with the within plat.  We do further certify that this plat is
made and submitted with our free consent and desires.



This subdivision shall be known and designated as     (Name)      , an
addition to       (Name)        .  All streets and alleys shown and
not heretofore dedicated, are hereby dedicated to the public.



Front yard building setback lines are hereby established as shown on this
plat, between which lines and the property lines of the street, there shall
be erected or maintained no building or structure.



A perpetual easement is hereby granted to any local public utility or
municipal department, their successors and assigns, within the area shown on
the plat and marked "Easement," to install, lay, construct, renew, operate,
maintain and remove conduits, cables, pipes, poles and wires, overhead and
underground, with all necessary braces, guys, anchors and other equipment for
the purpose of serving the subdivision and other property with telephone,
electric and gas, sewer and water service as a part of the respective utility
systems; also is granted (subject to the prior rights of the public therein)
the right to use the streets and lots with aerial service wires to serve
adjacent lots and street lights, the right to cut down and remove or trim and
keep trimmed any trees or shrubs that interfere or threaten to interfere with
any of the said public utility equipment, and the right is hereby granted to
enter upon the lots at all times for all of the purposes aforesaid.  No
permanent buildings or trees shall be placed on said area as shown on the
plat and marked "Easement," but same may be used for gardens, shrubs,
landscaping and other purposes that do not then or later interfere with the
aforesaid user or the rights herein granted.



(Additional dedications and protective covenants, or private restrictions
would be inserted here upon the subdivider's initiative or the
recommendations of the Commission; important provisions are those specifying
the use to be made of the property and, in the case of residential use, the
minimum habitable floor area.)



The foregoing covenants, (or restrictions), are to run with the land and
shall be binding on all parties and all persons claiming under them until
January 1, 19  , (a twenty-five (25)-year period is suggested), at which
time said covenants, (or restrictions), shall be automatically extended for
successive periods of ten (10) years unless changed by vote of a majority of
the then owners of the building sites covered by these covenants, or
restrictions, in whole or in part. Invalidation of any one of the foregoing
covenants, or restrictions, by judgment or court order shall in no way affect
any of the other covenants or restrictions, which shall remain in full force
and effect.



The right to enforce these provisions by injunction, together with the right
to cause the removal, by due process of law, of any structure or part thereof
erected, or maintained in violation hereof, is hereby dedicated to the
public, and reserved to the several owners of the several lots in this
subdivision and to their heirs and assigns."



Witness our Hands and Seals this       day of               , 19  .



                                         
                                         



                                       �
�  (President)           



                                         
                                         



                                       �
�  (Secretary)



State of Indiana    )



              )  SS:



County of Clinton )



Before me the undersigned Notary Public, in and for the County and State,
personally appeared     (Name)    ,     (Name)    ,     (Name)   
, and each separately and severally acknowledge the execution of the
foregoing instrument as his or her voluntary act and deed, for the purposes
therein expressed.



Witness my hand and notarial seal this     day of           , 19  .



                                         
                                         



                                       �
�  (President)           



My Commission Expires:



                               



(Ord. CO-67-5, passed 2-21-67)



CHAPTER 154:  THOROUGHFARE PLAN



Section



General Provisions



   154.01   Short title



   154.02   General policy and pattern of development



   154.03   Thoroughfare maps; cross-sections drawing



   154.04   Classification of thoroughfares



Administration



   154.10   Powers and duties of City Plan Commission



   154.11   Authority of Board of Public Works



   154.12   Thoroughfare Fund



   154.13   Cost assessment; bond issuance



   154.14   Priority of improvements



   154.15   Street improvement program



   154.16   Issuance of permits



   154.17   Amendment of thoroughfare plan; procedure



Street Construction



   154.25   Right-of-way widths



   154.26   Location of streets; alignment



   Appendix:  Thoroughfare Development Plan



Cross-reference:



   Improvement location permit for tracts adjoining thoroughfares, see §
155.112



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 154.01  SHORT TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Official
Thoroughfare Plan, a Section of the Master Plan of Frankfort, Indiana, 1967".



(Ord. CO-67-4, passed 2-21-67)



§ 154.02  GENERAL POLICY AND PATTERN OF DEVELOPMENT.



   After adoption of the official thoroughfare plan and this chapter, the
Common Council of the city shall be guided by and give consideration to the
general policy and pattern of development set out in the official
thoroughfare plan in the authorization, construction, alteration, or
abandonment of public highways and structures.



(Ord. CO-67-4, passed 2-21-67)



§ 154.03  THOROUGHFARE MAPS; CROSS-SECTIONS DRAWING.



   (A)   The official thoroughfare plan is shown on two maps entitled
"Development Plan, Frankfort, Indiana," dated 1967, with a subtitle "Major
Street and Highway Plan".  These maps show the locations of existing and
proposed thoroughfares of various types within the city and the
jurisdictional area.  Notations, references, indications, and other details
shown on the official thoroughfare plan maps are as much a part of this
chapter as if they were fully described in the text of this chapter.



   (B)   A drawing entitled "Typical Thoroughfare Cross Sections,
Frankfort, Indiana," which shows cross sections for streets as designated on
the official thoroughfare plan maps, is hereby declared to be a part of this
chapter.



   (C)   Two copies of the official thoroughfare plan and ordinance and
two copies of the typical thoroughfare cross sections shall be kept on file
in the office of the City Clerk-Treasurer and shall be subject to public
examination during the regular office hours of the City Clerk-Treasurer.



(Ord. CO-67-4, passed 2-21-67; Am. Ord. 85-22, passed 1-27-86)



§ 154.04  CLASSIFICATION OF THOROUGHFARES.



   The thoroughfares are classified as to width and type in accordance
with their function as a part of the thoroughfare system, and are designated
as arterial, feeder, parkway, and residential streets as shown on the
official thoroughfare plan maps.  Such streets are to be provided with the
right-of-way widths shown on the official thoroughfare plan as set out in
§§ 154.15 and 154.25 of this chapter and are to be improved as required by
Chapter 153 of this code.



(Ord. CO-67-4, passed 2-21-67)



ADMINISTRATION



§ 154.10  POWERS AND DUTIES OF CITY PLAN COMMISSION.



   The City Plan Commission may do the following.



   (A)   Determine lines for new, extended, widened, or narrowed
thoroughfares in any portion of its jurisdiction.



   (B)   Certify to the Common Council the amended or additional plan
under the same procedure as established for the certification and approval of
the official thoroughfare plan.



(Ord. CO-67-4, passed 2-21-67)



§ 154.11  AUTHORITY OF BOARD OF PUBLIC WORKS.



   In the carrying out of any project under the official thoroughfare
plan, the Board of Public Works shall proceed, and shall have authority under
the provisions of I.C. 36-9-6.1 et seq., and all acts amendatory thereto, and
the method of procedure shall comply with the provisions of state law.  The
provisions for remonstrance of resident freeholders shall not apply, and if
it shall be determined that property shall be assessed within a special
benefit district, the Board shall determine the boundaries of the district.



(Ord. CO-67-4, passed 2-21-67; Am. Ord. CO-90-11, passed 12-10-90)



§ 154.12  THOROUGHFARE FUND.



   In the event that the Common Council, pursuant to the provisions of
I.C. 36-9-6.1 et seq. and all acts amendatory thereto, should levy a tax on
taxable property in the city for the purpose of a Thoroughfare Fund, the
fund, when collected, shall be kept separate from other funds of the city,
and pursuant to statutory authority the fund shall be a continuing fund to be
drawn upon by the Board of Public Works and Safety of this city, for work
done under, in furtherance of, or in carrying out a part of the Official
Thoroughfare Plan.



(Ord. CO-67-4, passed 2-21-67; Am. Ord. CO-90-11, passed 12-10-90)



§ 154.13  COST ASSESSMENTS; BOND ISSUANCE.



   (A)   The Board of Public Works in the carrying out of any project
under the official thoroughfare plan adopted by this chapter shall consider
and determine what proportionate part of the cost of the project, or of any
separate phase of improvement thereunder, shall be paid by the city out of
the Thoroughfare Fund, including any increase of damages ordered by any court
on appeal, as benefit to the city at large, and, at that time, shall
determine the amount, if any, of the total cost of any such phase of
improvement under the project, including damages awarded by the Board, which
shall be assessed as benefits on the real estate within a special benefit
district.



   (B)   In the event the cost of acquisition and the benefits assessed
against the city by reason of any such project shall, at any time, be in
excess of the amount of money then standing to the credit of the Thoroughfare
Fund of the city, the city shall have the power, and the Common Council is
authorized by ordinance to issue a bond in a sum sufficient to pay for the
benefit, or any part thereof, as it may be deemed necessary.  The bond shall
be issued and sold in the same form and manner, and with the same rate of
interest and with such maturities as are by law provided for the issuance and
sale of bonds of the city for the general purposes thereof, and the proceeds
of the sale of such bonds shall be deposited in and credited to the
Thoroughfare Fund, to be used in the payment for any cost of acquisition and
benefits assessed against the city at large and any increased damages which
may be ordered paid by any court on appeal.



(Ord. CO-67-4, passed 2-21-67)



§ 154.14  PRIORITY OF IMPROVEMENTS.



   The City Plan Commission may recommend to the Board of Public Works the
order in which improvements made pursuant to this chapter and to be paid for
in part out of the Thoroughfare Fund shall be undertaken and carried out; and
when so made, the Board of Public Works shall not start or commence by
resolution or otherwise, any work, appropriation, or improvement pursuant to
this chapter, other than in the order designated by the recommendation.



(Ord. CO-67-4, passed 2-21-67)



§ 154.15  STREET IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM.



   The City Board of Public Works and Safety is authorized to use funds
available for street improvement purposes to participate with the owners of
lands abutting streets within the city in the improvement of those streets in
accordance with the requirements of the Board of Public Works and Safety and
the standards for street improvement established in Chapter 151.  For any
participation project, the Board shall be governed by the following policies.



   (A)   All alley and street intersections will be paved at city
expense and the cost of the work is not to be considered as a part of the
city's share of other street improvements.



   (B)   The cost of grading and excavating in connection with the
improvement of alleys and streets existing on February 21, 1967, is to be
considered a city expense and not as a part of the city's share of other
street and alley improvements.



   (C)   The cost of grading and excavating in connection with the
improvement of streets and alleys hereafter dedicated is not to be considered
a part of the improvement cost in which the city can participate.



   (D)   The city may participate to the extent of 50% of the cost of
improving an alley located in a business district, as shown in the city zone
map.   The city shall not participate in the cost of improving alleys
other than those indicated above.



   (E)   The amount of the participation by the city in the cost of
street improvements is indicated below as a percentage of the total of such
cost, as may be modified by preceding statements, in accordance with the
street designation and width of surface to be improved which may include curb
and gutter of the integral roll-type where that type of curb may be installed.



 

 
Street or Thoroughfare Designation


Width of Improved Surfaces
 
Arterial
 
Feeder
 
Residential


24 to 28 feet
 
50%
 
40%
 
30%


29 to 30 feet
 
60%
 
50%
 
40%


31 to 35 feet
 
70%
 
60%
 
50%


36 to 40 feet
 
80%
 
70%
 
60%



 



(Ord. CO-67-4, passed 2-21-67)



§ 154.16  ISSUANCE OF PERMITS.



   In the case of permits authorized by the Common Council for the
erection or alteration of structures and other improvements, the permit shall
be issued only if the proposed street and thoroughfare rights-of- way as set
forth by the plan will be protected from encroachment and, for planning and
zoning purposes, the proposed street and thoroughfare right-of-way lines will
be considered as the front line of lots and tracts bordering such streets and
thoroughfares.



(Ord. CO-67-4, passed 2-21-67)



§ 154.17  AMENDMENT OF THOROUGHFARE PLAN; PROCEDURE.



   In addition to the provisions of § 154.10, amendments may be initiated
as follows:



   (A)   The Common Council may direct the City Plan Commission to
prepare an amendment, as desired, and submit it to public hearing within 60
days after formal written request by the Common Council.



   (B)   The owners of 50% or more of the area of property abutting
that part of a street which is proposed to be changed may also petition the
City Council requesting an amendment to the official thoroughfare plan.



   (C)   The City Plan Commission may on its own motion, petition for a
change of this chapter.



(Ord. CO-67-4, passed 2-21-67)



STREET CONSTRUCTION



§ 154.25  RIGHT-OF-WAY WIDTHS.



   Whenever a street designated on the official thoroughfare plan is to be
platted as a part of a subdivision of land, the right-of- way shall conform
to the policies and specified designations and indications in the official
thoroughfare plan.  Where a street borders a tract of land to be subdivided,
the owner of the land shall be required to plat only one-half of the
right-of-way width designated for the street, measured at 90 degrees to the
center line thereof.



(Ord. CO-67-4, passed 2-21-67)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 154.26  LOCATION OF STREETS; ALIGNMENT.



   (A)   Wherever the locations of streets are indicated on the
official thoroughfare plan as following existing roads or streets, or section
or half-section lines, or other established property lines, they shall
conform to such locations.  However, streets lying wholly within a
subdivision, and not designated as following an existing road or a section
line, may be varied in their alignment where the variance promotes the plan
of a neighborhood development and provides for the continuity of traffic
movement.



   (B)   Streets which follow irregular alignment, or indicate revised
alignments, or are not referenced to established lines, shall follow in a
general manner the alignment shown on the official thoroughfare plan.  Their
alignment shall be subject to detailed surveys which may be made by the city,
the City Plan Commission, or by other public agencies, or by the owners of
land to be subdivided. The surveys shall be subject to the approval of the
City Plan Commission prior to the acquisition of land or the filing of
subdivision plans affecting the streets.



(Ord. CO-67-4, passed 2-21-67)  Penalty, see § 10.99



APPENDIX:  THOROUGHFARE DEVELOPMENT PLAN



Section



   1.   Secondary arterial thoroughfares



   2.   Feeder thoroughfares



   3.   Residential streets



§ 1  SECONDARY ARTERIAL THOROUGHFARES.



   The secondary arterial thoroughfares supplement the primary routes and
are equally important elements of the thoroughfare system. They are described
below in detail.



   (A)   Washington Street - Rossville Avenue.  Washington Street now
carries substantially as much traffic as Main Street, and will continue to be
a vital part of the major traffic system.  Together with Rossville Avenue,
it provides a valuable route from the east part of the city to the
intersection with Highways 38-39-421 at Kyger Street.  The proposed
designation of Kelley Avenue as a one-way street north and Hoke Avenue as a
one-way street south would provide efficient connections with the east route
of Highways 28-421.  It is evident that this system would provide an
efficient relief system of streets through the city.  Rossville Avenue
should have a right-of-way of 80 feet.  The other portions of the system do
not require widening.



   (B)   Washington Avenue.  Washington Avenue, the Michigantown Road,
will carry a constantly increasing traffic load.  It should have a
right-of-way of 80 feet, which should be obtained definitely east of Kelley
Avenue.



   (C)   Burlington Avenue.  This street will become increasingly
important as developments take place to the northeast.  It also should have
a right-of-way of 80 feet, which should be obtainable without difficulty
north of Green Street.  In order to make this street more efficient, the jog
at Washington Avenue should be removed.  This would require the purchase of
two residences but the expense would be justified.  This would permit the
easy flow and harmonious control of traffic traveling north on Williams
Street into Washington Avenue or Burlington Avenue.



   (D)   Hoke Avenue - Kelley Avenue (North of Wabash Street).  These
two streets, which have narrow right-of-way could be combined as a one-way
pair between Wabash Street and Washington Avenue and thus provide a desirable
connection.



   (E)   Columbia Street - White Street.  Columbia Street is an
important north-south relief street of the same character as Washington
Street, which runs east and west.  Extending from Green Street to White
Street and using White Street to Jackson Street, it serves as a valuable
element of the thoroughfare system.  No right-of-way widening is necessary.



   (F)   Main Street.  The short stretch of Main Street from Green
Street to Kyger Street would continue to be a two-way street and would be
considered as a secondary arterial street.  It has ample width.



   (G)   Armstrong Street.  Armstrong Street has always been an
important southside street.  It collects traffic from the southwest part of
the county and serves the southern portion of the city.  When the
Coulterwood Addition was designed it was extended through to Williams
Street.  The northeast areas are destined to become fine residential
districts and it is extremely important that an efficient trafficway extend
through the area.  It is recommended that Armstrong Street follow an
alignment along a reverse curve and then along the section line, midway
between Wabash Street and Kelley Road to the proposed new primary arterial
thoroughfare extending east of Clinton Trafficway.  This new section should
have a right-of-way of 80 feet. Heavy truck traffic should not be permitted
to use Armstrong Street east of Fifth Street since such traffic would be
incompatible with the residential developments adjacent to its route.



   (H)   Prairie Avenue.  This street, which is a narrow country road
at present, should be developed with an 80 foot right-of-way south of
McKinley Avenue.



   (I)   Fifth Street.  The road extending south from Freeman Street,
which is substantially an extension of Fifth Street, should have a
right-of-way of 80 feet and be designated as a secondary arterial
thoroughfare.



   (J)   Maish Road.  This road is becoming increasingly important as
a traffic element and should by all means have a right-of-way of 80 feet. 
It should be opened into Clinton Trafficway south of Kelley Road and beyond.



   (K)   Road 100 North.  This road which is now open east of Highway
75 should be extended west to the Kreisher Mill Road.  It should have a
right-of-way of 80 feet.



   (L)   Freeman Street.  This road is now open with a narrow
right-of-way between Clay Street and Prairie Avenue.  It should be
designated as a secondary arterial thoroughfare west of Fifth Street and
extended west with an 80 foot right-of-way.



   (M)  Alhambra Avenue - Hackett Street.  Alhambra Avenue leads more
and more traffic into the city from the Kirklin Road.  It could be widened
along the fairgrounds, but beyond its intersection with Hackett Street,
widening would be difficult.  It is recommended that north of Ann Street,
Alhambra Avenue be operated one-way north leading into Jackson Street, also
proposed as a one-way thoroughfare north. Hackett Street, in that event,
should be operated one-way east from Columbia Street.  This would permit
Main Street traffic to flow easily into Hackett Street and pass to Alhambra
Avenue and thence to the Kirklin Road.



   (N)   Kelley Road.  This road is open east of Jackson Street and
should have a right-of-way of 80 feet.  It is now a narrow country road but
already carries much traffic.  West of Jackson Street this road should be
opened into Clinton Trafficway and the Thorntown Road with an 80 foot
right-of-way.  Due to the presence of the Monon Railroad the sections east
and west of Jackson Street could not be connected in a practical manner.



   (O)   Blinn Road.  West of the intersection of Blinn Avenue and
Barner Street, Blinn Road should have a right-of-way of 80 feet and should be
designated as a secondary arterial thoroughfare.



(Ord. 85-22, passed 1-27-86)



§ 2  FEEDER THOROUGHFARES.



   Feeder thoroughfares supplement the primary and secondary arterial
thoroughfares and carry considerable volumes of local and internal traffic. 
Normally they do not require wider rights-of-way than they now possess, but
their efficiency may be promoted by constructing the widest roadways which
their right-of-way widths will permit, and by limiting or prohibiting parking
along their routes in order that adequate roadway widths may be available for
traffic.  The time of establishing such parking limitations will be apparent
as traffic becomes increasingly heavy.  The feeder thoroughfares are
designated on the plan in order that their importance in the traffic
circulation system may be emphasized.



   (A)   Clay Street.  This street is an important thoroughfare
serving east side residential areas and extends from Alhambra Avenue north to
Kyger Street at the Gem City TPA Park.



   (B)   East Street.  This street carries a considerable load of
local traffic between Harvard Terrace and Washington Avenue.



   (C)   Williams Street.  The importance of this street is apparent
from the map and by observation on the ground, and it will become
increasingly important.  It extends from Kelley Road to Washington Avenue
and will become more important when the jog with Burlington Avenue is removed
at Washington Avenue.  Williams Street should be extended south of Kelley
Road as a Parkway Drive.  Wherever possible it should have a right-of-way of
70 feet.



   (D)   Second Street.  Extending from Walnut Street to Freeman
Street, this street bisects the residential area west of Columbia Street.



   (E)   Main Street - Avery Street.  North of Kyger Street, Main
Street and Avery Street should be designated and developed as feeder
thoroughfares.



   (F)   Delphi Avenue.  The short stretch of Delphi Avenue between
Green and Kyger Streets will be of less importance after the establishment of
the one-way streets in that vicinity.  It should still be designated as a
feeder street.



   (G)   Hoke Avenue.  This street should be extended to the south to
connect with County Road 1505, Kelly Road.  Although this avenue is
classified as a feeder street, right-of-way south of Wabash Street need only
be 60 feet.



   (H)   Jackson Street.  The block of Jackson Street north of Kyger
Street provides the principal entrance to Wesley Manor and should be
developed as a feeder street.



   (I)   Kyger Street.  Kyger Street is an important thoroughfare and
has been designated as a primary arterial thoroughfare between Jackson Street
and Rossville Avenue.  East of Jackson Street it leads to Gem City TPA Park
and this section should be operated and developed as a feeder thoroughfare. 
West of Rossville Avenue it serves the Woodside area, which has shown much
improvement and rehabilitation during the last 15 years and will see
desirable residential development west to Clinton Trafficway and beyond.  It
should be designated as a feeder thoroughfare and extended beyond Walsh
Avenue, crossing Clinton Trafficway, and uniting with the Road 50 North at
Road 200 West.  The new section should have a right-of-way of 70 feet.



   (J)   Green Street.  This is an important feeder thoroughfare from
Burlington Avenue west.  It also is an access street to Gem City TPA Park. 
The section from Main Street to John Street forms part of the Main
Street-Jackson Street one-way system.  This street extends through Woodside,
dipping south around the oval, and terminating at Morris Street.  It should
be extended west to Road 200 West.  West of Walsh Avenue every effort should
be made to obtain a 70 foot right-of-way.



   (K)   Barner Street.  Between Clay Street and the intersection of
Blinn Avenue and Barner Street, this is an important feeder thoroughfare
serving the north side of the city.



   (L)   Blinn Avenue - Morrison Street.  These two streets form one
street essentially between the intersection with Barner Street and Clay
Street.  They carry a considerable volume of traffic and should be developed
and maintained as a feeder thoroughfare.



   (M)  Wabash Street.  This street has always been of local importance
as a feeder thoroughfare and should be so designated.



   (N)   Freeman Street.  East of Fifth Street, Freeman Street is of
considerable importance as a feeder thoroughfare to Clay Street.



   (O)   Wilshire Drive.  Wilshire Drive, east and west of Maish Road,
has been developed as a portion of the Wilshire and Risse Additions.  It
would be desirable to extend it as a feeder thoroughfare with a width of 70
feet, east to Clinton Trafficway and west to the proposed extension of
Armstrong Street.  In the future heavy truck traffic should not be permitted
to use it.



   (P)   Kentwood Drive.  Kentwood Drive would provide a convenient
feeder thoroughfare connection between Wilshire Drive and Wabash Street, but
truck traffic should be prohibited from using it.



   (Q)   Myrtle Avenue.  This is an important feeder thoroughfare
serving the residential areas in and adjacent to Woodside.  It passes the
Woodside School and for that, and other valid reasons, should not be open to
truck or heavy traffic.  It extends from Morrison Street to Rossville Avenue.



   (R)   Central Avenue.  This street is a useful feeder street
between the Woodside Circle and Blinn Avenue.



   (S)   Hawthorne Avenue.  Between Barner Street and Willow Street,
this street is of local importance as a feeder thoroughfare.  It should be
extended parallel to Rossville Avenue to an intersection with Clinton
Trafficway.  It would form an efficient relief function for Highway
38-39-421, and its new right-of-way should be 70 feet wide.



(Ord. 85-22, passed 1-27-86)



§ 3  RESIDENTIAL STREETS.



   The residential streets now in existence would not be subject to
changes, except in a minor sense.  New residential streets, however, should
be designed in accordance with the sound principles of residential
neighborhood design.  New residential streets should have rights-of-way of
60 feet in order to accommodate roadways, sidewalks, and space for utilities,
and adequate space for heavy snow removal.



(Ord. 85-22, passed 1-27-86)



CHAPTER 155:  ZONING CODE



Section



General Provisions



   155.001   Short title



   155.002   Definitions



   155.003   Interpretation; restrictions



   155.004   Annexed or vacated areas



   155.005   Buildings



   155.006   Parking areas



   155.007   Fee schedule



   155.008   Nonconforming uses



   155.009   Remedies



   155.010   Amendments



   155.011   Exemptions



   155.012   Visual clearance



   155.013   Fences



Districts



   155.020   Establishment of districts; zone map



   155.021   District boundaries



Residential Uses



   155.030   Permitted uses



   155.031   Nonconforming uses



   155.032   Accessory buildings and uses



   155.033   Height of buildings



   155.034   Building lines



   155.035   Tapered yard formula



Business Uses



   155.040   Permitted uses



   155.041   Local business use



   155.042   Roadside business use



   155.043   General business use



   155.044   Parking requirements



   155.045   Loading and unloading berths



   155.046   Building setback



   155.047   Front and rear yards



   155.048   Open storage



   155.049   Height of building



   155.050   Noise and smoke emission



   155.051   Sewage discharge



   155.052   More than one principal building permitted



   155.053   Screening



   155.054   Filling stations



   155.055   Special exception use



   155.056   Wind energy systems



Neighborhood Convenience Center and Shopping Center Plan



   155.060   Permitted uses



   155.061   Area of land required



   155.062   Improvement location permit



Industrial Uses



   155.070   Restrictions



   155.071   Enclosed and open industrial uses



   155.072   Height requirements



   155.073   Smoke, gas, and particulate matter emissions



   155.074   Disposal of wastes



   155.075   Odors



   155.076   Glare and heat



   155.077   Vibration restrictions



   155.078   Noise



   155.079   Fire hazards



   155.080   Parking and loading and unloading requirements



   155.081   More than one principal building permitted



Contingent Uses and Requirements



   155.090   Where permitted



   155.091   Parking requirements



   155.092   Yard and setback requirements



   155.093   Building height



   155.094   Special exceptions



   155.095   Existing use



Special Exceptions



   155.100   Where permitted



   155.101   Improvement location permit; hearing



   155.102   Existing use



   155.103   Garden apartment use



   155.104   High-rise apartment use



   155.105   Planting screen



Improvement Location Permits



   155.110   Required



   155.111   Application



   155.112   Issuance; tracts adjoining thoroughfares



   155.113   Appeals



   155.114   Certificate of occupancy



   155.115   Completion time limit



   155.116   Remedies



Administration



   155.125   Building Inspector



   155.126   Board of Zoning Appeals



   155.127   Meetings of Board



   155.128   Powers and duties of Board



Signs



   155.130   Signs; purpose



   155.131   Signs permitted in all districts



   155.132   Signs prohibited in all districts



   155.133   Temporary signs



   155.134   On-premises signs



   155.135   Off-premises signs



   155.136   When sign permit not required



   155.137   Landscaping around freestanding signs



   155.138   Nonconforming signs



Temporary Use Sites



   155.140   Temporary uses



   155.141   Amusements; charitable activities



   155.142   Collection boxes



   155.143   Refuse disposal dumpsters, storage areas and the like



   155.144   Vending machines



   155.145   Sidewalk items



West State Road 28 Corridor Overlay Zone



   155.170   Purpose, intent and authority



   155.171   District boundaries



   155.172   Plan Commission approval



   155.173   Overlay applicability



   155.174   Application procedure



   155.175   Validity of approval of the application by the Plan
Commission



   155.176   Definitions



   155.177   Overlay district tier applicability and purpose



   155.178   Permitted uses



   155.179   Permitted special exceptions



   155.180   Excluded uses



   155.181   Accessory buildings and uses



   155.182   Minimum lot area



   155.183   Development requirements



   155.184   Architectural design requirements



   155.185   Landscaping requirements



   155.186   Parking requirements



   155.187   Signs



   155.188   Lighting requirements



   155.189   Access to individual tracts



   155.190   Other requirements



   155.191   Development plans



   155.192   Outdoor lighting



   155.193   Definitions for §§ 155.192 through 155.205



   155.194   Light trespass



   155.195   Illumination of buildings and other vertical structures



   155.196   Parking areas



   155.197   Lighting of exterior display or open sales areas



   155.198   Lighting of walkways, bikeways, parks and playgrounds



   155.199   Lighting of canopies, bays and loading and unloading spaces



   155.200   Outdoor activity facilities



   155.201   Street lighting



   155.202   Neon lighting



   155.203   Sign illumination



   155.204   Other outdoor lighting



   155.205   Lighting plan




Crosstown Overlay District




   155.210   Intent



   155.211   District boundaries



   155.212   Review process



   155.213   Uses



   155.214   Development standards



   155.215   Severability




Frankfort Downtown Historic District




   155.230   Frankfort Downtown Historic District established



   155.231   Historical standards



Airport Overlay Zoning District



   155.240   Airport Overlay District



   155.241   Purpose and intent



   155.242   Airport zones



   155.243   Height limitations



   155.244   Noise sensitive zone



   155.245   Wildlife attractant zones



   155.246   Relation to underlying zoning



   155.247   Communication and visibility interference prohibited



   155.248   Miscellaneous provisions



   155.249   Administration and enforcement



   155.250   Variances



   155.251   Obstruction marking and lighting



East State Road 28 Overlay District



   155.265   Intent



   155.266   District boundaries



   155.267   Review process



   155.268   Uses



   155.269   Development standards



Historic Preservation Commission



   155.400   Purpose



   155.401   Definitions



   155.402   Establishment; organization



   155.403   Powers and duties



   155.404   Local Historic Districts and guidelines



   155.405   Interim protection



   155.406   Certificates of appropriateness (COA)



   155.407   Staff approvals



   155.408   Visual compatibility



   155.409   Preservation of historic and architectural character upon
alteration or relocation mandated



   155.410   Appeal provisions



   155.411   Maintenance



   155.412   Relationships with zoning districts



   155.413   (Reserved)



   155.414   Interested parties



   155.415   Enforcement; penalties; judicial review



   155.416   Severability



 



   155.999   Penalty



   Appendix A:  Zoning charts



   Appendix B:  Zoning development plan



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 155.001  SHORT TITLE.



   This chapter and any ordinances supplemental or amendatory thereto
shall be known and may be cited as the "Zoning Code of Frankfort, Indiana,
1967."



(Ord. CO-67-2, passed 2-21-67)



§ 155.002  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ABUTTING.  Bordering.



   ACCESSORY BUILDING or ACCESSORY USE.  A building or use subordinate to
another structure or use located on the same lot and which does not change or
alter the character of the premises and which is not used for human
occupancy, such as public utility installations, electric distribution and
secondary power lines, gas, water, and sewer lines, their supports and poles,
guy wires, small transformers, wire or cable, and incidental equipment, and
public telephone booths, and satellite television antennas, also known as
parabolic antennas.



   AGRICULTURE.  The art or science of cultivating the ground and raising
and harvesting crops, also often including feeding, breeding, and management
of livestock; tillage, husbandry; farming; in a broader sense, the science
and art of the production of plants and animals useful to man, including to a
variable extent the preparation of these products for man's use and their
disposal by marketing or otherwise. In this broad use AGRICULTURE includes
farming, horticulture, forestry, dairying, sugar making, and so forth.



   AIRCRAFT.  Any contrivance now known, or hereafter invented, used or
designed for navigation of or flight in the air.



   AIRPORT.  A use devoted to the takeoff, landing, and storage of
aircraft.  The Frankfort Municipal Airport, together with all of its
structures, services and improvements.



   AIRPORT AUTHORITY. The Frankfort, Indiana Airport Authority.



   AIRPORT BOUNDARY. The property line existing in fee simple and depicted
on the Airport Facilities Plan.



   AIRPORT ELEVATION. The highest point of an airport's usable landing
area measured in feet from mean sea level, and established to be 861 feet
above mean sea level (MSL).



   AIRPORT HAZARD. Any structure or object of natural growth located on or
in the vicinity of a public airport, or any use of land near such airport
which obstructs the airspace required for the ascent, descent or glide path
of aircraft in landing or takeoff at the airport or is otherwise hazardous to
such landing or takeoff of aircraft.



   ALLEY.  A permanent public service way providing a secondary means of
access to abutting lands.



   ALLEY LINE.  A lot line bordering an alley.



   AMBIENT SOUND LEVEL. The amount of background noise at a given location
prior to the installation of a wind energy system which may include, but not
be limited to, traffic, machinery, lawnmowers, human activity, and the
interaction of wind with the landscape. The ambient sound level is measured
on the dB(A) weighted scale as defined by the American National Standards
Institute.



   APARTMENT.  A building or portion thereof designed for or occupied by
more than two families.  Also a multi-family dwelling.



   APPROACH, HORIZONTAL, AND CONICAL ZONES. These zones are set forth in
§ 155.242.



   AUTOMOBILE SALES AREA or TRAILER SALES AREA.  An open area, other than
a street, used for the display, sale, or rental of new or used automobiles or
trailers, and where no repair work is done except minor incidental repair of
automobiles or trailers to be displayed, sold, or rented on the premises.



   BASEMENT.  Any floor level below the first story in a building, except
that a floor level in a building having only one floor level shall be
classified as a basement unless the floor level qualifies as a first story as
defined herein.



   BLOCK.  A unit or property bounded by streets, or by streets or
railroad rights-of-way, waterways, or other barriers.



   BLOCK FRONTAGE.  Property having frontage on one side of a street and
lying between the two nearest intersecting or intercepting streets, or
nearest intersecting or intercepting street and railroad right-of- way,
waterway, or other barrier.



   BOARD.  The Board of Zoning Appeals.



   BOARDING HOUSE.  A building where meals are regularly served for
compensation for three or more persons, but not exceeding 12 persons, not
open to transients, in contradistinction to hotels and restaurants open to
transients.



   BUILDING.  A structure having a roof supported by columns or walls,
for the shelter, support, enclosure, or protection of persons, animals,
chattels, or other property.  When separated by party walls, without opening
through these walls, each portion of a BUILDING shall be considered a
separate structure.



      (1)   DETACHED BUILDING.  A building having no structural
connection with another building.



      (2)   FRONT LINE OF BUILDING.  The line of the face of the
building nearest the front lot line.



      (3)   HEIGHT OF BUILDING.  The vertical distance measured
from the lot ground level to the highest point of the roof for a flat roof;
to the deck line of a mansard roof; and to the mean height between eaves and
ridges for gable, hip, and gambrel roofs.



      (4)   PRINCIPAL BUILDING.  A building in which is conducted
the main or principal use of the lot on which the building is situated. 
Where a substantial part of an accessory building is attached to the
PRINCIPAL BUILDING in a substantial manner, as by a roof, the accessory
building shall be counted as a part of the PRINCIPAL BUILDING.



   BUILDING AREA.  The maximum horizontal projected area of the principal
and accessory building, excluding open steps or terraces, unenclosed porches
not exceeding one story in height, or architectural appurtenances projecting
not more than two feet.



   BUILDING INSPECTOR.  The official designated by the Common Council of
the city authorized to enforce the zoning code.



   BUILDING LINE or BUILDING SETBACK LINE.  The line nearest the front of
and across a lot establishing the minimum open space to be provided between
the front line of a building or structure and the front lot line.



   BUILDING MOUNTED WIND ENERGY SYSTEM. A wind energy system mounted or
attached to a building.



   BUSINESS.  The engaging in the purchase, sale, barter, or exchange of
goods, wares, merchandise, or services; the maintenance or operation of
offices; or recreational and amusement enterprises for profit.



   BUSINESS SCHOOL.  See TRADE SCHOOL.



   CAMP.  See PUBLIC CAMP.



   CEMETERY.  Land used for the burial of the dead and dedicated for
CEMETERY purposes including columbariums, crematories, mausoleums, and
mortuaries when operated in conjunction with and within the boundary of the
CEMETERY.



   CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.  A certificate signed by the Building
Inspector stating that the occupancy and use of land or a building or
structure referred to therein complies with the provisions of this chapter.



   CLUB.  Buildings and facilities owned or operated by a person for a
social, educational, or recreational purpose, but not primarily for profit or
to render a service which is customarily carried on as a business.



   COMMERCIAL FARM ENTERPRISE.  An operation or use inherent to or
closely associated with a farm or agriculture, such as the buying, selling,
or distribution of livestock or farm or agricultural products or products
essential to farm operation; but not including industrial grain elevators,
industrial mills, abattoirs, commercial hatcheries and poultry processing
plants, the manufacture of commercial fertilizers, and similar enterprises
which are of an industrial nature.



   COMMISSION.  The City Plan Commission.



   DECIBEL.  A unit of measurement of the intensity of loudness of
sound.  Sound level meters are used to measure these intensities and are
calibrated in DECIBELS.



   DEVELOPMENT PLAN.  A drawing including a legal or site description of
the real estate involved which shows the location and size of the following,
both existing and proposed:  all buildings, structures, and yards; the
location and dimension of building lines and easements; widths and lengths of
all entrances and exits to and from the real estate; location of all adjacent
or adjoining streets, service facilities, and other improvements such as
planting areas.



   DEVELOPMENT PLAN, RESIDENTIAL.  See RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN.



   DISTRICT.  A section of the territory within the jurisdiction of the
Frankfort City Plan Commission for which uniform regulations governing the
use, height, area, size, and intensity of use of buildings and land, and open
spaces about buildings, are established.



   DWELLING.  A building or portion thereof used primarily as a place of
abode for one or more human beings, but not including hotels or motels,
lodging or boarding houses, or tourist homes.



      (1)   MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING.  A building designed for or
occupied by three, four, or five families exclusively.



      (2)   SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING.  A detached building de-signed
for and occupied by one family only.



      (3)   TWO-FAMILY DWELLING.  A detached building designed for
or occupied by two families only.



   DWELLING UNIT.  A single unit providing complete independent living
facilities for one or more persons including permanent provisions for living,
sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation.



   EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION.  Public or parochial pre-primary, primary,
grade, junior-high, high preparatory school, or academy; junior college,
college, or university, if public or founded or conducted by or under the
sponsorship of a religious or charitable organization.



   FAMILY.  An individual or two or more persons related by blood or
marriage or a group of not more than eight persons (excluding servants) who
need not be related by blood or marriage living together in a dwelling unit.



   FARM.  A tract of land comprising an area which is devoted to
agricultural operations, such as forestry; the growing of crops; pasturage;
the production of livestock and poultry; the growing of trees, shrubs, and
plants; and other recognized agricultural pursuits and including accessory
buildings essential to the operation of the FARM.  Accessory buildings may
include barns; equipment and animal sheds; farm residences for the owner,
operator, or farm assistants; roadside sales structures for the sale of
products of the FARM; signs displaying subject matter directly related to the
name or the products of the particular FARM; but not including industrial or
commercial operations or structures.



   FILLING STATION.  Any building structure, premises, or enclosure or
other place used for the dispensing, sale, or offering for sale at retail of
fuels or oils for motor vehicles.  When the dispensing, sale, or offering
for sale is incidental to the conduct of a public garage, the premises shall
be classified as a public garage.



   FLASH POINT.  The lowest temperature at which a combustible liquid
under prescribed conditions will give off a flammable vapor which will burn
momentarily using the closed cup method.



   FLOOR AREA.



      (1)   GROUND FLOOR AREA.  The square foot area of a
residential building within its largest outside dimensions computed on a
horizontal plane at the ground floor level exclusive of open porches,
breeze-ways, terraces, garages, and exterior stairways.



      (2)   NET FLOOR AREA.  The total area computed on a
horizontal plane, used for a particular business category, exclusive of
entrances, hallways, stairs, and other accessory areas used for ingress or
egress.



   FREE BURNING.  A rate of combustion described by a material which
burns actively and easily supports combustion.



   FRONTAGE.  All the property on one side of a street between two
intersecting streets (crossing or terminating) measured along the line of the
street, or if the street is dead-ended, then all of the property abutting one
side between an intersecting street and the dead end of the street.



   GARAGE.



      (1)   PRIVATE GARAGE.  An accessory building with capacity
for not more than three motor vehicles per family, no more than one of which
may be a commercial vehicle of not more than three-ton capacity.  A garage
designed to house one or two motor vehicles for each family housed in
multi-family dwellings shall be classed as a private garage.



      (2)   PUBLIC GARAGE.  Any building, except those defined
above as a "private garage," used for the storage or care of motor vehicles
or where the vehicles are equipped for operation, repaired, or kept for
remuneration, hire, or sale.



   GEOGRAPHICAL REFERENCE POINT. The airport referent point (ARP)
established as a point having equal relationship to all existing and proposed
landing and takeoff points, as defined in AC 150/5300-4B, as amended, and
having Latitude 40°16'23.198"N and Longitude 86°33'49.846"W.



   GRADE.  The lowest point of elevation of the finished surface of the
ground, paving or sidewalk within the area between the building and the
property line or, when the property line is more than five feet from the
building, between the building and a line five feet from the building.



   GROUND FLOOR AREA.  The square foot area of a residential building
within its largest outside dimensions computed on a horizontal plane at the
ground floor level, exclusive of open porches, breezeways, terraces, garages,
and exterior stairways.



   GROUP HOUSE.  A group of dwellings constructed in a row, with the
dwelling units separated by vertical party walls without openings.  Also a
multi-family dwelling.



   HALF STORY.  That portion of a building under a sloping gable, hip, or
gambrel roof, the wall plates on at least two opposite exterior walls of
which are not more than three feet above the floor level of the HALF STORY.



   HEIGHT (AIRPORT OVERLAY DISTRICT). The purpose of determining the
height limits in the Airport Overlay District, the datum shall be mean sea
level elevation unless otherwise specified.



   HELIPORT. Any airport designed and designated for the exclusive use of
rotary wing and vertical takeoff and landing (VTOL) aircraft.



   HOME OCCUPATION.  Any use conducted entirely within a dwelling and
participated in solely by members of the family, which use is clearly
incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes and
does not change the character thereof, and in connection with which there is
no commodity sold upon the premises except that which is produced thereon,
provided that no sign other than a nameplate is attached to the building.



   HOSPITAL.  An institution licensed by the State Department of Health
and providing health services primarily for in-patient medical or surgical
care of the sick or injured and including related facilities such as
laboratories, out-patient departments, training facilities, central service
facilities, and staff offices which are an integral part of the facility,
provided such institution is operated by, or treatment is given under direct
supervision of a licensed physician.  Types of HOSPITALS include general,
mental, chronic disease, and allied special hospitals such as cardiac,
contagious disease, maternity, orthopedic, cancer, and the like.



   HOTEL.  A building in which lodging is provided and offered to the
public for compensation and which is open to transient guests, in
contradistinction to a boarding or lodging house.



   IMPROVEMENT LOCATION PERMIT.  A permit signed by the Building
Inspector stating that a proposed improvement complies with the provisions of
this chapter and any other applicable ordinances.



   INDUSTRIAL PARK.  A single structure or group of structures for
industrial operations forming a comprehensive arrangement of buildings,
grounds, and accessways planned in accordance with harmonious principles of
architectural and landscape architectural design and industrial management.



   INTENSE BURNING.  A rate of combustion described by a material that
burns with a high degree of activity and is consumed rapidly.



   INTERCONNECTED WIND ENERGY SYSTEM. A wind energy system which is
electrically connected to the local electrical power utility system and can
provide power to the local electrical power utility system.



   JUNK YARD.  Any place at which personal property is or may be salvaged
for reuse, resale, reduction, or similar disposition and is owned, possessed,
collected, accumulated, dismantled, or assorted, including but not limited
to, used or salvaged base metal or metals, their compounds or combinations,
used or salvaged rope, bags, paper, rags, glass, rubber, lumber, millwork,
brick, and similar property except animal matter, and used motor vehicles,
machinery, or equipment which is used, owned, or possessed for the purpose of
wrecking or salvaging parts therefrom.



   JURISDICTION OF THE COMMISSION.  The territory for planning and zoning
within the jurisdiction of the City Plan Commission.



   KENNEL.  Any lot on which four or more dogs or small animals at least
four months of age are kept.



   LARGER THAN UTILITY RUNWAY. A runway that is constructed for and
intended to be used by propeller driven aircraft of greater than 12,500
pounds maximum gross weight and jet powered aircraft.



   LOADING AND UNLOADING BERTHS.  The off-street area required for the
receipt or distribution by vehicles of material or merchandise, which in this
chapter is held to be a 12 by 45-foot loading space with a 14-foot height
clearance.



   LODGING HOUSE.  A building where lodging only is provided for
compensation to three or more, but not exceeding 12 persons, not open to
transients, in contradistinction to a hotel which is open to transients.



   LOT.  A parcel, tract, or area of land accessible by means of a street
or place, and for residential uses as set forth in §§ 155.030 through
155.034, abutting on a street or place for at least 50% of the lot width
prescribed for the district in which the LOT is located. It may be a single
parcel separately described in a deed or plat which is recorded in the office
of the County Recorder, or it may include parts of or a combination of the
parcels when adjacent to one another and used as one.  In determining LOT
area and boundary lines no part thereof within the limits of a street or
place shall be included.



      (1)   CORNER LOT.  A lot at the junction of and abutting two
or more intersecting streets.



      (2)   DEPTH OF LOT.  The mean horizontal distance between the
front lot line and the rear lot line of a lot, measured in the general
direction of the side lot line.



      (3)   INTERIOR LOT.  A  lot having frontage on one street
and abutting lots on the other three sides, whether across an alley or not. 



      (4)   LOT COVERAGE.  The percentage of the lot area covered
by the building area.



      (5)   REVERSED CORNER LOT.  A corner lot, the rear of which
abuts upon the side of another lot, whether across an alley or not.



      (6)   REVERSED INTERIOR LOT.  An interior lot, the front lot
line of which is formed by a street, which street also forms the side lot
line of an abutting corner lot.  The corner lot is considered abutting even
though separated from the interior lot line by an alley.



      (7)   THROUGH LOT.  A lot having frontage on two parallel or
approximately parallel streets and which is not a corner lot.



      (8)   WIDTH OF LOT.  The dimension of a lot, measured between
side lot lines on the building line.



   LOT LINE.



      (1)   FRONT LOT LINE.  In the case of an "interior lot," a
line separating the "lot" from the "street" or "place"; and in the case of a
"corner lot" a line separating the narrowest frontage of the "lot" from the
"street," except in cases where deed restrictions in effect specify another
"street" right-of-way line as the "front lot line."



      (2)   REAR LOT LINE.  A lot line which is opposite and most
distant from the front lot line and, in the case of an irregular or
triangular-shaped lot, a line ten feet in length within the lot, parallel to
and at the maximum distance from the front lot line.



      (3)   SIDE LOT LINE.  Any lot boundary line not a front lot
line or a rear lot line.



   LOT OF RECORD.  A lot which is part of a subdivision, the map of which
has been recorded in the office of the County Recorder of Clinton County, or
a parcel of land, the deed to which has been recorded in the office of the
County Recorder of Clinton County, prior to February 21, 1967.



   MASTER PLAN.  The complete plan or any of its parts for the
development of the city, prepared by the City Plan Commission and adopted in
accordance with I.C. 36-7-4-500 et seq., as is now or may hereafter be in
effect.



   MOBILE HOME.  Any vehicle either self-propelled or propelled by means
of being attached to a motor vehicle, which may be used as a place of abode
or sleeping place by one or more persons, and which has no foundation other
than the wheels required for its movement from one place to another.



   MOBILE HOME PARK.  An area of land on which two or more mobile homes
are harbored for the purpose of being occupied whether free of charge or in
consideration of the payment of rental for the mobile home or the site on
which it rests, and within which area a mobile home may be supported either
by its wheels, or by a foundation of any sort.



   MODERATE BURNING.  A rate of combustion described by a material which
supports combustion and is consumed slowly as it burns.



   MOTEL.  A building or detached building used as dwelling units
containing bedroom, bathroom, and closet space, and each unit having
convenient access to a parking space for the use of the unit's occupants. 
The units, with the exception of the apartment of the manager or caretaker,
are devoted to the use of automobile transients.



   MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING.  See DWELLING.



   NACELLE. The structure which houses all of the generating components,
gearbox, drive train and other components.



   NET FLOOR AREA.  See FLOOR AREA.



   NONCONFORMING USE (AIRPORT OVERLAY DISTRICT). Any pre-existing
structure, object of natural growth, or use of land which is inconsistent
with the provisions of the Airport Overlay District standards.



   NONCONFORMING USES.  An existing use of land or a building which fails
to comply with the requirements set forth in this chapter applicable to the
district in which the use is located.



   NONPRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY. A runway having an existing instrument
approach procedure utilizing air navigation facilities with only horizontal
guidance, or area type navigation equipment, for which a straight-in
nonprecision instrument approach procedure has been approved or planned, and
for which no precision approach facilities are planned or indicated on an FAA
planning document or military service's military airport planning document.



   NURSING HOME.  A facility licensed by the State Board of Health which
meets the following.



      (1)   Provides nursing services on a continuing basis.



      (2)   Admits the majority of the occupants on the advice of
physicians as ill or infirm persons requiring nursing services.



      (3)   Provides for licensed physicians services or supervision.



      (4)   Maintains medical records.  These facilities may also
provide other and similar medical or health services, provided that no
occupant requires physical restraint within the facility.



Examples of NURSING HOME facilities that provide health services may include
if they comply with all the above criteria NURSING HOMES, convalescent homes,
maternity homes, rest homes, homes for the aged, and the like.



   NURSING HOME CONVERSIONS.  A dwelling which is converted for the use
of a nursing home and licensed by the State Board of Health.



   OBSTRUCTION (AIRPORT OVERLAY DISTRICT). Any structure, growth, or other
object, including a mobile object, which exceeds a limiting height in the
Airport Overlay District.



   OCTAVE BAND.  A narrow range of sound frequencies which classify
sounds according to pitch.  In the octave band analyzer the audible sound
spectrum is divided into eight OCTAVE BANDS.



   OCTAVE BAND ANALYZER.  An electrical device used with the sound level
meter that sorts a complex noise or sound into the various octave bands.



   PARKING AREA.  See PUBLIC PARKING AREA.



   PARKING SPACE.  A space other than on a street or alley designed for
use or used for the temporary parking of a motor vehicle, and being not less
than nine feet wide and 20 feet long exclusive of passageways.



   PARTICULATE MATTER.  Finely divided liquid or solid material which is
discharged and carried along in the air.  This shall not include water
droplets commonly called steam.



   PERSON (AIRPORT OVERLAY DISTRICT). An individual, firm, partnership,
corporation, company, association, joint stock association or government
entity; includes any trustee, receiver, assignee, or a similar representative
thereof.



   PLACE.  An open, unoccupied, officially designated space other than a
street or alley, permanently reserved for use as the principal means of
access to abutting property.



   PLAT.  A map or chart indicating the subdivision or resubdivision of
land, intended to be filed for record.



   PRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY. A runway having an existing instrument
approach procedure utilizing an instrument landing system (ILS) or a
precision approach using the global positioning system (GPS) wide area
augmentation system (WAAS) with localizer like with precision vertical
guidance (LPV). It also means a runway for which a precision approach system
is planned and is so indicated on approved airport layout plan or any other
planning document.



   PREMISES.  A lot or plot including buildings thereon, if any.



   PRIMARY SURFACE. A surface longitudinally centered on a runway. When
the runway has a specially prepared hard surface, the primary surface extends
200 feet beyond each end of that runway; for military runways or when the
runway has no specially prepared hard surface, or planned hard surface, the
primary surface ends at each end of that runway. The width of the primary
surface is set forth in § 155.242. The elevation of any point on the primary
surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest point on the runway
centerline.



   PRIVATE GARAGE.  See GARAGE.



   PRIVATE SCHOOL.  Private, primary, grade, high, or preparatory school
or academy.



   PRIVATE SWIMMING POOL.  A swimming pool used only by the owner of the
pool and friends as an accessory use at a private residence.



   PROFESSIONAL OFFICE.  Office of a member or members of a recognized
profession as defined by the United States Bureau of the Census.



   PROFESSIONAL OFFICE CENTER.  An architectural and functional grouping
of professional offices and appropriate associated and accessory uses which
is the central feature of a site plan composed of building area, parking
area, landscaped reservation and plantation, and other land features
appropriate for its use as a professional office enterprise, designed to
serve residential neighborhoods.  Such center shall conform to the standards
and requirements of this chapter.



   PROFESSIONAL OFFICE IN RESIDENCE.  An office in the dwelling of a
member of recognized professions as defined by the United States Bureau of
the Census, provided that the professional service is performed by a member
or members of the family occupying the dwelling, and that no additional
person is employed in rendering the service. Not more than 25% of the gross
floor area is devoted to this use, and no sign, other than a nameplate
attached to the building, not exceeding two square feet in area, is displayed.



   PUBLIC CAMP.  Any area or tract of land used or designed to
accommodate two or more camping parties, including cabins, tents, or camping
outfits.



   PUBLIC GARAGE.  See GARAGE.



   PUBLIC PARKING AREA.  An open area, other than a "street" or "alley"
designed for use or used for the temporary parking of more than four motor
vehicles when available for public use, whether free or for compensation, or
as an accommodation for clients or customers.



   PUBLIC UTILITY INSTALLATIONS.  The erection, construction, alteration,
or maintenance by public utilities, municipal departments, commissions, or
common carriers of underground, surface, or overhead gas, oil, electrical,
steam, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic
signals, hydrants, towers and other similar equipment and accessories in
connection therewith, reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate
service by public utility or municipal departments, commissions, or common
carriers, for the public health, safety, or general welfare.



   RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN.  A plan proposed to use a tract of land
for residential development in accordance with the requirements of this
chapter, even though the use of the land, the location of the buildings to be
erected in the area, and the yards and open spaces provided in the plan do
not conform in certain respects to the regulations for the district in which
the RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT is proposed to be located.



   RINGELMANN NUMBER.  The number of the area on the Ringelmann Chart
that most nearly matches the light-obscuring capacity of smoke. The
Ringelmann Chart is described in the U.S. Bureau of Mines Information
Circular 6888, on which are illustrated graduated shades of gray for use in
estimating smoke density.  Smoke below the density of Ringelmann No. 1 shall
be considered no smoke, or Ringelmann 0.



   ROTOR DIAMETER. The cross-sectional dimension of the circle swept by
the rotating blades of a wind energy system.



   RUNWAY.  A defined area on an airport prepared for landing and takeoff
of aircraft along its length.



   SHADOW FLICKER. The moving shadow created by the sun shining through
the rotating blades of a wind energy system. The amount of shadow flicker
created by a wind energy system is calculated by a computer model that takes
into consideration turbine locations, elevation, tree cover, location of all
structures, wind activity and sunlight.



   SHOPPING CENTER.  An architectural and functional grouping of retail
stores, generally oriented around a supermarket or department store, and
appropriate associated and accessory uses, which is the central feature of a
site plan or development plan composed of building areas, parking areas,
access streets, and circulatory ways for vehicles and pedestrians, landscape
reservations and plantations, and other land features appropriate for its
operation as a business enterprise, designed to serve residential
neighborhoods or communities and which conforms to the requirements of this
chapter.



   SIGN.  Any surface, fabric, or device bearing lettered, pictorial or
sculptured matter designed to convey information visually and exposed to
public views; or any structure (including billboards, poster panels, or other
graphic displays) designed to carry the above visual information.



      (1)   BUILDING-MOUNTED SIGN.  A sign attached to the exterior
wall of a structure, other than a structure used exclusively for sign
support, which does not project more than 18 inches therefrom.  Individual
letter, in addition to the "box-type sign" may be installed as a
building-mounted sign.



      (2)   CANOPY SIGN.  A sign displayed, maintained or supported
upon an overhanging marquee, canopy, awning or other similar cover of shelter
projecting from a structure.



      (3)   FREESTANDING SIGN.  A sign that is not connected to a
building or structure, other than a structure used exclusively for sign
support.



      (4)   INDIRECT LIGHTING.  Lighting which is located either
internally within the sign or which is directed and shielded so that only the
face of the sign is illuminated from external locations.



      (5)   OFF-PREMISES SIGN.  A sign which communicates the
availability of goods, services, ideas or a business establishment which is
not available on the premises the sign is located.



      (6)   ON-PREMISES SIGN.  A sign which communicates the
availability of goods, services, ideas or a business establishment available
on the premises on which the sign is located.



      (7)   PORTABLE SIGN.  Any sign that is designed to be
transported from place to place, either on its own wheels or on a trailer,
and may be temporarily or permanently attached to the ground, structures or
other signs.



      (8)   WALL GRAPHIC.  A design which is painted on a side of a
building for the purpose of improving a blank or dilapidated building
surface, enhancing architectural detail, or generally intended to improve the
visual aspect of the community.  Wall graphics may include the name and/or
logo of a local business, but shall not advertise specific products
manufactured or offered for sale, except through indirect graphic
representation.



   SIGN AREA.  The area of a sign shall be calculated by one of the
following ways as applicable:



      (1)   Freestanding or building-mounted:  The area includes
all lettering, wording, and accompanying design and symbols, together with
the background, whether open or closed, on which they are displayed.  The
area does not include minimal supporting framework, bracing poles, but it
does include any decorative structures.



      (2)   Individual letter or figures:  When attached or painted
on a surface such as a building, canopy, awning, wall, or window, the area is
that of the smallest rectangle or other geometric shape that encompasses all
of the letters or symbols.



   SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING.  See DWELLING.



   SLOW BURNING OR INCOMBUSTIBLE.  Materials which do not in themselves
constitute an active fuel for the speed of combustion.  A material which
will not ignite, nor actively support combustion during an exposure for five
minutes to a temperature of 1200° F.



   SMOKE.  A suspension of fine particles, excluding water droplets, in a
gaseous plume, which obscure more or less the transmission of light.



   SMOKE UNIT.  The number obtained when the smoke density in Ringelmann
number is multiplied by the time of emission in minutes. For the purpose of
this calculation, a Ringelmann density reading shall be made at least once a
minute during the period of observation. Each reading is then multiplied by
the time in minutes during which it is observed.  The various products are
then added together to give the total number of smoke units observed during
the entire observation periods.



   SPECIAL SCHOOL.  Any school which has as its primary purpose the
instruction, care, and rehabilitation of atypical or exceptional children or
adults and the usual statutory educational requirements expressly or
implicitly do not apply.



   STORY.  That portion of a building, included between the surface of
any floor and surface of the floor next above it.  If there is no floor
above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it
shall be the STORY.



   STORY, HALF.  See HALF STORY.



   STREET.  A right-of-way or thoroughfare, other than an alley or place,
dedicated or otherwise legally established to the public use, usually
affording the principal means of access to abutting property.



   STRUCTURAL ALTERATION.  Any change in the supporting members of a
building, such as bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams, or girders, or
any substantial change in the exterior walls or the roof.



   STRUCTURE.  Anything constructed or erected which required location on
the ground or attachment to something having a location on the ground.



   STRUCTURE (AIRPORT OVERLAY DISTRICT). An object, including a mobile
object, constructed or installed by man, including but without limitation,
buildings, towers, cranes, smokestacks, earth formation, and overhead
transmission lines.



   SWIMMING POOL, PRIVATE.  See PRIVATE SWIMMING POOL.



   TOTAL WIND ENERGY SYSTEM HEIGHT.



      (1)   In the case of a tower or pole mounted wind energy
system, total wind energy system height shall be the vertical distance from
the ground at the base of the pole or tower to the uppermost vertical
extension of any blade or to the maximum height of any part of the wind
energy system.



      (2)   In the case of a building or structure mounted wind
energy system, total wind energy system height shall be the vertical distance
measured from the ground at the ground's highest point adjacent to the
building or structure to the uppermost vertical extension of any blade or to
the maximum height of any part of the wind energy system.



   TOURIST HOME.  A building in which one but not more than five rooms
are used to provide or offer overnight accommodations to transient guests for
compensation.



   TOWER MOUNT WIND ENERGY SYSTEM. A wind energy system mounted or
attached to a tower, pole or similar structure which is not a building.



   TRADE OR BUSINESS SCHOOL.  Secretarial or BUSINESS SCHOOL or college
when not publicly owned or owned or conducted by or under the sponsorship of
a religious, charitable, or nonprofit organization; or a school conducted as
a commercial enterprise for teaching instrumental music, dancing, barbering
or hair dressing, drafting, or for teaching industrial or technical arts.



   TRAILER SALES AREA.  See AUTOMOBILE SALES AREA.



   TREE.  Any object of natural growth.



   TWO-FAMILY DWELLING.  See DWELLING.



   URBAN AREA.  Any land or lots used for residential purposes where
there are eight or more residences within a 1/4-mile square area, and the
lands or lots have been or are planned for residential area contiguous to
incorporated cities or towns.



   USE.  The employment or occupation of a building, structure, or land
for a person's service, benefit, or enjoyment.



   USE, NONCONFORMING.  See NONCONFORMING USE.



   UTILITY RUNWAY.  A runway that is constructed for and intended to be
used by propeller driven aircraft of 12,500 pounds maximum gross weight or
less.



   VARIANCE.  A modification of the specific requirements of this chapter
granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals in accordance with the terms of this
chapter for the purpose of assuring that no property, because of special
circumstances applicable to it, shall be deprived of privileges commonly
enjoyed by other properties in the same vicinity and district.



   VIBRATION.  Oscillatory motion transmitted through the ground.



   VISUAL CLEARANCE.  A triangular space at the street of a corner lot or
at the intersection of driveways and alleys with streets or at the
intersection of alleys with alleys, which must be kept free from any kind of
obstruction between the height of three and 12 feet above the established
surface grade as further specified in this chapter.



   VISUAL RUNWAY.  A runway intended solely for the operation of aircraft
using visual approach procedures with no straight-in instrument approach
procedure and no instrument designation indicated on an FAA approved airport
layout plan, a military service approved military airport layout plan, or by
any planning document submitted to the FAA by competent authority.



   WIND ENERGY SYSTEM. Equipment that converts and then stores or
transfers energy from the wind into usable forms of energy and includes any
base, blade, foundation, generator, nacelle, rotor, tower, transformer,
turbine, vane, wire or other component used in the system.



   WIND ENERGY SYSTEM SETBACK. The distance from the base of the
structure, tower, pole or building upon which the wind energy system is
mounted to a public right-of-way, overhead public utility line or lot line.
In the case of multiple parcels utilized a single or multiple wind energy
system(s), the setbacks shall be taken from the outside boundary of the
parcels utilized for the wind energy system project.



   YARD.  A space on the same lot with the principal building, open,
unoccupied, and unobstructed by structures, except as otherwise provided in
this chapter.







 







 



      (1)   FRONT YARD.  A yard extending across the full width of
the lot, unoccupied other than by steps, walks, terraces, driveways,
lampposts, and similar structures, the depth of which is the least distance
between the front lot line and the building line.



      (2)   REAR YARD.  A yard extending across the full width of
the lot between the rear of the principal building and the rear lot line
unoccupied other than by accessory buildings which do not occupy more than
30% of the required space, and steps, walks, terraces, driveways, lampposts,
and similar structures, the depth of which is the least distance between the
rear lot line and the rear of the principal building.



      (3)   SIDE YARD.  A yard between the principal building and
the side lot line, extending from the front yard or from the front lot line
where no front yard is required, to the rear yard.  The width of the
required SIDE YARD is measured horizontally at 90 degrees with the side lot
line, from the nearest part of the principal building, except in cases where
irregular or pie-shaped lots are located, then the width of the required SIDE
YARD shall be an average of the width of the area between the side lot line
and the principal building measured horizontally at 90 degrees with the side
lot line.



   ZONE MAP.  A map entitled "Frankfort, Indiana, Zone Map and
Development Plan, 1967", and any amendments thereto.



   ZONES. The zones established in the Airport Overlay District are
imaginary horizontal or inclined surfaces in compliance with Federal Aviation
Regulation, the Frankfort Comprehensive Plan and I.C. 8-21-10, as amended.



(Ord. CO-67-2, passed 2-21-67; Am. Ord. 85-2, passed 4-8-85; Am. Ord. 85-5,
passed 5-28-85; Am. Ord. CO-89-14, passed 11-27-89; Am. Ord. CO-90-4, passed
3-26-90; Am. Ord. 10-01, passed 1-25-10; Am. Ord. 11-06, passed 5-23-11)



§ 155.003  INTERPRETATION; RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter,
they shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the
public health, safety, comfort, morals, convenience, and general welfare. 
The City Plan Commission has given consideration to the existing and future
probable use of land in the territory affected by this chapter, and has
prepared a master plan showing the future development of this area, which has
served as a guide in the preparation of this chapter.



   (B)   It is not intended by this chapter to interfere with,
abrogate, or annul any easements, covenants, or other agreements between
parties; nor any ordinances, rules, regulations, or permits previously
adopted or issued, or which shall be adopted or issued and which are not in
conflict with any of the provisions of this chapter. However, where this
chapter imposes a greater restriction upon the use of buildings or land, or
requires larger open spaces or greater lot area per family, than are required
or imposed by any easements, covenants, or agreements between parties, or by
any ordinance, rules, regulations, or permits, the provisions of this chapter
shall control.



(Ord. CO-67-2, passed 2-21-67)



§ 155.004  ANNEXED OR VACATED AREAS.



   (A)   Territory which may hereafter be annexed to the city shall
remain as zoned unless changed by amendment to this chapter.



   (B)   Whenever any street, alley, public way, railroad right-of-way,
waterway, or other similar area is vacated by proper authority, the districts
adjoining each side of the street, alley, public way, railroad right- of-way,
or similar areas shall be extended automatically to the center of the
vacation and all area included in the vacation shall then and thenceforth be
subject to all appropriate regulations of the extended districts.  In the
event of a partial vacation, the adjoining district, or district nearest the
portion vacated, shall be extended automatically to include all of the
vacated area.



(Ord. CO-67-2, passed 2-21-67)



§ 155.005  BUILDINGS.



   (A)   No building or land shall be used and no building shall be
erected, reconstructed, or structurally altered, which is arranged, intended,
or designed to be used for any purpose other than a use which is permitted
and specified in a district in which the building or land is located.



   (B)   No building shall be erected, reconstructed, or structurally
altered in any manner which will encroach upon, or reduce in any manner, the
yards, lot area per family, ground floor area of dwellings, or lot coverage
provisions established and specified for the use and the district in which
the building is located.



   (C)   Every building hereafter erected shall be located on a lot. In
no case shall there be more than one principal building used for residential
purposes, and its accessory buildings, located on one lot, except as
otherwise provided in this chapter.



(Ord. CO-67-2, passed 2-21-67)  Penalty, see § 155.999



§ 155.006  PARKING AREAS.



   (A)   For each building hereafter erected and for certain other uses
of land, parking spaces for motor vehicles and loading and unloading berths
as specified for the use to which the building or land is to be devoted shall
be provided.  However, parking spaces may not be required in a block
frontage contained in a business district in which the ground floor area of
business or industrial structures, including their accessory buildings,
existing on February 21, 1967, equaled 50% or more of the entire area of the
block frontage.



   (B)   All public parking areas and all parking spaces required for
business, enclosed industrial, or open industrial use, and loading and
unloading berths, shall be surfaced with a dustproof and hard surface.



(Ord. CO-67-2, passed 2-21-67)  Penalty, see § 155.999



§ 155.007  FEE SCHEDULE.



   (A)   Applications and petitions filed pursuant to the provisions of
this zoning code shall be accompanied by the filing fees herein specified. 
These fees shall be paid to the Building Inspector who shall forthwith pay
over to the Clerk-Treasurer to the credit of the General Fund of the city.



   (B)   For each petition for an appeal from the decision of the
Building Inspector to the Board of Zoning Appeals, a fee of $20 shall be paid.



   (C)   For each application for the approval by the Board of Zoning
Appeals of a special exception, a fee of $70 shall be paid.  However, an
application for a neighborhood convenience center plan, a fee of $150 shall
be paid, and for a shopping center plan, a fee of $250 shall be paid.



   (D)   For each petition for an amendment to this chapter, a fee of
$25 shall be paid.



   (E)   No part of any filing fee paid pursuant to this section shall
be returnable to the applicant or petitioner, except that in the event an
application for an improvement location permit has been denied, the fee for
the certificate of occupancy, therefor, shall be returned to the applicant.



   (F)   A double fee shall be assessed, if construction is started
prior to the issuance of an improvement location permit.



(Ord. CO-67-2, passed 2-21-67; Am. Ord. CO-77-22, passed 10-19-77; Am. Ord.
85-22, passed 1-27-86; Am. Ord. 86-2, passed 3-27-86; Am. Ord. CO-98-20,
passed 1-11-99)



§ 155.008  NONCONFORMING USES.



   (A)   The lawful use of a building or premise, existing on February
21, 1954, may be continued although the use does not conform to all the
provisions of this chapter, subject to the following conditions.



      (1)   A nonconforming use may be extended throughout a
building provided the size of the structure is not increased.



      (2)   A nonconforming use may be changed to another
nonconforming use of the same or greater restrictions, provided the size of
the structure is not increased.



      (3)   Whenever a nonconforming use has been changed to a
conforming use or to a use permitted in a district of greater restrictions,
it shall not thereafter be changed to a nonconforming use of a less
restricted district.



      (4)   No building shall be erected on any premises devoted to
a nonconforming use, except in conformance with the provisions of this
chapter.



      (5)   The Board of Zoning Appeals may authorize, by written
permit, in a district permitting residential use, for a period of not more
than one year from the date of the permit, a temporary building for business
or industrial use incidental to the residential construction and development
of the district.



      (6)   In the event that a nonconforming use of any building or
premises is discontinued for a period of two years, the use of the building
or premises shall thereafter conform to the uses permitted in the district in
which it is located.  Any nonconforming dwelling which is deficient in
ground floor area, and which may be removed from a lot, shall not relocate on
a lot.



      (7)   Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the
plans for the construction or designated use of a building for which an
improvement location permit or a building permit has been heretofore issued,
and the construction of which has been diligently prosecuted within 90 days
of the date of the permit, and which entire building shall be completed
according to the plans filed within three years from February 21, 1967.



      (8)   Any nonconforming open use of land such as a junk yard
or automobile wrecking or salvage yard located in a district which does not
permit the open use of land, shall be discontinued within five years from
February 1, 1954.



   (B)   These provisions apply in the same manner to a use which may
become a nonconforming use as a result of an amendment to this chapter.



(Ord. CO-67-2, passed 2-21-67)



§ 155.009  REMEDIES.



   (A)   The City Plan Commission, the Board of Zoning Appeals, the
Building Inspector, any designated enforcement official, or any person, firm,
or corporation jointly or severally aggrieved may institute  a suit for
injunction in the Clinton Circuit Court to restrain an individual or a
governmental unit from violating the provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   The Commission or the Board may also institute a suit for
mandatory injunction directing any individual, corporation, or a governmental
unit to remove a structure erected in violation of the provisions of this
chapter.



   (C)   Any building, erected, raised, or converted, or land or
premises used in violation of any provisions of this chapter, or the
requirement thereof, is hereby declared to be a common nuisance and as such
may be abated in the manner as nuisances are now or may hereafter be abated
under existing law.



(Ord. CO-67-2, passed 2-21-67)



§ 155.010  AMENDMENTS.



   All amendments to this chapter shall be in conformance with I.C.
36-7-4-507, 36-7-4-509, 36-7-4-608, 36-7-4-609, and 36-7-4-611, and all acts
amendatory thereto.



(Ord. CO-67-2, passed 2-21-67)



§ 155.011  EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   Farms.  Land, farmhouses, farm barns, farm outbuildings, or
other buildings, structures, or erections which are adapted by reason of
nature and area for use for agricultural purposes, while so used, shall not
be affected by restrictions or regulations of this chapter.



   (B)   Public utility installations.  Structures and land used for
public utility installations, as defined in § 155.002, while so used, shall
not be affected by restrictions or regulations of this chapter. However,
power substations, terminal facilities, and treatment or processing plants
are contingent uses and are subject to the provisions of this chapter.



   (C)   Mineral extraction.  Nothing herein shall prevent, outside of
urban areas, the complete use and alienation of any mineral resources or
forests by the owner or alienee thereof.



(Ord. CO-67-2, passed 2-21-67)



§ 155.012  VISUAL CLEARANCE.



   (A)   On a corner lot in any district except General Business (GB),
no building, fence, hedge, wall, sign or other structure shall be erected,
placed, planted or allowed to grow, and no motor vehicle, recreational
vehicle or outdoor storage may be placed in the triangular area specified
below in such a manner as to impede vision between a height of three feet and
12 feet above the established street grade.  The street grade is measured at
the intersection of the center lines of the intersecting street pavements.
The triangular area is determined by a diagonal line connecting two points
measured 15 feet along each of the street property lines equidistant from the
intersection of the property lines or the property lines extended at the
corner of the lot.  Traffic-control devices and public utility fixtures
shall not be affected by this requirement.



   (B)   At intersections of driveways and alleys with streets, or at
intersections of alleys with alleys in any district except General Business
(GB), no building, fence, hedge, wall, sign or other structure shall be
erected, placed or allowed to grow and no motor vehicle, recreational vehicle
or outdoor storage may be placed in the triangular area specified below in
such a manner as to impede vision between a height of three feet and 12 feet
above the established driveway or alley grade level.  The grade level is
measured at the intersection of the center lines of the intersecting
driveway, street or alley surfaces.  The triangular area is determined by a
diagonal line connecting two points measured 15 feet along each of the
driveway lines and street or alley right-of-way lines equidistant from the
intersection of the driveway lines and street or alley right-of-way lines or
alley and alley right-of-way lines.  Traffic-control devices and public
utility fixtures shall not be affected by this requirement.



(Ord. CO-89-14, passed 11-27-89)



§ 155.013  FENCES.



   Fences are permitted as accessory structures in any district and
require an Improvement Location Permit.  The height of all fences will be
measured from ground level and must meet the following standards:



   (A)   Partition, or line, fences, where necessary, shall be built
and maintained between adjacent properties in accordance with I.C. 32-10-9.



   (B)   Except for partition fences, all fences must be located
entirely upon the lot which it serves, though the fence may be located
immediately adjacent to the lot line.



   (C)   No fence in any district except for those servicing
agricultural uses shall be constructed of or contain barbed wire, broken
glass, spikes or sharp and dangerous objects, nor be electrically charged,
except that barbed wire may be used at the top portion of a permitted fence
or wall if located more than seven feet above the adjacent ground level.



   (D)   All posts for wood panel, stockade, or similar type fences
shall not be located on the side of said fence facing adjacent property or
road right-of-way.



   (E)   Fences for swimming pools shall meet § 155.032 and all other
applicable provisions of this chapter and state law.



   (F)   In residential or business districts, no fence or wall of more
than six feet in height may be placed, built or installed in the side and
rear yards of any lot.  No fence or wall of more than 42 inches may be
placed, built or installed within 25 feet of any street right-of-way in any
Residential District or LB District nor within 75 feet of any street
right-of-way in the RB District.  All fences and walls must be in compliance
with visual clearance area requirements of this chapter.



   (G)   In industrial districts, a fence or wall not to exceed eight
feet in height may be placed, built or installed at the property lines in
required side and rear yards, excepting in that portion of any required yard
that lies within the visual clearance area.  Additionally, the height of
such fences may be increased by six inches for each three feet of distance
from the property line, to a maximum height of 12 feet.



   (H)   Every retention pond required by the city for water runoff
storage and in which the deepest point is more than two feet below adjacent
ground level shall be enclosed with a decorative fence or protective barrier
a minimum of six feet in height.



(Ord. CO-90-4, passed 3-26-90; Am. Ord. 02-20, passed 6-23-03)



DISTRICTS



§ 155.020  ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS; ZONE MAP.



   (A)   The territory within the jurisdiction of the City Plan
Commission is hereby classified and divided into 11 districts designated as
follows.



 

Type of District
 
District Designation




Suburban Residence
 
“S”


Residence
 
“A”


Residence
 
“B”


Residence
 
“C”


Residence
 
“D”


Local Business
 
“LB”


Roadside Business
 
“RB”


General Business
 
“GB”


Open Industrial
 
“I-1”


Enclosed Industrial
 
“I-2”


Reserved Industrial
 
“I-3”




 



   (B)   The zone map, which accompanies and is hereby declared to be a
part of this chapter, shows the boundaries of the area covered by the
districts.  Notations, references, indications, and other matters shown on
the zone map are as much a part of this chapter as if they were fully
described herein.



(Ord. CO-67-2, passed 2-21-67)



§ 155.021  DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.



   (A)   In determining the boundaries of districts, and establishing
the provisions applicable to each district, due and careful consideration has
been given to existing conditions, the character of buildings erected in each
district, the most desirable use for which the land in each district may be
adapted, and the conservation of property values throughout the jurisdiction
of the City Plan Commission.



   (B)   Where uncertainty exists as to the exact boundaries of any
district as shown on the zone map, the following rules shall apply.



      (1)   In unsubdivided areas, or where a district boundary
subdivides a lot, the exact location of the boundary shall be determined by
use of the scale of the zone map.



      (2)   In the case of further uncertainty, the Board of Zoning
Appeals shall interpret the intent of the zone map as to the location of the
boundary in question.



(Ord. CO-67-2, passed 2-21-67)



RESIDENTIAL USES



§ 155.030  PERMITTED USES.



   The residential uses listed below, and defined in § 155.002, including
accessory buildings and uses, are permitted in the districts indicated in §
1 of Appendix A at the end of this chapter, when complying with the
requirements listed therein, and shall be subject also to the provisions of
§§ 155.031 through 155.034.



   (A)   A single-family dwelling.



   (B)   A two-family dwelling.



   (C)   A multi-family dwelling.



(Ord. CO-67-2, passed 2-21-67)



§ 155.031  NONCONFORMING USES.



   A single-family dwelling may be located on any lot in any district in
which single-family dwellings are permitted if the lot was a single parcel in
single ownership or a single parcel separately described or included in a
deed or plat which was of record in the Office of the County Recorder on
February 21, 1967, even though the lot does not have the minimum lot width or
the minimum lot area specified for the district.



(Ord. CO-67-2, passed 2-21-67)



§ 155.032  ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND USES.



   (A)   Accessory buildings are permitted in all districts, but not
prior to the erection of the principal building, except for strictly storage
purposes, and not for human occupancy.



   (B)   The detached accessory building or swimming pool shall not be
located closer to a rear lot line than three feet, have a side yard the same
as that required for a dwelling, nor exceed 18 feet in height.  The
accessory building or swimming pool shall be set back of the rear line of the
main building; however, a private swimming pool shall be surrounded by a
fence of sufficient height and maintained so as to prevent access by children
or animals.  If any side or sides of a private swimming pool lie within ten
feet of an abutting residential use, a solid screen of suitable construction
material or solid planting screen to the height of six feet, which will act
as a sound barrier on that side or sides, shall be provided and maintained.



   (C)   Accessory uses such as public utility installations, walks,
driveways, curbs, retaining walls, mailboxes, name plates, lamp posts, bird
baths, and structures of a like nature are permitted in any required front,
side, or rear yard, without the issuance of any permit.  Fences, lattice
work, screens, hedges, or walls, not more than six feet in height, may be
located in the required side or rear yard, and a hedge or an ornamental
fence, not to exceed 3-1/2 feet in height, may be located in any front
yard.  However, nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to
prohibit the construction or maintenance of a fence of any height in
connection with an agricultural use.  Trees, shrubs, flowers, or plants
shall be permitted in any required front, side, or rear yard; however, vision
clearance on corner lots shall be provided when required.



   (D)   Satellite television antennas shall be a permitted accessory
use only in accordance with the following standards:



      (1)   A satellite television antenna, also known as a
parabolic antenna, having a diameter greater than four feet shall be located
on the ground, to the rear of the principal building on a building lot, but
not within a required side yard or required rear yard.



      (2)   A satellite television antenna, also known as a
parabolic antenna, having a diameter of four feet or less may be located on
the principal building or an accessory building on a building lot, subject to
the height regulations in division (3), below.  When a satellite television
antenna, also known as a parabolic antenna, having a diameter of four feet or
less is located on the ground, the antenna shall be placed to the rear of the
principal building on the lot.



      (3)   In all districts a satellite television antenna, also
known as a parabolic antenna, may have a maximum height of 20 feet when
located on the ground, and when located on the roof of a building in a
commercial or industrial district shall not exceed the height limitation for
the district in which it is located by more than ten feet.



      (4)   A satellite television antenna, also known as a
parabolic antenna, having printed matter on its surface shall be treated as a
sign in conformance with the regulations in Title XV of this code.



      (5)   A building permit shall be required prior to the
permanent placement of a satellite television antenna, also known as a
parabolic antenna, having a diameter greater than four feet.



      (6)   All cables and connections from a satellite antenna to
other equipment on the premises shall be buried underground when an antenna
is located on the ground, or appropriately concealed when an antenna is
located on a building.



   (E)   Outdoor furnaces.



      (1)   Purpose.  This subchapter is intended to promote the
public health, safety and welfare and to safeguard the health, comfort,
living conditions, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City of
Frankfort, Indiana. This regulation shall provide for the requirements and
limitations of the installation of any exterior burning device, the primary
purpose of which is to convert acceptable combustible fuel into a heat or
energy source for interior spaces.



      (2)   Definitions.  For purposes of this division (E) the
following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.



         ACCESSORY STRUCTURE.  All outdoor furnaces, combustible
fuel fired hydronic heaters and similar devices are to be considered
accessory structures, shall adhere to appropriate zoning codes and will
require a city permit.



         AMERICAN  NATIONAL STANDARDS INSTITUTE.  Product testing
agency also known as ANSI.



         ASTM INTERNATIONAL.  Product testing agency, also known as
ASTM.



         CLEAN WOOD.  Natural wood which has not been painted,
varnished or coated with a similar material has not been pressure treated
with preservatives, impregnated with any retardant chemicals, and does not
contain performance enhancing resins or glues.



         CONFLICTS.  In the event of a conflict, the stricter of
the regulations, ordinances, codes or such, shall be enforced.



         EMISSIONS.  The release of any or all of the following;
smoke, steam, airborne particulates or fuel particles from the unit which
have not been totally consumed by fire.



         ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY.  U.S. government
regulatory agency,  also known as EPA.



         EXTERIOR FURNACE. Any device, contrivance or apparatus or
any part thereof which is installed, affixed or situated out of doors for the
purpose of the combustion of fuel from which heat or energy is derived and
intended to be directed from there by conduit or other mechanism into any
interior space for the supply of heat or energy. The furnace and its
components must have a current UL or ANSI listing. Also referred to in the
text of this division (E) as a UNIT.



         FURNACE DEVICE, EXTERIOR.  Any contrivance, apparatus or
part thereof, including a boiler, firebox, exchanger, grate, fuel gun, fuel
nozzle, chimney, smoke pipe, flue, exhaust conduit and like devices used for
the burning of combustible fuels for the creation of heat or energy from an
exterior location into an interior location. The furnace and its components
must have a current UL or ANSI listing. Also referred to in the text of this
division (E) as a UNIT.



         GREEN WOOD.  Term which means that the natural wood is not
sufficiently seasoned and which contains an unacceptable moisture level.



         INSPECTOR.  This is to include the Building Inspector,
Fire Inspector and/or their duly authorized representatives displaying proper
city issued credentials.



         MANUFACTURER SPECIFICATIONS.  This includes any and all
requirements specified in writing, submitted by the manufacturer of the unit
which includes the following: pamphlets, drawings, installation and
maintenance manuals and any other pertinent documents.



         OUTDOOR FURNACE. A furnace, stove, boiler, or similar
devices or any part thereof, designed for burning of clean wood, coal, corn,
cobs, or any other combustible material. Also referred to in the text of this
division (E) as a UNIT.



         REFUSE. Any combustible waste material except clean wood.



         SEASONED WOOD. Natural wood of any species that has been
sufficiently dried so as to contain 20% or less moisture by weight.



         TREATED WOOD. Natural wood of any species that has been
chemically impregnated, painted, or similarly modified to prevent weathering
or deterioration.



         UNDERWRITERS LABORATORIES. Product testing agency also
known as UL.



      (3)   Installation. All acceptable constructed units shall be
installed to the following requirements:



         (a)   All units shall be installed in strict conformance
with the appropriate manufacturer's specifications, instructions and
regulations. All units must be issued and display the Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) placard regarding emissions and appropriate testing
agency, i.e. UL, ASTM or ANSI.



         (b)   Any outdoor furnace installed after the effective
date of this division (E) shall be located at least 50 feet from all lot
lines of the parcel of which it is a part, with the exception of the front
lot line. All accessory structures shall be located behind the rear plane of
the primary structure on the shared lot.



         (c)   The unit shall have a chimney or flue through
which all smoke and by-products of combustion are emitted. The height of the
flue shall be determined by the distance from the nearest residence or other
buildings intended for human occupation which is not served by the outdoor
furnace unit, as follows:



            1.   50 feet to 100 feet:      Height of the
tallest roof peak of the nearest residence or occupied building not served,
plus two feet.



            2.   More than 100 feet:      75% of the
tallest roof peak of the nearest residence or occupied building not served,
plus two feet.



            3.   In no event shall the chimney, flue or stack
be less than 15 feet tall.



         (d)   The accessory structure shall not be located any
closer to any building than the required flue height as stated in division
(E)(c)1., 2., and 3. This restriction shall apply regardless of whether the
adjacent building is located on the same parcel as the accessory structure or
on a neighboring parcel.



         (e)   The flue assembly shall be adequately supported
either by a complete guy wire assembly of no less than a three-wire
configuration or a vertical tower support unit. The tower unit shall be
adequately supported by concrete base.



         (f)   The required distribution piping system utilized
to transfer the heated water from the unit and its return piping from the
house must be of the accepted configuration and installed in accordance with
manufacturer's specifications. Adequate protection measures must be adhered
to.



         (g)   A fire extinguisher of adequate size and type,
approved by Fire Department Inspector, must be readily accessible.



         (h)   The manufacturer's specification booklet supplied
with the unit must be made available to an inquiring city inspector upon
request.



         (i)   Any deviations or non-compliance with appropriate
provisions of the city zoning code or adherence to manufacturer's
specifications could cause the unit to be declared a nuisance as described in
§ 96.01 of this code.



         (j)   The unit must be adequately secured in place to
prevent movement by appropriate methods, i.e. tie-down straps, anchor bolts.



         (k)   Prior to approved installation, a city building
permit must be obtained.



      (4)   Materials that may not be burned.  The following
materials shall not be utilized as fuel and not be burned in the units:



         (a)   Rubbish or garbage, including but not limited to,
food wastes, food wraps, packaging, animal carcasses, paint or painted
materials, furniture or furniture parts, roofing materials, pallets,
construction or demolition debris, household or commercial generated wastes;



         (b)   Any petroleum products or waste, accelerant or
fuel shall not be used;



         (c)   Any products which contain asphalt;



         (d)   Chemically or oil treated, painted, stained,
varnished or enhanced wood and or lumber products;



         (e)   Rubber, including tires, tubes and natural or
synthetic rubber like products;



         (f)   Printed paper, corrugated cardboard, container
board and paper products. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, small
quantities of paper or cardboard may be used as  starter fuel;



         (g)   Wood which is not seasoned, i.e."green";



         (h)   Wood which is not locally harvested;



         (i)   Any other material determined by the Fire
Department or the Building Inspector to be potentially harmful to the health,
living conditions, safety and welfare of the public.



      (5)   Fuel storage.  All acceptable wood, which is intended
to be used as fuel for the unit, shall be cut in lengths as recommended by
unit manufacture, and stored in a manner which does not distract from or
compromise the surrounding area. Any other acceptable fuel must be stored in
a weather-tight,  vermin- restrictive container.



      (6)   Existing units.  Any unit installed and operational
prior to the adoption of this division (E), shall be appropriately adapted
and/or reconfigured as to be in compliance with the EPA June 2007 emission
regulations, also in accordance with the appropriate testing agencies and
manufacture specification requirements.



      (7)   Right of entry and inspection. The Building Inspector or
designee, Fire Department Inspector or designee, who presents proper current
credentials, may inspect any property, appropriate equipment and/or unit, for
the purpose of ascertaining compliance with the provisions of this division
(E).



(Ord. CO-67-2, passed 2-21-67; Am. Ord. CO-77-21, passed 10-19-77; Am. Ord.
85-2, passed 4-8-85; Am. Ord. 85-5, passed 5-28-85; Am. Ord. 85-22, passed
1-27-86; Am. Ord. 02-20, passed 6-23-03; Am. Ord. CO-07-04, passed 5-29-07) 
Penalty, see § 155.999



§ 155.033  HEIGHT OF BUILDINGS.



   In the districts limiting building height to 25 feet, a dwelling may be
increased in height not to exceed 35 feet, provided that each of the required
side yard dimensions is increased an additional foot for each foot the
structure exceeds 25 feet in height.



(Ord. CO-67-2, passed 2-21-67)



§ 155.034  BUILDING LINES.



   (A)   Where 25% or more of the lots in a block frontage are occupied
by buildings, the average setback of the buildings determines the location of
the building line for the block frontage.  However, the front yard dimension
need not exceed 40 feet in any case.  The rear building line of an accessory
building shall be the average setback of the other accessory buildings on the
lots, but a minimum of three feet shall be required.



   (B)   Building lines established in a recorded subdivision shall
establish the setback of buildings in the subdivisions, except when the
building lines may be less restrictive than provided in this chapter.



   (C)   On through lots a building line is required on each street.



(Ord. CO-67-2, passed 2-21-67; Am. Ord. CO-77-21, passed 10-19-77)



§ 155.035  TAPERED YARD FORMULA.



   Where an interior lot fronts on a side street in the rear of a corner
lot which interior lot may or may not be separated from the corner lot by an
alley, an accessory building located on the rear lot line of the corner lot
shall set back from the side street as far as the dwelling on the interior
lot.  For each foot that the accessory building is placed from the rear lot
line toward the front lot line of the corner lot, the accessory building may
be set four inches closer to the front lot line along the side street, but in
no case closer than the building setback line along the side street required
by this chapter.



(Ord. CO-67-2, passed 2-21-67)



BUSINESS USES



§ 155.040  PERMITTED USES.



   The business uses classified in §§ 155.041 through 155.043 are
permitted in the districts indicated in § 2 of Appendix A at the end of this
chapter, when complying with the requirements specified in §§ 2, 3, and 4
of Appendix A at the end of this chapter, subject to the provisions of §§
155.044 through 155.053.  Roadside Business Uses are also subject to the
provisions of § 155.055.



(Ord. CO-67-2, passed 2-21-67)



§ 155.041  LOCAL BUSINESS USE.



   A Local Business Use is one which is primarily of a retail or service
nature and is specifically classified or implied in the following categories
of uses.



   (A)   Automobile service, including the following.



      (1)   Public garage, but not including major repair or body
work.



      (2)   Public parking area.



      (3)   Sales room.



   (B)   Business service, including the following.



      (1)   Bank.



      (2)   Office building.



      (3)   Postal station.



      (4)   Telegraph office.



      (5)   Telephone exchange.



      (6)   Utility company business office.



   (C)   Clothing service, including the following.



      (1)   Laundry agency.



      (2)   Self-service laundry or self-service dry cleaning
establishment.



      (3)   Dry cleaning establishment using not more than two
clothes-cleaning units, neither of which shall have a rated capacity of more
than 60 pounds, and using cleaning fluid which is non-explosive and
non-flammable.



      (4)   Dressmaking.



      (5)   Millinery.



      (6)   Tailor and pressing shop.



      (7)   Shoe repair shop.



   (D)   Equipment service, including the following.



      (1)   Radio or television shop.



      (2)   Electric appliance shop.



      (3)   Record shop.



   (E)   Food service, including the following.



      (1)   Grocery.



      (2)   Meat market.



      (3)   Supermarket.



      (4)   Restaurant.



      (5)   Delicatessen.



      (6)   Cold storage lockers, for individual use.



      (7)   Bakery, provided floor area used for production shall
not exceed 750 square feet.



      (8)   Roadside sales stand.



   (F)   Personal service, including the following.



      (1)   Barber shop.



      (2)   Beauty shop.



      (3)   Reducing salon.



      (4)   Photographic studio.



   (G)   Retail service and retail stores generally, including the
following.



      (1)   Drug store.



      (2)   Hardware or paint store.



      (3)   Stationer.



      (4)   Newsdealer.



      (5)   Show room and sales area for articles to be sold at
retail.



      (6)   Commercial greenhouse not exceeding 1,000 square feet in
area.



      (7)   Apparel shop.



      (8)   Flower shop.



      (9)   Antique shop.



      (10)   Shoe store.



      (11)   Variety store.



      (12)   Toy store.



      (13)   Jewelry store.



   (H)   Business recreational uses, including the following.



      (1)   Billiard room.



      (2)   Dancing academy.



      (3)   Tavern or night club, only in conformity with
requirements of laws or ordinances governing their use.



   (I)   Private club or lodge.



   (J)   Advertising sign or billboard.



   (K)   Department store.



   (L)   Accessory building or use customarily incidental to the uses
in divisions (A) through (K) above.



   (M)  Department store, hardware store, variety store, discount store,
or any other retail store or service business which involves no nuisance
features and which involves no more intensive use of land than those
classifications specifically listed.



(Ord. CO-67-2, passed 2-21-67)



§ 155.042  ROADSIDE BUSINESS USE.



   A Roadside Business Use is one which normally requires drive-in
facilities related to a street or highway, is primarily of a retail or
service nature, and includes storage warehouse and wholesale establishments
and enclosed industrial use, specifically stated or implied in the following
categories.



   (A)   Local business uses.



   (B)   Automobile, truck, or trailer rental and sales area.



   (C)   Automobile and truck repair, entirely within enclosed
buildings.



   (D)   Indoor theater.



   (E)   Bowling alley or roller rink, entirely within enclosed
buildings.



   (F)   Hotel or motel.



   (G)   Veterinary hospital for small animals.



   (H)   Kennel.



   (I)   Radio and television studios.



   (J)   Newspaper publishing.



   (K)   Motor bus or railroad passenger station.



   (L)   Storage warehouse.



   (M)  Wholesale establishment.



   (N)   Any business use not specifically stated or implied elsewhere
in this chapter.



   (O)   Accessory buildings or uses customarily incidental to the uses
in divisions (A) through (N) above.



(Ord. CO-67-2, passed 2-21-67)



§ 155.043  GENERAL BUSINESS USE.



   A General Business Use includes the uses specifically stated or implied
as follows.



   (A)   Local business uses.



   (B)   Roadside business uses.



   (C)   Accessory buildings or use customarily incidental to the uses
in divisions (A) and (B) above.



(Ord. CO-67-2, passed 2-21-67)



§ 155.044  PARKING REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Parking spaces shall be provided on the lot, or as an
exception within 300 feet thereof, as indicated in § 4 of Appendix A at the
end of this chapter.



   (B)   The Board of Zoning Appeals may waive the parking space
required in a block frontage contained in a business district in which the
ground floor area of business or industrial structures, including their
accessory buildings, existing on February 21, 1967, equaled 50% or more of
the entire area of the block frontage.



   (C)   Groups of uses requiring parking space may join in
establishing a private parking area with a capacity aggregating that required
for each participating use.



   (D)   Any multi-family dwelling used as an accessory use of business
buildings shall conform to the minimum parking requirements set forth in § 1
of Appendix A at the end of this chapter for a multi-family dwelling use. 
The location of the parking space may be permitted as an exception by the
Board of Zoning Appeals.



(Ord. CO-67-2, passed 2-21-67)  Penalty, see § 155.999



§ 155.045  LOADING AND UNLOADING BERTHS.



   Loading and unloading berths shall be provided on the lot as indicated
in § 3 of Appendix A at the end of this chapter.  Loading and unloading
berths shall not be required for Business Uses which demonstrably do not
receive or transmit goods or wares by truck delivery.



(Ord. CO-67-2, passed 2-21-67)  Penalty, see § 155.999



§ 155.046  BUILDING SETBACK.



   Where 25% or more of the lots in a block frontage are occupied by
buildings, the setback of the buildings shall determine the location of the
building line, except for the RB Roadside Business District.



(Ord. CO-67-2, passed 2-21-67)



§ 155.047  FRONT AND REAR YARDS.



   (A)   One-half of an alley abutting the rear of a lot may be
included in the rear yard, but the alley space shall not be included for
loading and unloading berths.



   (B)   Parking spaces and accessory uses are permitted in the
required front yard in the LB Local Business District, on lots where business
is located.



   (C)   On a through lot, front yards shall be provided on each street
in the LB Local Business District.



(Ord. CO-67-2, passed 2-21-67)



§ 155.048  OPEN STORAGE.



   Business uses shall not include open storage use on the lot, except for
the temporary storage of automobiles or trailers for retail sale on a lot
devoted to open automobile or trailer sales area use, and for the temporary
parking of vehicles in off-street parking spaces permitted for the use.



(Ord. CO-67-2, passed 2-21-67)  Penalty, see § 155.999



§ 155.049  HEIGHT OF BUILDING.



   (A)   Buildings may be erected higher than the normal maximum height
of 100 feet in the GB General Business and I-l Open Industrial Districts,
provided that buildings shall be set back from the required side yard lines
and rear yard lines one foot for each two feet of height above 45 feet.



   (B)   Chimneys, cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, fire towers,
penthouses, stacks, tanks, water towers, transmission towers, or essential
mechanical appurtenances may be erected to any height not prohibited by other
laws or ordinances.



(Ord. CO-67-2, passed 2-21-67)



§ 155.050  NOISE AND SMOKE EMISSION.



   (A)   Business uses shall be conducted within buildings so
constructed that no noise of any kind produced therein shall be audible
beyond the confines of the building.



   (B)   Any emission of smoke, dust, gas, fumes, odors, noise, or
vibrations which is noxious or offensive, in the judgment of the Building
Inspector, beyond the confines of the building, is not permitted.



(Ord. CO-67-2, passed 2-21-67)  Penalty, see § 155.999



§ 155.051  SEWAGE DISCHARGE.



   No business operation or activity shall discharge, or cause to be
discharged, liquid or solid wastes into public waters unless in conformance
with the water pollution control provisions under state law.  Plans and
specifications for proposed sewage and other waste treatment and disposal
facilities shall be submitted to and approval obtained from the Water
Pollution Control Board of the state.



(Ord. CO-67-2, passed 2-2l-67)  Penalty, see § 155.999



§ 155.052  MORE THAN ONE PRINCIPAL BUILDING PERMITTED.



   In all business districts it is permissible to erect more than one
principal building, used as a business or enclosed industrial use as the case
may be, on a lot.



(Ord. CO-67-2, passed 2-21-67)



§ 155.053  SCREENING.



   Any business use proposed to be located on a lot which abuts or adjoins
any lot used or zoned for residential purposes, shall include in the
application thereof provisions for a planting screen in accordance with the
type and character set forth in § 155.105.



(Ord. CO-67-2, passed 2-21-67; Am. Ord. 85-22, passed 1-27-86)



§ 155.054  FILLING STATIONS.



   The application for a filling station shall not be granted until after
it has been subject to the requirements specified in §§ 155.100 through
155.105, and § 9 of Appendix A at the end of this chapter, for a special
exception use.



(Ord. CO-67-2, passed 2-21-67)



§ 155.055  SPECIAL EXCEPTION USE.



   In the event a local business use or roadside business use or enclosed
industrial use is proposed to be located in an RB Roadside Business District,
the application therefore shall not be granted until after it has been
subject to the requirements and procedure specified in §§ 155.100 through
155.105, and § 9 of Appendix A at the end of this chapter, for a special
exception use.



(Ord. CO-67-2, passed 2-21-67)



§ 155.056  WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS.



   (A)   Applicability.  No wind energy system shall be constructed or
operated within the City of Frankfort until and unless all applicable
standards, requirements and restrictions imposed by this section have been
satisfied, the appropriate application has been filed with the Building
Inspector, the permit fee has been paid and a permit authorizing its
construction and operation has been issued by the Building Inspector. Any
physical modification to an existing wind energy system that materially
alters the size, type, equipment or location shall require a new application
process. The person or firm submitting the application for permit may be
referred to further in this section as "applicant".



   (B)   Standards for all wind energy systems.  All wind energy
systems shall comply with the following requirements:



      (1)   Sound pressure level.



         (a)   When in operation a wind energy system shall not
exceed either 55 dB(A), or ambient noise level as measured at any property
line of the parcel containing the wind energy system. For example, if the
ambient noise level is less than 55 dB(A) before the wind energy system
begins operation then the noise level when the WES is operating shall not
exceed 55 dB(A) and if the ambient noise level before the wind energy system
begins operating is 60 dB(A) then the noise level when the wind energy system
is operating shall not exceed 60 dB(A). This sound pressure level may be
exceeded during short-term events such as severe wind storms.



         (b)   Wind energy systems which are under single
ownership or control and which involve more than one property shall be
subject to the requirements of division (B)(1)(a) above but the sound
pressure level shall be measured at the property line closest to the wind
energy system at the outside boundary of all property used for the wind
energy system. In addition, if required by the Building Inspector, the
applicant shall provide documentation through modeling or other evidence that
will demonstrate that the wind energy system will not exceed the maximum
permitted sound pressure.



         (c)   At the applicant's expense, a baseline noise
emission study of the proposed site and impact upon all areas within
one-quarter mile of the proposed wind energy system location will be required
by the Board of Zoning Appeals prior to approval of any required special
exception for a wind energy system greater than 35 feet in total height. The
applicant shall also provide estimated noise levels which the wind energy
system is likely to produce at the nearest property lines at the time of
submitting a request for a special exception.



      (2)   Setbacks for wind energy systems. All wind energy
systems shall be located a minimum of 200 feet from public parks, public open
space, public greenways and historic preservation districts, measured from
the nearest property lines or district lines.



         (a)   Tower mounted wind energy system. The minimum
setback for a tower mounted wind energy system from a property line, public
right-of-way, or public overhead utility line shall be a distance which is at
least equal to two times the total height of the wind energy system. All
tower mounted wind energy systems shall be located to the rear of the primary
structure on any lot.



         (b)   Building mounted wind energy system. The setback
for a building mounted wind energy system shall be a minimum of 15 feet from
the property line, public right-of-way, or public overhead utility line if
mounted directly on a roof or other elevated surface of the building. The
setback shall be measured from the furthest outward extension of all moving
parts. The 15-foot minimum setback requirement may be reduced by the Building
Inspector under either or both of the following circumstances:



            1.   If the applicant provides a registered
engineer's certification that the wind energy system is designed to collapse,
curl or bend within a distance less than the required setback of the wind
energy system;



            2.   If the Building Inspector determines that a
lesser setback will not be detrimental to adjoining properties. In making the
determination the Building Inspector shall, at a minimum, take into
consideration the type and location of the building containing the wind
energy system, the type of wind energy system proposed, the installation
requirements of the wind energy system and the location of buildings or uses
on the adjacent properties.



      (3)   Location of tower and guy wires.



         (a)   A tower mounted wind energy system shall only be
located in the rear yard and must be on the same lot as the principal use.



         (b)   Guy wires and anchors shall not be located within
or above the front yard. If guy wires are used, the wires must be sleeved in
a bright colored material extending seven feet above ground, or be surrounded
by a fence at least four feet tall from the guy wire anchor to the point
where the guy wires have seven feet of clearance.



      (4)   Shared wind energy system usage.  A wind energy system
may provide electrical power to more than one dwelling unit or building,
provided that:



         (a)   The dwelling units or buildings are located on
property or properties that are adjacent to the property or properties on
which the wind energy system is located; and



         (b)   All properties serviced by the wind energy system
share common ownership.



      (5)   Rotor clearance.



         (a)   Blade or rotor arcs created by a tower mounted
wind energy system shall have a minimum of 20 feet of clearance above the
ground and over and from any structure, adjoining property or tree.



         (b)   The blade or rotor arcs created by a building
mounted wind energy system shall have a minimum clearance of eight feet above
the roof and shall not extend horizontally beyond the roof of the structure
on which it is mounted.



      (6)   Shadow flicker.  The Building Inspector or the Board of
Zoning Appeals, if a special exception is required, may request that the
applicant perform an analysis of potential shadow flicker. The analysis shall
identify locations of shadow flicker that may occur, and shall describe
measures such as screening that shall be taken to eliminate or minimize the
shadow flicker.



      (7)   Construction codes and interconnection standards.  A
wind energy system shall comply with the following:



         (a)   All applicable federal and state construction and
electrical codes and local building permit requirements.



         (b)   Federal Aviation Administration requirements.



         (c)   The Indiana Tall Structures Act, being I.C.
8-21-10, as amended.



         (d)   The Indiana Public Service Commission and Federal
Energy Regulatory Commission requirements if a wind energy system is an
interconnected system.



         (e)   Frankfort and Clinton County Airport Overlay
District Standards.



      (8)   Safety requirements.



         (a)   Each wind energy system shall be equipped with
both a manual and automatic braking device capable of stopping the wind
energy system operation in high winds or must be designed so that the
rotational speed of the rotor blade does not exceed the design limits of the
rotor.



         (b)   To prevent unauthorized access, each tower mounted
wind energy system must comply with at least one of the following provisions,
and more than one if required by the Building Inspector or the Board of
Zoning Appeals:



            1.   Tower climbing apparatus shall not be located
within 12 feet of the ground.



            2.   A locked anti-climb devise shall be installed
and maintained.



            3.   A tower capable of being climbed shall be
enclosed by a locked, protective fence at least ten feet high with barbed
wire fencing.



         (c)   All wind energy systems shall have lightning
protection.



         (d)   If a tower is supported by guy wires, the wires
shall be clearly visible to a height of at least eight feet above the guy
wire anchors.



      (9)   Signs.



         (a)   Each tower mounted wind energy system shall have
one sign not to exceed two square feet posted at the base of the tower, or,
if the structure is fenced, on the fence. The sign shall include a warning
about high voltage and emergency phone numbers.



         (b)   A wind energy system shall not include any
advertising of any kind, except the nacelle may have lettering that exhibits
the manufacturer's and/or owner's identification.



      (10)   Electromagnetic interference. A wind energy system
shall be designed, constructed and operated so as not to cause radio and
television interference.



      (11)   Maintenance. All wind energy systems must be kept and
maintained in good repair and condition at all times and shall not pose a
potential safety hazard.



      (12)   Inspection. The city shall have the right upon
approving any wind energy system to inspect the premises on which the wind
energy system is located at all reasonable times with permission of the
property owner. The city may hire a consultant to assist with any such
inspections at the applicant's cost.



      (13)   Insurance.



         (a)   The owner or operator of the wind energy system
shall procure comprehensive general liability, casualty and wrongful acts
insurance policies customary to the wind energy system industry with
liability limits of not less than $1,000,000 per occurrence or per claim.



         (b)   The owner or operator shall furnish the Building
Inspector with a certificate or other evidence of such liability insurance
prior to being issued a permit for the construction or operation of the
system.



         (c)   The owner or operator of the wind energy system
shall maintain the required liability insurance for the duration of the
construction, operation and removal of the system. The insurance carrier
shall be instructed to provide the Building Inspector with written notice if
such insurance coverage ceases to be maintained for any reason.



         (d)   Failure of the owner or operator to maintain the
required insurance at all times shall result in termination of the permit.



      (14)   Other.



         (a)   The wind energy system, except for building
mounted wind energy systems, may be located on a lawful parcel or parcels
which do not have frontage on a public or private road.



         (b)   All distribution lines from a wind energy system
shall be located and maintained underground, both on the property on which
the wind energy system is located and off-site.



         (c)   A wind energy system shall be painted a
non-obtrusive (i.e. beige or gray) non-reflective color. No striping of color
or advertisement shall be visible on the blades or tower.



         (d)   A structure or roof mounted wind energy system
shall be located on the rear portion of the roof or structure, and shall not
extend over 15 feet from the peak of the roof of the structure on which it is
mounted to the tip of the rotor blade at its highest point.



         (e)   No permit shall be issued to install a wind energy
system until written evidence has been submitted to the Building Inspector
that the electric utility company providing service to the premises has been
notified of the applicant's intent to install such wind energy system.



         (f)   No permit shall be issued to install a wind energy
system until the applicant has submitted a certificate of design compliance
that the manufacturer of the system's components has obtained from
Underwriters Laboratories, Inc. or an equivalent satisfactory and recognized
safety rating agency.



   (C)   Requirements for wind energy systems - 35 feet or less in wind
energy system height. Any tower mounted or building mounted wind energy
system which is 35 feet or less in total wind energy system height, as
defined in § 155.002, shall be a permitted use in all zoning districts,
subject to the requirements of division (A) above and the following:



      (1)   A building permit shall be obtained from the Building
Inspector to construct and operate any tower mounted or building mounted wind
energy system which is 35 feet or less in total wind energy system height.
The minimum clearance between the ground and any motor blade tip at its
lowest point shall be 20 feet. Any wind energy system which is greater than
35 feet in total wind energy system height shall be required to obtain a
special exception as set forth in §§ 155.001 and 155.101 herein.



      (2)   The following information is required upon submitting an
application for a zoning permit for a wind energy system:



         (a)   Name of the property owner(s) and address.



         (b)   An accurate drawing showing the proposed location
of the wind energy system, property lines, existing building(s), proposed
wind energy system setback, right-of-way lines, public easements and overhead
utility lines and the distance from the wind energy system to principal
buildings on adjacent lots.



         (c)   The proposed type and height of the wind energy
system to be constructed, including the manufacturer and model, product
specifications including maximum noise output (measured in decibels), total
rated generated capacity, dimensions, rotor diameter, and a description of
ancillary functions.



         (d)   If the applicant intends to install an
interconnected wind energy system, the applicant must provide documentation
that the applicable utility company has or will approve the proposed
interconnection.



         (e)   Manufacturer's design standards, specifications
and drawings of the wind energy system.



         (f)   Other relevant information as may be reasonably
requested by the Building Inspector.



      (3)   Final approval of the application for permit shall be
issued only after inspection of the wind energy system by the Building
Inspector, or an authorized agent of the Building Inspector; and only where
the inspection finds that the wind energy system complies with all
requirements of divisions (A) and (B) herein, all applicable state
construction and electrical codes, local building permit requirements, and
all manufacturers design standards, specifications and drawings.



   (D)   Requirements for wind energy systems - over 35 feet in wind
energy system height. Any tower mounted or building mounted wind energy
system which is over 35 feet in total wind energy system height, as defined
in § 155.002, may be allowed as a special exception in all zoning districts
subject to the following requirements:



      (1)   Application requirements. An application form, an
applicant for a wind energy system over 35 feet in total wind energy system
height shall provide the following information as part of the application.



         (a)   The proposed type and height of the wind energy
system, as constructed, including the manufacturer and model, product,
specifications including maximum noise output (measured in decibels), total
rated generating capacity, dimensions, rotor diameter, and a description of
ancillary facilities.



         (b)   If the applicant intends to install an
interconnected wind energy system the applicant must provide documentation
that the company providing electrical service to the affected properties has
or will approve the proposed interconnection.



         (c)   Site plan requirements. A site plan for a wind
energy system for exceeding 35 feet in total height shall be submitted and
shall include the following items with or on the site plan:



            1.   Dimensions of the area purchased or leased
where the wind energy system is to be located.



            2.   Location and height of all existing and
proposed buildings, structures, electrical lines, towers, guy wires, guy wire
anchors, security fencing, and any other above-ground structures proposed or
existing for the parcel or parcels containing the wind energy system.



            3.   Specific distances from the wind energy
system structures to all other buildings, structures, and above ground
utilities which are on the parcel or parcels upon which the wind energy
system is proposed to be located and on abutting parcels.



            4.   Land uses within 300 feet of the parcel.



            5.   Access drives or the wind energy system
including dimensions and composition, with a narrative describing proposed
maintenance of the drives.



            6.   All lighting proposed for the site, including
diagrams of lighting fixtures proposed if requested by the Board of Zoning
Appeals.



            7.   Security measures proposed to prevent
unauthorized trespass and access.



            8.   Manufacturer's design standards,
specifications and drawings of the structural components of the wind energy
system, including structures, towers, bases and footings. A registered
engineer shall certify drawings and any necessary calculations that show that
the system complies with all applicable local, state and federal building,
structural and electrical codes.



            9.   Additional information as may be required by
the Board of Zoning Appeals.



The Board of Zoning Appeals may waive or modify the above requirements at the
request of the applicant if it is determined that those items would not be
needed to properly review the project.



      (2)   Lighting. A wind energy system shall provide lighting as
may be required by the Federal Aviation Administration.



      (3)   Maintenance program required. The applicant shall
provide a written description of the maintenance program to be used to
maintain the wind energy system, including a maintenance schedule of types of
maintenance tasks to be performed.



      (4)   Site standards and visual impact. 



         (a)   A wind energy system shall be designed and placed
in such a manner to minimize adverse visual and noise impacts on neighboring
areas.



         (b)   A wind energy system project with more than one
wind energy system structure or tower shall utilize similar design, size,
color, operation and appearance throughout the project as is practicable.



      (5)   Performance guarantee. If a special exception is granted
pursuant to this section, the Board of Zoning Appeals may require a security
in the form of a cash deposit, surety bond, or irrevocable letter of credit
in a form, amount, and duration with a financial institution deemed
acceptable to the city, which shall be furnished by the applicant to the city
in order to ensure full compliance with this section and any conditions of
approval.



      (6)   Final approval. Final approval shall be issued only
after inspection of the wind energy system by the Building Inspector, or an
authorized agent of the Building Inspector, and only where the inspection
finds that the wind energy system complies with all requirements of divisions
(A) and (C) herein, all applicable state construction and electrical codes,
local building permit requirements, and all manufacturers' design standards,
specifications and drawings.



   (E)   Abandonment and/or decommissioning. Any wind energy system
that has not been used for a continuous 12-month period from the last day of
the known transmission of energy shall be deemed abandoned and shall be
removed by its owner from the premises within 30 days after receiving such
directive by the Building Inspector.



   (F)   Enforcement and penalties.



      (1)   The enforcement of this section shall be the
responsibility of the Building Inspector.



      (2)   An owner/operator, landowner, firm, association,
corporation or representative agent of any wind energy system that is found
by the Building Inspector, to be in violation of the provisions, or to be
abandoned, inoperable, or unsafe:



         (a)   Shall provide abatement by shut down, repair, or
removal of the wind energy system upon written notification from the Building
Inspector.



         (b)   Shall be subject to penalty as provided in §
155.999.



         (c)   May be subject to revocation of the permit for
excessive and continued violations.



         (d)   May be required to reimburse the city for cost(s)
and expenses of obtaining other relief including a temporary or permanent
injunction; such reimbursement may include costs and reasonable attorney fees.



(Ord. 11-06, passed 5-23-11)



NEIGHBORHOOD CONVENIENCE CENTER AND SHOPPING CENTER PLAN



§ 155.060  PERMITTED USES.



   (A)   A neighborhood convenience center or a shopping center plan
may be permitted by the Board of Zoning Appeals as a special exception,
subject to compliance with the requirements contained in this section and
§§ 155.061 and 155.062 and in accordance with the procedures of §§
155.100 through 155.105.



   (B)   The local business uses provided in § 155.041, and also a
filling station, are permitted on a tract of land proposed for a neighborhood
convenience center or a shopping center.  The proposed plan shall include at
least four separate types of business uses as are specifically classified or
implied in the local business use categories in § 155.041, not more than one
of which shall be an automobile service, as set forth in § 155.041 (A), or a
filling station as set forth in § 9 of Appendix A at the end of this chapter.



(Ord. CO-67-2, passed 2-21-67)



§ 155.061  AREA OF LAND REQUIRED.



   The tract of land proposed for a shopping center plan shall be of an
area of not less than 20 acres and the tract of land proposed for a
neighborhood convenience center shall be of an area of not less than four
acres.  The tract shall have a reasonable configuration for its intended
uses.



(Ord. CO-67-2, passed 2-21-67)



§ 155.062  IMPROVEMENT LOCATION PERMIT.



   The Board of Zoning Appeals may order an improvement location permit
issued for a neighborhood convenience center or a shopping center plan in
accordance with the procedure and provisions of §§ 155.110 through 155.115,
and upon an affirmative finding by the Board that the following requirements
have been met by the owner or developers of the tract of land proposed for a
neighborhood convenience center or a shopping center plan.



   (A)   A market analysis.  This requirement shall apply to a
shopping center plan, only.



      (1)   To determine the number, size, and type of stores which
could be expected to operate with a reasonable margin of profit in the
proposed center.



      (2)   To evidence the advisability of locating the proposed
center, where the developers propose to locate it, so as to serve an existing
and potential customer demand.



   (B)   Financial report.  This shall include a statement of
financial responsibility which demonstrates the ability of the developer of
the center to proceed with and complete construction and development.



   (C)   Development plan.  This shall include the following
additional requirements.



      (1)   A plan of landscape development which shall include,
among other considerations, an area of at least ten feet in width along all
streets, with the exception of approved entrances, which border the proposed
center, to be planted and maintained with trees and shrubbery to serve as a
screen for the parking area.



      (2)   A planting screen, consisting of suitable shrubbery,
maintained at a six-foot height by six-foot width, to be planted wherever the
proposed center would abut residential use.



      (3)   Provision for one off-street parking space, at least 270
square feet in area, for each 60 square feet of sales area in the center.



      (4)   No buildings or paved areas (other than access drives)
may be located closer than 50 feet to any area used or zoned for residential
purposes, in order to create a greenbelt.  This greenbelt shall be
maintained as lawn together with appropriate landscape development and screen
planting specified in divisions (A) (1) and (A) (2) above.



      (5)   An adequate number and proper arrangement of loading and
unloading berths shall be shown in the development plan and provided by the
developer.



   (D)   Other authority approval.  Any other authority approval
required when applicable, such as the State Board of Health, the State
Highway Department, and the like, shall accompany the application.



   (E)   Outdoor signs and lighting.  The location, effect, and
arrangement of all outdoor advertising signs proposed to be erected shall be
subject to the approval of the Board of Zoning Appeals.



(Ord. CO-67-2, passed 2-21-67)



INDUSTRIAL USES



§ 155.070  RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   The industrial uses defined in § 155.071, including accessory
buildings and uses, are permitted in the districts indicated in § 5 of
Appendix A at the end of this chapter, in accordance with the requirements of
this section and § 5 of Appendix A.  No activity involving the storage,
utilization, or manufacture of materials or products which decompose by
detonation shall be permitted unless specifically approved by the Common
Council.  This activity shall be conducted in accordance with the rules
promulgated by the State Fire Marshal.  These materials shall include, but
are not limited to, all primary explosives such as lead azide, lead
styphnate, fulminates, and tetracene; all high explosives such as TNT, RDX,
HMX, PETN, and picric acid; propellants and components thereof, such as
nitrocellulose, black powder, boron hydrides, and hydrazine and its
derivatives; pyrotechnics and fireworks such as magnesium powder, potassium
chlorate, and potassium nitrate; blasting explosives such as dynamite and
nitroglycerine; unstable organic compounds such as acetyrides, tetrazoles,
and ozonides; strong oxidizing agents such as liquid oxygen, perchloric acid,
perchlorates, chlorates, and hydrogen peroxide in concentrations greater than
35%; nuclear fuels and fissionable materials and products, and reactor
elements such as Uranium 235 and Plutonium 239.



   (B)   The restrictions of this section shall not apply to the
following.



      (1)   The activities of site preparation or construction,
maintenance, repair, alteration, modification, or improvement of buildings,
equipment, or other improvements on or within the lot line.



      (2)   The operation of motor vehicles or other facilities for
the transportation of personnel, materials, or products.



      (3)   Conditions beyond the control of the user such as fire,
explosion, accidents, failure, or breakdown of equipment or facilities or
emergencies.



      (4)   Safety or emergency warning signals or alarms necessary
for the protection of life, limb or property.



(Ord. CO-67-2, passed 2-21-67)  Penalty, see § 155.999



§ 155.071  ENCLOSED AND OPEN INDUSTRIAL USES.



   (A)   An Enclosed Industrial Use is one which is conducted entirely
within enclosed buildings of any size, provided they meet the yard
requirements and conform to the standards in §§ 155.072 through 155.081.



   (B)   An Open Industrial Use is one which requires both buildings
and open area for manufacturing, fabricating, processing, extraction, heavy
repairing, dismantling, storage, or disposal of equipment, raw materials,
manufactured products or wastes; and land or buildings in districts
permitting an Open Industrial Use.  It shall be used so as to comply to the
standards in §§ 155.072 through 155.081.



(Ord. CO-67-2, passed 2-21-67)



§ 155.072  HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Chimneys, cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, fire towers,
penthouses, tanks, water towers, distribution poles and lines, transmission
towers, or essential mechanical appurtenances, may be erected to any height
not prohibited by other laws and ordinances.



   (B)   The maximum height requirements, as specified in § 5 of
Appendix A at the end of this chapter, may be increased if the portion of the
building above the maximum height requirement is set back from the building
line one foot for each two feet of additional height.



(Ord. CO-67-2, passed 2-21-67)



§ 155.073  SMOKE, GAS, AND PARTICULATE MATTER EMISSIONS.



   (A)   For enclosed industrial use the emission of more than 70 smoke
units per hour per stack and emissions in excess of Ringelmann No. 2 are
prohibited, except that for one hour during any 24-hour period, this rate may
be increased to 80 smoke units per stack up to and including Ringelmann No. 3
for purging, soot blowing, and fire cleaning.  For open industrial use the
emission of more than 90 smoke units per hour per stack and emission in
excess of Ringelmann No. 3 are prohibited, except that for one hour period
during the 24 this rate may be increased to 120 smoke units per hour per
stack, still at Ringelmann No. 3, for purposes of process purging, soot
blowing, and fire cleaning.



   (B)   The emission of toxic or injurious fumes and gases shall be
controlled so as to comply with the following:



      (1)   The emission from any source shall not cause at or
beyond any lot line, concentrations of toxic or injurious fumes and gases in
excess of 10% for an enclosed industrial use, and 25% for an open industrial
use, of the threshold limit as set for the fume or gas in question in the
"Threshold Limit Values for Toxic Materials in Industry" issued by the
Indiana State Board of Health, from the American Conference of Governmental
Hygienists, latest issue.



      (2)   The emission of any gas or fumes across lot lines in
concentrations that are detrimental to or endanger public health, safety,
comfort, and welfare or shall cause injury or damage to property or business
is prohibited.



   (C)   The rate of emission of particulate matter from an individual
process within the boundaries of any lot shall not exceed a figure of 0.06
pounds per 1,000 pounds of effluent gas for enclosed industrial use, nor 0.2
pounds per 1,000 pounds of effluent gas for open industrial use.  For
enclosed industrial use and open industrial use not more than 50% by weight
of particles larger than 44 microns (325) mesh shall be allowed.



(Ord. CO-67-2, passed 2-21-67)  Penalty, see § 155.999



§ 155.074  DISPOSAL OF WASTES.



   The disposal of wastes discharged into public streams and sewage
systems shall meet the requirements of the water pollution control provisions
under state law.



(Ord. CO-67-2, passed 2-2l-67)  Penalty, see § 155.999



§ 155.075  ODORS.



   Any enclosed or open industrial use activity or operation which
releases odors to the atmosphere shall be so controlled as to insure that it
will produce no public nuisance or hazard at or beyond the nearest residence
or suburban district boundary line.



(Ord. CO-67-2, passed 2-21-67)  Penalty, see § 155.999



§ 155.076  GLARE AND HEAT.



   No enclosed or open industrial use operation, activity, or structure
shall cause heat or glare in such a manner as to be a public nuisance at or
beyond any residence, suburban, or business district boundary.



(Ord. CO-67-2, passed 2-21-67)  Penalty, see § 155.999



§ 155.077  VIBRATION RESTRICTIONS.



   Any enclosed or open industrial use creating intense earth-shaking
vibrations such as are created by a heavy drop forge shall be set back from a
residence or suburban district boundary at least 250 feet, and at least 150
feet from a business district boundary. Earth-shaking vibrations at the
industrial property line shall not be in violation of this chapter as long as
the vibration is not perceptible without the aid of instruments.



(Ord. CO-67-2, passed 2-21-67)  Penalty, see § 155.999



§ 155.078  NOISE.



   (A)   At no point on the boundary of the I-2 Enclosed Industrial or
I-3 Reserved Industrial District, or any district which permits an enclosed
industrial use, shall the sound pressure level of any enclosed industrial use
operation or plant (other than background noises produced by sources not
under the control of this chapter) exceed the decibel limits in the following
octave bands.



 




Enclosed Industrial Use



Octave Band Frequency (Cycles Per Second)
 
Maximum Permitted Sound Level (In Decibels) 125 Feet From District Adjoining
Residence or Suburban District Boundaries
 
Maximum Permitted Sound Level (In Decibels) 125 Feet From District Adjoining
Business District Boundaries


0 to 75
 
75
 
80


75 to 150
 
70
 
75


150 to 300
 
65
 
70


300 to 600
 
59
 
64


600 to 1200
 
53
 
58


1200 to 4800
 
48
 
53


2400 to 4800
 
48
 
49


Above 4800
 
41
 
46




 



   (B)   At no point 125 feet from the boundary of an I-l Open
Industrial District, shall the sound pressure level of any open industrial
operation or plant (other than background noises produced by sources not
under the control of this chapter) exceed the decibel limits in the following
octave bands.



 




Open Industrial Use



Octave Band Frequency (Cycles Per Second)
 
Maximum Permitted Sound Level (In Decibels) 125 Feet From District Adjoining
Residence or Suburban District Boundaries
 
Maximum Permitted Sound Level (In Decibels) 125 Feet From District Adjoining
Business District Boundaries


0 to 75
 
75
 
81


75 to 150
 
70
 
76


150 to 300
 
66
 
72


300 to 600
 
62
 
68


600 to 1200
 
57
 
63


1200 to 4800
 
53
 
59


2400 to 4800
 
49
 
55


Above 4800
 
45
 
51




 



   (C)   Sound levels shall be measured with a sound level meter and
associated octave band analyzer or filter, manufactured in compliance with
standards prescribed by the American Standards Association.



(Ord. CO-67-2, passed 2-21-67)  Penalty, see § 155.999



§ 155.079  FIRE HAZARDS.



   The storage, utilization, or manufacture of solid materials or products
ranging from incombustible to moderate burning is permitted. The storage,
utilization, or manufacture of solid materials or products ranging from free
or active burning to intense burning is permitted provided the following
conditions are met.



   (A)   For enclosed industrial use and open industrial use the
materials shall be stored, utilized, or manufactured in such a manner and
protected by those means as approved by the State Fire Marshal.



   (B)   For enclosed industrial use and open industrial use the
storage, utilization, or manufacture of flammable liquids or gases which
produce flammable or explosive vapors shall be permitted in accordance with
rules and standards promulgated by the National Board of Fire Underwriters
for the "Storage and Handling of Liquified Petroleum Gases", latest issue, as
recommended by the National Fire Protection Association.



(Ord. CO-67-2, passed 2-21-67)  Penalty, see § 155.999



§ 155.080  PARKING AND LOADING AND UNLOADING REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Each use shall provide one parking space for each two
employees, on combined employment of the two largest successive shifts,
located on the same lot as the use, or as an exception within 300 feet
thereof.



   (B)   Groups of uses requiring parking space may join in
establishing a private parking area with capacity aggregating that required
for each participating use.



   (C)   Each use shall provide loading and unloading berths, located
on the same lot as the use, as specified in § 6 of Appendix A at the end of
this chapter.



   (D)   One-half of an alley abutting the rear or the side of a lot
may be included in the required rear yard or side yard, respectively, but the
alley space shall not be included for loading and unloading berths.



(Ord. CO-67-2, passed 2-21-67)  Penalty, see § 155.999



§ 155.081  MORE THAN ONE PRINCIPAL BUILDING PERMITTED.



   In all districts permitting enclosed industrial use or open industrial
use, it is permissible to erect more than one principal building devoted to
enclosed industrial use or open industrial use on a lot.



(Ord. CO-67-2, passed 2-21-67)



CONTINGENT USES AND REQUIREMENTS



§ 155.090  WHERE PERMITTED.



   (A)   Contingent uses defined in division (B) below, including
accessory buildings and uses, are permitted in the districts indicated in §
7 of Appendix A at the end of this chapter, subject to the provisions of §§
155.091 through 155.095.



   (B)   A contingent use is one which is likely or liable, but not
certain, to occur and which is not inappropriate to the principal uses of the
district in which it may be located.



(Ord. CO-67-2, passed 2-21-67)



§ 155.091  PARKING REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   A church or temple requiring parking area at times when nearby
uses do not need their parking facilities, may by agreement approved by the
Board of Zoning Appeals, utilize those facilities in lieu of providing their
own parking facilities.



   (B)   The number of parking spaces to be provided shall conform to
the requirements of § 7 of Appendix A at the end of this chapter. The
required number of parking spaces shall be provided on the same lot with the
use, or as an exception within 300 feet thereof.



(Ord. CO-67-2, passed 2-21-67)



§ 155.092  YARD AND SETBACK REQUIREMENTS.



   The yard and setback requirements for contingent uses shall be as
follows.



   (A)   For contingent uses proposed to be located in S Suburban
Residence, A, B, and C Residence, and I-3 Reserved Industrial Districts, the
requirements shall be the same as those for single-family dwelling.



   (B)   For contingent uses proposed to be located in the D Residence,
LB Local Business, and GB General Business Districts, the requirements shall
be the same as those for a multi-family dwelling.



   (C)   For contingent uses proposed to be located in the RB Roadside
Business District, the requirements shall be the same as those for a roadside
business use.



   (D)   For contingent uses proposed to be located in the I-l Open
Industrial and I-2 Enclosed Industrial Districts, the requirements shall be
the same as those for an enclosed industrial use.



(Ord. CO-67-2, passed 2-21-67)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 155.093  BUILDING HEIGHT.



   The Building Height for contingent uses shall be as provided in § 8 of
Appendix A at the end of this chapter and in accordance with the following.



   (A)   Buildings may be erected higher than the normal maximum
heights set forth in § 8 of Appendix A, provided that buildings shall be set
back from the required side and rear yard lines one foot for each two feet of
height above 25 feet in the S Surburban Residence, A Residence, RB Roadside
Business, and I-3 Reserved Industrial Districts, but not to exceed 35 feet in
any case; 35 feet in the B, C, and D Residence, and LB Local Business
Districts, but not to exceed 45 feet in any case; and 60 feet in the GB
General Business, I-l Open Industrial, and I-2 Enclosed Industrial Districts,
but not to exceed 70 feet in any case.



   (B)   In all districts, spires, church steeples, chimneys, cooling
towers, elevator bulkheads, fire towers, scenery lofts, power transmission
lines or towers and distribution poles and lines, and essential mechanical
appurtenances may be erected to any height not prohibited by other laws or
ordinances.



(Ord. CO-67-2, passed 2-21-67)



§ 155.094  SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS.



   Contingent uses proposed to be located in the RB Roadside Business
District are special exceptions, and shall meet the requirements set forth in
§§ 155.100 through 155.105.



(Ord. CO-67-2, passed 2-21-67)



§ 155.095  EXISTING USE.



   An existing use which is included herein as a contingent use, and which
is located in a district in which the contingent use is permitted, is a
conforming use.  Any expansion of the contingent use involving the
enlargement of the buildings, structures, and land area devoted to the use
shall be subject to the requirements of §§ 155.090 through 155.095.



(Ord. CO-67-2, passed 2-21-67)



SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS



§ 155.100  WHERE PERMITTED.



   (A)   The special exceptions listed in § 9 of Appendix A at the end
of this chapter and their accessory buildings and uses may be permitted by
the Board of Zoning Appeals in the districts indicated therein, in accordance
with the procedure set forth in §§ 155.101 through 155.105 and the
requirements listed in § 9 of Appendix A.



   (B)   Special exceptions are uses publicly operated, and those uses
traditionally affected with public interest, and those uses entirely private
in character, but of such an unusual nature that their operation may give
rise to unique problems with respect to their impact upon neighboring
property and public facilities.



(Ord. CO-67-2, passed 2-21-67)



§ 155.101  IMPROVEMENT LOCATION PERMIT; HEARING.



   (A)   Upon receipt of an application for an improvement location
permit for a special exception by the Building Inspector, the application
shall be referred to the Board of Zoning Appeals.  A copy of each
application shall be referred concurrently to the City Plan Commission.  The
Board shall then proceed with a hearing.



   (B)   Upon a hearing, and after the findings contained in divisions
(B) (1) through (B) (6) below, the Board shall direct the Building Inspector
to issue the improvement location permit for the special exception, or the
Board shall direct the Building Inspector to reject the application.  The
findings of the Board and its order to the Building Inspector shall be in
writing.



      (1)   The establishment, maintenance, or operation of the
special exception will not be detrimental to or endanger the public health,
safety, morals, or general welfare.



      (2)   The special exception will not be injurious to the use
and enjoyment of other property in the immediate vicinity for the purposes
already permitted, nor substantially diminish and impair property value
within the neighborhood.



      (3)   The establishment of the special exception will not
impede the normal and orderly development and improvement of surrounding
property for uses permitted in the district.



      (4)   Adequate utilities, access roads, drainage, and other
necessary facilities have been or are being provided.



      (5)   Adequate measures have been or will be taken to provide
ingress and egress so designed as to minimize traffic congestion in the
public streets.



      (6)   The special exception will be located in a district
where the use is permitted and all other requirements set forth in § 9 of
Appendix A at the end of this chapter applicable to the special exception
will be met.



   (C)   The Board may impose additional conditions to assure that the
special exceptions will conform to the intent of this chapter.



   (D)   Upon the receipt of an application for an improvement location
permit for a business or enclosed industrial use proposed to be located in an
RB Roadside Business District, the permit therefore shall not be granted
until a development plan has been approved as a special exception in
accordance with the procedure set forth in this section, and the basic
requirements and provisions of §§ 155.040 through 155.055, and §§ 155.070
through 155.081, and §§ 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6 of Appendix A at the end of this
chapter pertaining to uses in the RB District shall be met.



   (E)   Any person who is issued an improvement location permit for a
special exception, who fails to commence construction within 12 months after
the permit is issued, or who fails to carry to completion the total
development plan thereof within three years after the construction is begun,
whichever is later, or who fails to conform to the provisions of the
development plan and supporting data finally approved by the Board and upon
the basis of which the improvement location permit was issued, may be
required by the Board upon its own motion, and shall be required by the Board
upon written petition of any person deeming himself aggrieved, to show cause
why the approval should not be withdrawn and the improvement location permit
revoked.



   (F)   The holder of an improvement location permit for a special
exception may apply to the Board at any time for an alteration, change,
amendment, or extension of the application or development plan upon which the
permit was based.  Upon receipt of the application, the Board shall proceed
as in the case of original applications for an improvement location permit
for a special exception.  In the event the Board shall approve and order the
application or development plan changed, altered, amended, or extended, it
shall notify the Building Inspector who shall issue an amended improvement
location permit accordingly.



(Ord. CO-67-2, passed 2-21-67)



§ 155.102  EXISTING USE.



   An existing use which is listed as a special exception, and which is
located in a district in which the special exception may be permitted, is a
conforming use, provided the use meets the minimum lot area requirement set
forth in § 9 of Appendix A at the end of this chapter.  Any expansion of
the special exception involving the enlargement of buildings, structures, and
land area devoted to the use, shall be subject to the requirements and
procedure described in this subchapter.



(Ord. CO-67-2, passed 2-21-67)



§ 155.103  GARDEN APARTMENT USE.



   (A)   A garden apartment use, which is an architectural and
functional grouping of dwelling units in one or more buildings, with at least
two dwelling units in each building and appropriate associated and accessory
uses, which is the central feature of a development plan composed of building
area, parking area, landscape development and planting areas, and other land
features appropriate for its use as dwellings, and which conforms to the
standards and requirements of this chapter, may be permitted as a special
exception in the S Suburban Residence, D Residence, LB Local Business, RB
Roadside Business, and GB General Business Districts, in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter.  However, each garden apartment use shall have
at least six dwelling units.



   (B)   A garden apartment use shall have the following minimum lot
sizes in the districts indicated according to the total number and type of
dwelling units involved.



      (1)   The minimum lot size for a garden apartment use having
eight or less dwelling units shall be at least 60,000 square feet in the S
and RB Districts, 12,000 square feet in the D and LB Districts, and 10,000
square feet in the GB District; or the minimum lot size shall be determined
by computation in accordance with the following table.  However, the minimum
lot size shall be the larger size of these two methods.



 


 
S and RB Districts
 
D and LB Districts
 
GB District


Area per dwelling unit for each first four units in square feet
 
10,000
 
2,000
 
1,500


Area in square feet for each additional one-bedroom dwelling unit
 
5,000
 
1,000
 
1,000


Area in square feet for each additional two-bedroom dwelling unit
 
7,500
 
1,500
 
1,500


Area in square feet for each additional three-bedroom dwelling unit
 
10,000
 
2,000
 
1,500



 



      (2)   The minimum lot size for a garden apartment use having
more than eight dwelling units shall be in accordance with a computation
determined in accordance with the table below, provided that in no case shall
the minimum lot size be less than 60,000 square feet in the S and RB
Districts, 12,000 square feet in the D and LB Districts, and 10,000 square
feet in the GB District.



 


 
S and RB Districts
 
D and LB Districts
 
GB District


Area in square feet for each one-bedroom dwelling unit
 
5,000
 
1,000
 
750


Area in square feet for each two-bedroom dwelling unit
 
7,500
 
1,500
 
1,000


Area in square feet for each three-bedroom dwelling unit
 
10,000
 
2,000
 
1,500



 



      (3)   For four- or five-bedroom dwelling units, the lot size
requirements in the tables in divisions (B) (1) and (B) (2) above for
three-bedroom dwelling units shall apply.  In the event an accessory
dwelling unit is provided for a caretaker-superintendent, the lot size
requirement for a one-bedroom dwelling unit shall apply.  Any type of
dwelling unit may be included for the purpose of calculating the lot size
requirement for the "first four units" in the tables.  Efficiency units are
hereby classed as one-bedroom units.



   (C)   The minimum lot width for a garden apartment use shall be as
follows.



      (1)   For a garden apartment use having eight or less dwelling
units in the S and RB Districts, 200 feet; in the D and LB Districts, 80
feet; and in the GB District, 60 feet.



      (2)   For a garden apartment use having more than eight
dwelling units in the S and RB Districts, 15 feet per dwelling unit for the
first 13 units; in the D and LB Districts, ten feet for the first 13 units;
and in the GB District, six feet for the first 13 units.



   (D)   The maximum building height for garden apartment use shall be
35 feet in any district.



   (E)   The minimum front yard for garden apartment use shall be 75
feet in the S and RB Districts; 35 feet in the D and LB Districts; and 20
feet in the GB Districts.



   (F)   The minimum dimension for one side yard shall be 15% of the
required lot width, provided that both side yards shall have a minimum
dimension of 30% of the actual lot width.  The other provisions for
residential uses as set forth in §§ 155.031 through 155.035 shall not apply.



   (G)   The minimum rear yard for a garden apartment use shall be 40
feet in the S and RB Districts; and 20 feet in the D, LB, and GB Districts. 
The other provisions for residential uses as set forth in§ § 155.031
through 155.035 shall not apply.



   (H)   Accessory buildings are permitted in the rear yard and their
location shall be subject to the approval of the Board of Zoning Appeals.



   (I)   The minimum vehicle parking spaces to be provided on the lot
for a garden apartment use shall be as follows.



      (1)   One space for each one-bedroom dwelling unit or
efficiency apartment.



      (2)   One and one-half spaces for each two-bedroom dwelling
unit.



      (3)   Two spaces for each three, or more, bedroom dwelling
unit.



   (J)   A development plan for a garden apartment use shall accompany
the application for an improvement location permit.  The development plan
shall meet the following requirements, in addition to the requirements set
forth in this chapter and in § 155.104 (I) (3) through (I) (5).



      (1)  The building shall be so designed or located so that the
distance from any window of any room proposed to be used for human habitation
shall be not less than 40 feet from the wall of any structure on the
property.  This distance shall be measured by a line perpendicular to the
plane of the surface of the window, except that this distance may be reduced
to not less than 30 feet for an exposure where a room is a bathroom or
laundry utility room or is used as a community or group meeting room or for a
similar purpose.  No separate freestanding building shall be closer than 20
feet to any other building on or off the site or lot.  The Board of Zoning
Appeals may reduce any of these dimensions, if in its judgment, the intent of
this division (J) is preserved.



      (2)   In the event that more than one building is proposed,
they shall be designed to be located so that not more than two buildings are
in a straight, unbroken line.  Each garden apartment use building shall be
designed with setbacks or breaks of not less than six feet to all exterior
walls for every two building units.



(Ord. CO-67-2, passed 2-21-67; Am. Ord. CO-77-21, passed 10-19-77)  Penalty,
see § 155.999



§ 155.104  HIGH-RISE APARTMENT USE.



   (A)   A high-rise apartment use, which is an architectural and
functional grouping of dwelling units in one or more buildings, with at least
eight dwelling units in each building and associated and accessory uses,
which is the central feature of a development plan composed of building area,
parking area, landscape development and planting areas, and other land
features appropriate for its use as dwellings, and which conforms to the
standards and requirements of this chapter, may be permitted as a special
exception in the S Suburban Residence, D Residence, LB Local Business, RB
Roadside Business, and GB General Business Districts, and in accordance with
the additional requirements set out in divisions (B) through (I) below.



   (B)   A high-rise apartment use shall have a height in excess of 35
feet.



   (C)   The minimum front yard for a high-rise apartment use shall be
75 feet in the S and RB Districts, and 25 feet in the D, LB, and GB Districts.



   (D)   A side yard shall be provided on the side of the high-rise
apartment use building nearest the side lot line where the maximum horizontal
shadow would be cast, equal to the vertical dimension, measured from the lot
ground level to the highest point of the building which casts the shadow,
diminished by the dimension of the side yard required on an adjoining lot, or
by the rear yard required on an abutting lot, provided that the shadow shall
not extend further than the opposite property line of any street adjoining
the lot on which the high-rise apartment use is located.  The Board of
Zoning Appeals may waive the size yard dimension if the high-rise apartment
use building is proposed to be constructed without windows on a site which
abuts an existing building constructed without windows.  A side yard shall
be provided on the side of the building opposite to the side which casts a
shadow which shall have a dimension of one-fourth of the height of the
building.



   (E)   A development plan shall be submitted with the application for
an improvement location permit for a high-rise apartment use and shall
include a complete analysis of the shadows which would be cast by the
building up to a maximum of a dimension equal to the height of the
building.  This analysis shall give consideration to the orientation of the
building in order that the Board of Zoning Appeals may be fully aware of the
effects of shadows on neighboring properties and also that the Board may
reduce the requirements for side yards so long as the shadowing of adjoining
or abutting lots will not be exceeded as set forth herein.  In no case shall
the dimension of a side yard be less than one-fourth of the height of the
building, except as provided herein.



   (F)   The minimum rear yard dimension, except as otherwise provided
herein, shall be 25 feet in the S and RB Districts, and 20 feet in the D, LB,
and GB Districts.



   (G)   Accessory buildings are permitted in the side yard and rear
yard and their location shall be subject to the approval of the Board of
Zoning Appeals.



   (H)   The minimum vehicle parking spaces to be provided on the lot
shall be one and one-half spaces for each high-rise apartment use dwelling
unit, provided that the Board of Zoning Appeals may reduce this requirement
if the applicant can demonstrate that a permanent need for this parking ratio
does not exist.



   (I)   The development plan for a high-rise apartment use shall meet
the following requirements, in addition to other requirements set forth in
this chapter.



      (1)   The building shall be so designed or located so that the
distance from any window of any room proposed to be used for human habitation
shall be not less than 40 feet from the wall of any structure on the
property, or a distance equal to 50% of the height of the tallest adjacent
building, whichever dimension is larger.  This distance shall be measured by
a line perpendicular to the plane of the surface of the window.  No separate
freestanding building shall be located closer than 30 feet to any other
building on or off the lot. The Board of Zoning Appeals may reduce any of
these dimensions, if in its judgment, the intent of this division is
preserved.



      (2)   In the event that more than one building is proposed,
they shall be designed to be located so that not more than two buildings are
in a straight, unbroken line.  Each high-rise apartment use building shall
be designed with setbacks or breaks of not less than 20 feet to all exterior
walls for every two building units.



      (3)   Off-street parking space and adequate space for service
facilities shall be provided in the side yard or rear yard and shall in no
event be located in the required front yard.  No off-street parking area or
service facility area shall be located closer than ten feet to any side lot
line.  The off-street parking areas and service facility areas shall have
sufficient lighting facilities, which shall be located and adjusted so that
the glare or beam is directed away from any adjoining property, public
street, or high-rise apartment use dwelling windows.



      (4)   Any open-air off-street parking area and service
facility area shall be suitably screened with shrubbery or trees along all
streets and adjoining or adjacent property lines on the lot.  The locations
and names of the shrubbery planting shall be indicated on the development
plan or on a separate landscape plan which shall become a part of the
application.  The shrubbery may be planted informally or in a row and may
include several varieties and sizes provided that the Board of Zoning Appeals
shall be satisfied that the shrubbery will screen any parking areas and
expected ground activity from the view of abutting or opposite property, and
also that vision clearance at access points will be provided for safety
purposes.



      (5)   The location of all driveways, parking areas, service
facility areas, and streets shall be shown on the development plan. Also, the
location, type, and size of proposed public water, sewage, and drainage
facilities shall either be shown on the plan or on accompanying drawings.



(Ord. CO-67-2, passed 2-21-67)  Penalty, see § 155.999



§ 155.105  PLANTING SCREEN.



   Whenever a planting screen is required as a part of the development
plan, suitable shrubbery shall be provided and maintained so as to provide a
tight screen, effective at all times of the year. The locations and names of
the shrubbery planting shall be indicated on the development plan or on a
separate landscape plan which shall become a part of the application.  The
shrubbery may be planted informally or in a row and may include several
varieties and sizes provided that the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be
satisfied that the shrubbery will screen any parking areas and expected
ground activity from the view of abutting or opposite residence properties,
and also that vision clearance at access points will be provided for safety
purposes.



(Ord. CO-67-2, passed 2-21-67)  Penalty, see § 155.999



IMPROVEMENT LOCATION PERMITS



§ 155.110  REQUIRED.



   Within the city and its jurisdictional area, no structure, improvement,
or use of land may be altered, changed, placed, erected, or located on
platted or unplatted lands, unless the structure, improvement, or use, and
its location conform with the master plan of the city and Chapter 151, and an
improvement location permit for the structure, improvement, or use has been
issued.



('75 Code, §  16.01)  (Ord. PO-67-1, passed 2-21-67)  Penalty, see §
155.999



§ 155.111  APPLICATION.



   (A)   The Building Inspector of the city shall issue an improvement
location permit, on written application, when the proposed structure,
improvement, or use and its location conform in all respects to the master
plan of the city.  Every application for an improvement location permit
shall be accompanied by a site plan, drawn to scale, showing the location of
the structure, improvement, or use to be altered, changed, placed, erected,
or located, the dimensions of the lot to be improved, the size of the yards
and open spaces, existing and proposed streets and alleys adjoining or within
the lot, and the manner in which the location is to be improved.  ('75
Code,§ §  16.02 and 16.03)  (Ord. PO-67-1, passed 2-21-67; Am. Ord.
85-22, passed 1-27-86)



   (B)   Any person who shall make application for an improvement
location permit shall, at the time of making the application, furnish a site
plan or development plan of the real estate upon which the application is
made, as provided in division (A) above, at least five days prior to the
issuance of the improvement location permit.  The five days may be waived by
the Building Inspector.  The site plan shall be drawn to scale showing the
following items, both existing and proposed.



      (1)   Legal or site description of the real estate involved.



      (2)   Location and size of all buildings and structures.



      (3)   Width and length of all entrances and exits to and from
the real estate.



      (4)   All adjacent and adjoining roads or highways.



   (C)   An application for an improvement location permit for any
enclosed industrial use or open industrial use, subject to the provisions of
§§ 155.070 through 155.081 and § 5 of Appendix A at the end of this
chapter, shall be accompanied by a certificate of compliance subscribed by a
registered professional engineer or architect, certifying that the use
intended will satisfy the standards of the enclosed industrial use or open
industrial use, as the case may be, and in the district in which it is to be
located.  The Building Inspector may take ten days in which to study the
application, during which time he may consult with appropriate technical
consultants.  If, after the ten-day period, the Building Inspector has not
required any additional information or stated any objections in writing, the
Building Inspector shall issue the improvement location permit.



   (D)   Site plans or development plans furnished with the application
for an improvement location permit shall be filed and shall become a
permanent record.



   (E)   An application for an improvement location permit for any use
shall not be approved until it has been ascertained by the Building Inspector
that the proposed use and minimum lot size and width meets the minimum
standards for a sewage disposal system as required by the Clinton County
Health Department.



(Ord. CO-67-2, passed 2-21-67)



§ 155.112  ISSUANCE; TRACTS ADJOINING THOROUGHFARES.



   (A)   The Building Inspector shall issue an improvement location
permit for a special exception only following receipt of notice from the
Board of Zoning Appeals that the application therefor has been approved by
the Board.  (Ord. CO-67-2, passed 2-21-67)



   (B)   Before an improvement location permit is issued for a tract
adjoining a thoroughfare or a proposed thoroughfare, the thorough-fare must
be either paved according to the standards of Chapters 150 through 155 of
this code, or arrangements satisfactory to the City Plan Commission are made
for the paving thereof.  (Ord. PO-77-1, passed 8-3-77)



§ 155.113  APPEALS.



   (A)   Any decision of the Building Inspector of the city concerning
the issuance of an improvement location permit may be appealed to the Board
of Zoning Appeals when the decision in question involves a requirement of the
current zoning code of the city, as amended, or to the City Plan Commission
when the decision in question involves the requirements of other parts of the
master plan by any person claiming to be adversely affected by the decision.



('75 Code, § 16.04)



   (B)   Decisions of the City Plan Commission may be reviewed by
certiorari procedure as provided for the appeal of zoning cases from the
Board of Zoning Appeals.  ('75 Code, § 16.05)



(Ord. PO-67-1, passed 2-21-67)



§ 155.114  CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.



   (A)   No land shall be occupied or used and no building hereafter
erected, reconstructed, or structurally altered shall be occupied or used, in
whole or in part, for any purpose whatsoever, until a certificate of
occupancy has been issued stating that the building and use comply with all
of the provisions of this chapter applicable to the building or premises or
the use in the district in which it is to be located.  When the improvement
covered by the improvement location permit has been completed in substantial
conformity with the site plan or development plan submitted in the
application pursuant to § 155.111, a certificate of occupancy shall then be
issued.



   (B)   No change shall be made in the use of land, except as provided
in this chapter, or in the use of any building or part thereof, now or
hereafter erected, reconstructed, or structurally altered, without a
certificate of occupancy having been issued by the Building Inspector.  No
certificate shall be issued to make a change unless it is in conformity with
the provisions of this chapter.



   (C)   A certificate of occupancy shall be applied for coincidentally
with the application for an improvement location permit and shall be issued
within ten days after notification by the applicant thereof that the lawful
erection, reconstruction, or structural alteration of the building or other
improvement of the land shall have been completed.



   (D)   A record of all certificates of occupancy shall be kept on
file in the office of the Building Inspector and copies shall be furnished on
request to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the
building or land affected.



   (E)   No improvement location permit shall be issued for excavation
for, or the erection, reconstruction, or structural alteration of, any
building before application has been made for a certificate of occupancy.



(Ord. CO-67-2, passed 2-21-67)  Penalty, see § 155.999



§ 155.115  COMPLETION TIME LIMIT.



   The work or use authorized by any improvement location permit,
certificate of occupancy, permit for a variance or a contingent use, or any
other permit, except for a special exception, must be commenced within 60
days of the date of issuance of the certificate or permit; otherwise, it
shall lapse and become null and void.  All work so authorized shall be
completed within 180 days from the date of issuance of the permit therefor,
except for a special exception, and provided that for good cause shown the
Board of Public Works and Safety may extend the work completion time for a
period of 90 days. Any additional extensions needed after the 270-day period
may be granted by the Board of Public Works an Safety after a hearing
requested by the applicant at the Board's next meeting.  Any further
extensions to be granted by the Board will be granted only for good cause
established by the applicant.



(Ord. CO-67-2, passed 2-21-67; Am. Ord. 86-6, passed 5-12-86)



§ 155.116  REMEDIES.



   (A)   The City Plan Commission, the Building Inspector, any
designated enforcement official, or any person, firm, or corporation, jointly
or severally aggrieved, may institute a suit for injunction in the Clinton
Circuit Court to restrain an individual or a governmental unit from violating
the provisions of this subchapter.



   (B)   The Commission or the Board of Zoning Appeals may also
institute a suit for mandatory injunction directing any individual,
corporation, or a governmental unit to remove a structure erected in
violation of the provisions of this subchapter.



   (C)   Any building, erected, raised, or converted, or land or
premises used in violation of any provisions of this subchapter or the
requirements thereof, is declared to be a common nuisance and as such may be
abated in the manner that nuisances are now or may hereafter be abated under
existing law.



('75 Code, §  16.06)  (Ord. PO-67-1, passed 2-21-67)



ADMINISTRATION



§ 155.125  BUILDING INSPECTOR.



   There is established in the city the office of Building Inspector. 
The Building Inspector shall be appointed by the Mayor and he shall hold
office at the pleasure of the Mayor.  The Building Inspector shall have the
powers, rights, duties, and authority, and shall perform those services that
may be provided, detailed, or outlined in any ordinance now or hereafter in
effect.  He is designated and authorized to enforce the provisions of this
chapter.



('75 Code, § 2.05)  (Ord. 4-15, passed 2-15-54; Am. Ord. CO-67-2, passed
2-21-67)



§ 155.126  BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS.



   A Board of Zoning Appeals is established with membership and
appointment provided in accordance with I.C. 36-7-4-901 through 36-7-4-907,
and all acts now or hereafter amendatory thereto.



('75 Code, § 3.08)  (Ord. CO-67-2, passed 2-21-67)



§ 155.127 MEETINGS OF BOARD.



   (A)   At the first meeting of each year, the Board of Zoning Appeals
shall elect a Chairman and a Vice Chairman from among its members, and it may
appoint and fix the compensation of a Secretary and other employees necessary
for the discharge of its duties, all in conformity to and in compliance with
salaries and compensation theretofore fixed by the legislative authority. 
('75 Code, § 3.09)



   (B)   The Board shall adopt rules and regulations as it may deem
necessary to effectuate the provisions of this chapter.  ('75 Code, § 3.11)



   (C)   All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public.  The
Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, keep records of its examinations
and other official actions, prepare findings, and record the vote of each
member voting on each question.  All minutes and records shall be filed in
the office of the Board and shall be a public record.  ('75 Code, § 3.10)



(Ord. CO-67-2, passed 2-21-67)



§ 155.128  POWERS AND DUTIES OF BOARD.



   (A)   The Board of Zoning Appeals shall have the powers and it shall
be its duty to do the following.



      (1)   Hear and determine appeals from and review any order,
requirement, decision, or determination made by the Building Inspector in the
enforcement of this chapter.



      (2)   Permit and authorize exceptions to the district
regulations only in the classes of cases or in particular situations as
specified in this chapter.



      (3)   Hear and decide on permits for special exceptions,
development plans, or other uses on which the Board is required to act under
this chapter.



      (4)   Authorize on appeal in specific cases any variances from
the terms of this chapter as will not be contrary to the public interest,
where owing to special conditions, fully demonstrated on the basis of the
facts presented, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this chapter will
result in unnecessary hardship and so that the spirit of this chapter shall
be observed and substantial justice done.



('75 Code, § 3.12)



   (B)   Any decision of the Building Inspector in the enforcement of
this chapter may be appealed to the Board by any person claiming to be
adversely affected by the decision.



   (C)   In exercising its powers, the Board may reverse or affirm,
wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision, or
determination appealed from as in its opinion ought to be done in the
premises, and to that end shall have all the powers of the Building Inspector
from whom the appeal is taken.



   (D)   Every decision of the Board shall be subject to review by
certiorari.  ('75 Code, § 3.13)



(Ord. CO-67-2, passed 2-21-67)



SIGNS



§ 155.130  SIGNS; PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this section is to regulate all exterior signs placed
for exterior observance so as to protect property values, to protect
character of the various neighborhoods in the city, to facilitate the
creation of a convenient, attractive and harmonious community, to protect
against danger in travel and transportation, to improve and protect the
public health, safety, convenience and general welfare, and to further the
purposes and intent of the Zoning Code.



   (A)   A sign that serves as an I.D. is a principal use sign. Any
sign erected on a lot or building for the purpose of advertising a use
conducted therein or thereon shall be an accessory use to the principal use.



   (B)   It is further intended that all signs within a given
development be coordinated with the architecture of the principal use in such
a manner that the overall appearance is harmonious in form and proportion and
that the signs shall be structurally sound so as to ensure the safety of the
general public.



   (C)   No sign shall be permitted in any district except as herein
provided. No sign, except as specified herein, shall be erected unless a sign
permit has been issued by the Building Inspector. Applications for sign
permits shall include drawings of the sign, and shall be accompanied by such
fee as may be established by the Common Council.



   (D)   The following designated areas shall have specific conditions
and restrictions as stated in  §§ 155.130 through 155.138: The specific
areas are:



      (1)   The Historic Downtown Area: Beginning on the north side
of East Walnut Street at the Prairie Creek bridge, west to the west side of
Columbia Street, north along the west side of Columbia Street to the south
side of Morrison Street, east to the west bank of Prairie Creek and south
following the west bank of Prairie Creek to the Walnut Street bridge.



      (2)   All Local and Roadside Business zoned districts
including the areas which are adjacent to State Road 28, 38 and 39.



      (3)   Industrial zoned districts.



      (4)   All other areas, including Residential zoned districts.



(Ord. CO-90-2, passed 3-26-90; Am. Ord. CO-07-19, passed 12-10-07)



§ 155.131  SIGNS PERMITTED IN ALL DISTRICTS.



   The following signs are permitted in all districts. No sign permit is
required for these signs.



   (A)   One residential identification sign, not to exceed two square
feet in area, for each residential dwelling, may be affixed to a mailbox,
fence, or structure or be freestanding. In addition, one sign not exceeding
two square feet for any permissible home occupation is allowed.



   (B)   Property address numbers for any house or business are
permitted not to exceed two square feet in residential areas or four square
feet in commercial or industrial areas.



   (C)   Signs for the purposes of identifying the name of schools,
churches, community buildings or other public or semi-public institutional
buildings, residential subdivisions, apartments or mobile home parks, shall
be permitted provided the following conditions are met:



      (1)   The sign shall not exceed 24 square feet.



      (2)   If freestanding, the sign shall be located not less than
15 feet from the road right-of-way. Freestanding signs may be double-faced,
and such sign, including any structure to which it is attached, shall not
exceed five feet in height.



      (3)   The Building Inspector may authorize additional signs if
the building fronts on more than one street.



   (D)   One bulletin board, not illuminated except by indirect light
and not exceeding 24 square feet in surface area is permitted with any
church, school, or other similar public or semi-public structures.



   (E)   Permanent off-site directional signs intended for the purposes
of directing traffic to such civic or public facilities as churches, schools,
or public parks shall be permitted, provided such signs do not exceed six
square feet in area and not placed so as to create a traffic hazard.



   (F)   Signs erected by the city, county, state or a public utility
are permitted including traffic-control and safety signs, handicapped parking
signs, railroad signals, entrance and exit signs, signs indicating scenic or
historical places, welcome sign, public directional signs and memorial
plaques.



   (G)   Show window displays are permitted, including displays of
merchandise, photographs, drawings, prices, promotional statements or
messages designed and intended to be viewed from outside the building.



   (H)   An exterior building directory, on a multiple tenancy
structure, is permitted provided it does not exceed one sign per entrance and
does not exceed six square feet in area.



   (I)   Any flags bearing the official design of a nation, state,
city, or organizations, a corporation or a school or decorative flags are
permitted.



   (J)   On-site directional signs shall be permitted for the purpose
of directing traffic and parking on the same lot as the signs. Such signs
shall not exceed five square feet, shall not be located in any public right-
of-way, and such sign, including any structure to which it is located, shall
not exceed four feet in height.



   (K)   Signs located on-site warning the public against hunting,
fishing, dumping, trespassing, dangerous animals, swimming or the like, shall
be permitted. Such signs may be freestanding or attached to a fence.



   (L)   Names of buildings, dates of construction, commemorative
tablets and the like are permitted, when carved in stone, concrete or similar
material or made of bronze, aluminum or other permanent type of construction
and made an integral part of the building and structure.



   (M)   Signs accessory to an agricultural use located on a parcel of
not less than 20 acres for the purpose of identifying such agricultural uses
of advertising the products thereof, including seed and demonstration test
areas. No such sign shall exceed 32 square feet in area, does not pose a
visual clearance situation, and all such signs on a given farm shall not
exceed 60 square feet in area. No such sign shall exceed eight feet in height
or be located within any street right-of-way.



   (N)   Signs erected by farm operators on their barns or other
accessory buildings giving their name, the name of the farm and the year the
farm established are permitted.



(Ord. CO-90-2, passed 3-26-90; Am. Ord. CO-07-19, passed 12-10-07)



§ 155.132  SIGNS PROHIBITED IN ALL DISTRICTS.



   The following signs are prohibited in all districts:



   (A)   Any sign that does not meet electrical codes, is no longer
functional, or is abandoned. All signs shall be repaired, removed or
relocated in compliance with the regulations of this subchapter within a
reasonable period of time after notification by the Building Inspector.



   Signs shall be considered no longer functional or abandoned:



      (1)   When the signs is materially obstructed from view.



      (2)   When its essential elements are no longer readable.



      (3)   When a sign has been left by a business which has ceased
to operate at that location.



      (4)   When a condition shows deterioration or dilapidation.



   (B)   Any sign which is constructed, altered, located or illuminated
in any manner that causes undue glare, distraction, confusion, nuisance,
noise, or hazard to traffic or to other properties. Sign may not be
illuminated after 11:00 p.m. if it is located within or adjacent to a
residential district, except those businesses remaining open beyond that
time, in which case illumination shall cease upon closing.



   (C)   Signs that are attached to a tree or other living vegetation,
utility pole, rock, curbstone, sidewalk, lamppost, hydrant, bridge, highway
marker, or another sign, except for public information signs as provided in
§ 155.131(E) and (F).



   (D)   Any sign that is not expressly listed in this subchapter is
prohibited.



   (E)   Signs advertising activities which are illegal under federal,
state or local laws or regulations are prohibited.



   (F)   Any sign so placed that it obstructs any window, door, fire
escape, stairway, ladder, opening or access intended for light, air, ingress
to, or egress from any building is prohibited.



   (G)   Any signs that violate any provision of I.C. 8-23-20 or I.C.
9-21-4-6.



   (H)   Signs which have a rotating beam or beacon shall be permitted
for advertising or identification purposes where no hazard or need for
caution exists.



(Ord. CO-90-2, passed 3-26-90; Am. Ord. CO-07-19, passed 12-10-07)



§ 155.133  TEMPORARY SIGNS.



   The following temporary signs are permitted within all zoning districts
of the city subject to these conditions:



   (A)   Temporary real estate signs are permitted on any property
being sold, leased, or developed if they are not illuminated, or located
between the sidewalk and curb, or in any required side or rear yard setback.
They shall be no larger than seven square feet in any residential district.
These signs shall be promptly removed when the sale, lease or development of
the property has been completed.  A sign permit is not required.



   (B)   Temporary signs announcing events such as "Grand Opening",
"Under New Management" or "Going out of Business", may be either freestanding
or building-mounted and shall be subject to the following standards.



      (1)   Only one sign is permitted with a maximum of 20 square
feet in area.



      (2)   If freestanding, the sign is not to exceed eight feet in
height or be located closer than ten feet to any lot line, and 15 feet from
any street right-of-way.



      (3)   The sign is not to be located for a period more than 60
days except for a "Going out of Business" sign which shall not exceed 120
days.



   (C)   Any temporary construction sign is permitted which announces
the names of architects, engineers, contractors, other individuals or firms
involved with the construction, alteration or repair of a building or
development. The sign may also announce the character of a building
enterprise or the purpose which the building is intended. These signs shall
be located on the site of the construction work, and not more than 32 square
feet in area. A sign permit is not required.



   (D)   Seasonal displays and decorations are permitted for events
such as religious holidays and the Fourth of July, but they cannot advertise
a product, service, or entertainment. A sign permit is not required.



   (E)   Temporary on-site signs advertising any temporary use
specified in § 155.140 are permitted. These signs may be freestanding or be
building-mounted, and shall not exceed one per use, and shall not exceed 32
square feet in area. Freestanding temporary signs shall not exceed eight feet
in height. Such signs may be erected only for the duration of the temporary
use and shall be located only as approved by the Building Inspector. In
addition, there may be off-site directional signs as specified in division
(F) below.



   (F)   Freestanding, off-site directional signs providing information
for the location of grand openings, private garage or yard sale, other
temporary user, or real estate that is for sale or for rent. These signs do
not require a permit but shall be subject to the following conditions.



      (1)   These signs shall not exceed six square feet in area or
four feet in height.



      (2)   No more than five signs per site for this purpose are
allowed.



      (3)   These signs shall not be located in any public
right-of-way.



      (4)   These signs shall not be situated to cause an
obstruction or distraction to passing motorists.



      (5)   These signs shall be removed promptly after the sale or
temporary activity has ended.



   (G)   Banners or flags announcing a campaign, drive or event of a
civic, charitable, educational, historical or religious organization are
permitted. Such signs may be mounted on a building or freestanding and may be
on or over public property or right-of-way with the approval of the governing
body. These signs do not have to be located at the site of the event, and may
be erected for a period not more than 60 days. A sign permit is not required.



   (H)   Political signs.



      (1)   Political campaign signs erected on Election Day at
officially designated polling places are permitted.



      (2)   Each sign shall not exceed 32 square feet in area, and a
freestanding sign shall not exceed eight feet in height.



      (3)   A sign shall not be erected for more than 30 days before
the primary election, general election or referendum which they advertise.



      (4)   All signs shall be removed within five days after the
election or referendum.



      (5)   This provision shall not authorize the posting of
political campaign signs upon trees, utility poles, traffic-control signs,
street lights, or in any place prohibited by this subchapter.



      (6)   Any temporary political campaign signs placed on
buildings or in building windows which are visible to the outside shall meet
above requirements.



      (7)   The political party and candidate shall be responsible
for the prompt removal of signs within the required five days.



      (8)   There shall be no limit to the number of signs
appropriately displayed.



      (9)   No sign permit is required.



   (I)   Signs displayed on private property which express a political,
religious, social, or similar message, shall be permitted in any district
subject to the following.



      (1)   The sign shall not exceed 32 square feet in area, and
the freestanding sign shall not exceed eight feet in height.



      (2)   No sign shall be erected for more than 30 calendar days.



      (3)   No more than two such signs on any property per calendar
year are permitted.



      (4)   A sign permit is not required.



   (J)   Inflatable hot-air or gas-filled balloons used for the purpose
of product advertising shall be permitted as temporary signs in a business
district for a period from the Building Inspector who shall determine that
the usage of the balloons will meet safety standards.



   (K)   Search or spot lights placed temporarily on the ground for
grand openings or special promotions are permitted provided the devise has a
vertical beam and it does not create an air traffic hazard. A sign permit is
required from the Building Inspector who shall determine that safety
standards are met.



   (L)   Portable signs are permitted in commercial and industrial
districts and up to 30 days per year in residential areas. There shall be
only one sign per business or residence. Sign permits are required and the
following standards apply:



      (1)   The sign must be at least 15 feet from the right-of-way
and at least ten feet from any  adjacent property line.



      (2)   In residential districts, the sign shall not display any
product advertising.



      (3)   The sign shall not obstruct the view of traffic from any
driveway.



      (4)   There shall be no flashing lights or any moving parts.



      (5)   The sign shall be anchored to the ground and shall meet
applicable electrical codes.



      (6)   No portable signs shall be permitted on any public
right-of-way sidewalks. Sandwich style signs, two feet by three feet, are
permitted on right-of-way sidewalks, during the businesses operating hours
and do not interfere with normal pedestrian travel.



   (M)   Temporary signs on local government property shall be
installed to meet the standards as specified in this section.



(Ord. CO-90-2, passed 3-26-90; Am. Ord. CO-07-19, passed 12-10-07; Am. Ord.
11-03, passed 4-25-11)



§ 155.134  ON-PREMISES SIGNS.



   Signs permitted in business and industrial districts. The following
signs are permitted in business and industrial districts subject to the
standards set forth below. All signs require a permit except those in
division (A).



   (A)   Signs permitted in all districts and temporary signs as
specified in this subchapter.  Sign permits not required where specified
above.



   (B)   One or more business signs mounted on the building shall be
permitted, if the following requirements are met:



      (1)   Signs containing only advertising of products sold on
premises.



      (2)   Signs may have up to four square feet for each foot of
frontage of the building.



   (C)   Authorized additional building-mounted business signs are
permitted if one of the following conditions are met.



      (1)   The business fronts on more than one thoroughfare.



      (2)   More than one business located in a building. In such
instance, the combined total area of the business signs shall not exceed four
square feet per front foot of the building.



      (3)   The business has rear or side parking, in which case one
additional business sign may be permitted on the side or rear of the building
occupied provided such sign is constructed to the same standards as are
required in the front of said premises.



      (4)   The sign is part of a wall graphic.



      (5)   The sign is a projecting sign. Where may be more than
one sign per business, the total surface area of all signs (both sides) shall
be included in the maximum sign surface area specified in division (B)(2)
above. The sign shall not project more than six feet from a structure nor be
closer than ten feet to the ground. If the sign is over the public sidewalk
or right-of-way, in the Historic Downtown District, these signs may be
illuminated in neon as long as they are not flashing or have moving graphics.
All signs that project from a structure may be no larger than a six-foot by
six-foot sign with both sides included in the maximum surface area specified
in division (B)(2) above. All projecting signs must receive approval by the
Board of Works. If the projecting sign is to be located in the Historic
Downtown District, then application for recommendation must first be obtained
from the City Plan Commission prior to submission to the Board of Works for
approval.



      (6)   The sign is a canopy sign. There may be more than two
business uses and the total surface area of the sign (both sides) shall be
included in the maximum sign surface area specified in division (B) (2)
above. The sign shall be no closer than eight feet to the ground. If the
canopy is over a public sidewalk or right-of-way, Board of Works approval
shall be obtained.  If the canopy sign is to be located in the Historic
Downtown District, then application for recommendation must first be obtained
from the City Plan Commission prior to submission to the Board of Works for
approval.



   (D)   In addition to the building-mounted sign or signs, one single-
or double-faced, freestanding sign may be erected on a business or industrial
site, provided the following conditions are met:



      (1)   Such sign, including any structure to which the sign is
attached, shall not exceed 35 feet in height from the grade level to the top
of the sign and shall be set back not less than 15 feet from the road
right-of-way and from adjacent property.  No freestanding sign or billboard
shall be permitted in the Historic Downtown Square Area. In all the other
Historic Downtown Area off the square, a 25-foot freestanding sign in height
from grade level may be erected.



      (2)   The sign shall not be larger in total surface area than
100 square feet per face.



      (3)   The sign shall contain only the logotype, trademark or
name of the company, commercial or industrial center on the property.



      (4)   Only one freestanding sign shall be permitted on each
individual parcel.  However, within commercial or industrial centers where
more than one business is located in a building, the freestanding sign may
identify all the businesses in the center but in this instance, the combined
total area of the sign shall not exceed the standards of this section. In
such instances where an individual business site or commercial or industrial
center has access on more than one street, the Building Inspector may
authorize such additional signs as the Building Inspector determines to be
appropriate, but in no event shall there be more than one sign per street
frontage. Additional freestanding signs may be approved as a special
exception by the Board of Zoning Appeals where special circumstances warrant.



      (5)   Businesses which require the frequent display of special
prices and events shall be permitted, in addition to a logo sign, one
permanent message sign which does not exceed 20 square feet per face. Where
additional message logo signs have been allowed by division (1), additional
message signs shall be mounted on the same pole or structure as the logo or
signs or on the building, and there shall be no freestanding message signs or
product advertising signs whatsoever other than as permitted above.



   (E)   For businesses which sell gasoline, sign on pump islands and
canopies relating to self-service or full-service locations, prices and
similar information are permitted provided the numerals of any sign does not
exceed eight inches in height and the signs do not exceed a total area of six
square feet on each pump island.



   (F)   For businesses with drive up windows, directional signs and
outside menu display boards are permitted but said signs shall be directed
towards customers on the property and shall not display any product
advertising visible by passing motorists or pedestrians.



   (G)   For businesses which have service bays, wall signs which
identify the special functions of the various service bays are permitted
provided they do not exceed ten square feet each and do not contain any
product advertising.



   (H)   The following alternating illumination signs are permitted:



      (1)   Time, temperature and changing devices customarily
identified with banks and lending institutions.



      (2)   Barber poles, provided such devices meet other
applicable provisions of this subchapter.



   (I)   Signs on vending machines, where permitted, are allowed
provided that all such machines on a parcel placed together in a single group
against a building.



   (J)   Streamers, pennants, banners and decorative flags are
permitted in business and industrial districts. No sign permits required.



   (K)   Disregarding all other business sign requirements, where
existing residences are converted to nonresidential uses in residential
districts by the Board of Zoning Appeals approval or otherwise, such
nonresidential use shall be limited to one sign per use either attached or
freestanding, which does not exceed ten square feet in total area nor six
feet in height. Such signs may not be illuminated except by indirect light.
Freestanding signs may be double-faced and shall be located in a landscaped
area of the front yard. The sign shall be at least 15 feet from the
right-of-way and from adjacent property.



(Ord. CO-90-2, passed 3-26-90; Am. Ord. CO-07-19, passed 12-10-07)



§  155.135  OFF-PREMISES SIGNS.



   Off-premises signs are permitted in the city. An off-premise sign shall
be treated as a principal land use and may be on the same property as other
principal land uses provided all standards of this subchapter are met for
each land use.



   (A)   The following standards apply to both building-mounted and
freestanding off-premise signs.



      (1)   Off-premise signs shall be permitted in the following
zoning districts: I-1 (Open Industrial) District and I-2 (Enclosed
Industrial) District.



      (2)   Off-premise signs shall be permitted by special
exception in the business district.



      (3)   The maximum height of an off-premise sign above the road
grade from which it is to be viewed shall not exceed 35 feet.



      (4)   Lighting for off-premise signs shall be indirect and
non-flashing in nature.



      (5)   No off-premise sign shall be placed so as to obstruct
the view of on-coming traffic or create any kind of traffic hazard.



      (6)   All signs shall meet the adopted city building code for
signs.



      (7)   No off-premise sign structure shall be placed until such
time as a permit shall have been issued for said placement in accordance with
this subchapter.



   (B)   The following additional standards apply to freestanding
off-premise signs:



      (1)   Each sign face shall contain no more than 300 square
feet (12 feet x 25 feet) and no sign structure shall contain more than two
such faces in the same direction and shall not be separated by more than 12
inches.  All freestanding off-premises signs shall require approval by the
Board of Public Works following recommendation by the City Plan Commission.



      (2)   Back-to-back freestanding signs may be separated in the
shape of the "V" if the greatest point of separation between sign faces does
not exceed 15 feet.



      (3)   The distance between legally erected freestanding
off-premise sign structures shall be a linear measure taken along
right-of-way lines of that side of the street on which the sign is to be
located. Freestanding signs shall be at least:



         (a)   500 feet or more from one sign to another on the
same side of the street which need not be met where a physical obstruction
exists which prevents viewing two off-premise sign structures at the same
time.



         (b)   100 feet to any residential district or to a
church, school or health care institution. This measurement is taken along
right-of-way lines of that side of the street on which the sign is located.



      (4)   The distance measured at a right angle from the
right-of-way line to the leading edge of an off-premise sign structure shall
be no less than 15 feet.



   (C)   The following additional standards apply to building-mounted
signs:



      (1)   Each building-mounted sign face shall contain no more
than 300 square feet (12 feet x 25 feet) and there shall be no more than one
such face on any building wall facing in the same direction.



      (2)   No building-mounted sign shall exceed beyond the corner
edge of the building to which it is attached.



      (3)   Building-mounted signs shall not be located closer than:



         (a)   250 feet from any freestanding or building-mounted
off-premise sign on the same side of the street.



         (b)   100 feet to any residential district or to a
church, school or health care institution. This measurement shall be a linear
measure taken along right-of-way lines of that side of the street on which
the sign is located.



   (D)   Notwithstanding the provisions of § 155.008, nonconforming
off-premise sign structures may be continued, but may not be replaced or
otherwise increased in nonconformity except as specified herein or as
permitted by the provisions of this subchapter. Nonconforming off-premise
sign structures may be maintained and repaired subject to the above
restrictions.



(Ord. CO-90-2, passed 3-26-90; Am. Ord. CO-07-19, passed 12-10-07)



§ 155.136  WHEN SIGN PERMIT NOT REQUIRED.



   The following operations are not considered as creating a sign and will
not require a sign permit:



   (A)   The changing of advertised copy of a message on any approved
sign, painted or printed. This also includes billboards, theater marquees and
similar approved signs which are specifically designed for the use of
replaceable copy.



   (B)   Painting, repainting, cleaning, and other normal maintenance
and repair of an approved sign or sign structure, unless a structural
alteration is made.



(Ord. CO-90-2, passed 3-26-90; Am. Ord. CO-07-19, passed 12-10-07)



§ 155.137  LANDSCAPING AROUND FREESTANDING SIGNS.



   Taking into account all the above provisions of this subchapter,
shrubbery and other landscaping shall be planted around all freestanding
signs when possible and that landscaping must be attractively maintained.



(Ord. CO-90-2, passed 3-26-90; Am. Ord. CO-07-19, passed 12-10-07)



§ 155.138  NONCONFORMING SIGNS.



   Any new business or occupant which locates on a property that already
has a building-mounted or freestanding nonconforming sign due to setback and
size, may reuse the existing sign pole or sign face, provided the extent of
nonconformity is not increased and that no more than one nonconforming
freestanding sign may be reused per property. A nonconforming sign pole may
not be replaced except in conformance with this subchapter. All other
applicable sections of this subchapter shall be complied with and all
abandoned or obsolete signs shall be removed from the property.



(Ord. CO-90-2, passed 3-26-90; Am. Ord. CO-07-19, passed 12-10-07)



TEMPORARY USE SITES



§ 155.140  TEMPORARY USES.



   A permit for a temporary use may be issued by the Building Inspector
subject to the standards in division (B) and after receipt of Board of Health
approval, if applicable. Access and parking for all temporary uses shall be
provided to the Building Inspector's satisfaction. All temporary use sites
shall be adequately cleaned up at the conclusion of the event. Signs for
temporary uses shall comply with § 155.130. Any temporary use exceeding the
standards of division (B) shall be considered a special exception in the
district in which it is located. A city business license must also be
obtained for applicable business.



   (B)   SCHEDULE OF SIGN REGULATIONS.



 



USE
 
PERMITTED DISTRICT/TIME
 
CONDITIONS


(1)  Carnival, Circus, Fair, Festival, or concert
 
Any business/industrial district 15 days per year per site
 
Lights and noise to be controlled


(2)  Tent Sale, Auto Show, Farm Equipment Show, Outdoor Promotional
Attraction
 
Any business/industrial district 30 per year per district
 
Lights and noise to be controlled


(3)  Farmers Market
 
Any business district 60 day per year
 
Only agricultural produce to be sold


(4)  Sawmills on property where the timber is cut
 
Any non-residential district six months maximum
 
No closer than 500 feet to off-premises residence


(5)  Temporary Group Camp
 
Any non-residential district one week per six months
 
Noise shall not adversely affect adjacent land


(6)  Contractor Office and Equipment Storage (includes mobile home)
 
Incidental to any construction removal upon completion of construction
 
No sleeping facilities
Not to exceed one year


(7)  Real Estate Sales Office
Not to exceed one year
 
Incidental to any development facilities
 
No sleeping or cooking


(8)  Religious Tent Meetings
30 days per six months
 
Any non-residential district
 
Off street parking as required for churches


(9)  Basement Home
to exceed one year from permit
 
Any residential district not
 
Does not include permanently complete earth sheltered home


(10) Fireworks, display and sale
 
Any business district, not to exceed two weeks
 
All applicable State Federal laws must be met


(11) Farm Tours, Farm Fairs,  Hayrides (Commercial) Pick-your-own Produce,
Sales or similar uses.
 
Any non-residential district four months per year maximum
 
None


(12) Yard/Garage/Porch Sales (only normal household Merchandise)
 
Any district/no more than four days per year per property
 
Multiple participants permissible


(13) Sale of Personal Property at Place of Residence,  including vehicles
such as automobiles, motorcycles and recreational vehicles
 
Any district
 
No permit necessary, no more than two square foot sign, no more than two
items at a time if displayed outside.
Vehicles must be titled and currently licensed to resident and may not be
inoperable or in any way dismantled


(14) Auction/Pre-Priced Sales
 
Any district
 
No permit necessary, parking to be controlled


(15) Sale or Offering For Sale of Goods or Services from any Temporary
Structure or vehicles, including trailers busses, or Vans.
 
Any district by Special Exception
 
Does not include vending from vehicles on a public street that is not
otherwise prohibited by law




 



(Ord. CO-90-2, passed 3-26-90)



§ 155.141  AMUSEMENTS; CHARITABLE ACTIVITIES.



   Amusement and charitable activities, sponsored by public agencies,
churches, civic and charity groups, schools and other nonprofit organizations
on a temporary basis are permitted in any zoning  district, provided it is
on the site of said sponsor. If an amusement or charitable activity does not
meet the standards, it shall be considered under use of division (B)(1) of §
155.140.



(Ord. CO-90-2, passed 3-26-90)



§ 155.142  COLLECTION BOXES.



   Collection boxes for used merchandise or for recyclable items are
permitted in areas zoned commercial or industrial and are not subject to side
or rear setback regulations provided they are not located in a way to create
a traffic hazard and do not violate other sections of this subchapter. The
collection boxes shall be routinely emptied and no outdoor storage of items
is permitted.



(Ord. CO-90-2, passed 3-26-90)



§ 155.143  REFUSE DISPOSAL DUMPSTERS, STORAGE AREAS AND THE LIKE.



   A refuse disposal container (dumpster) and refuse storage area or
corral for commercial or industrial use shall not be located within any
required front or side yard setback or eliminate any required parking or
loading areas. Refuse disposal containers and areas shall be opaquely
screened from the public street and adjacent properties. This screening may
be achieved by wall, landscaping or existing fences, or by virtue of the
location of the lot. This section does not apply to refuse disposal
containers used temporarily during remodeling provided they are not used for
a period to exceed 90 days.



(Ord. CO-90-2, passed 3-26-90)



§ 155.144  VENDING MACHINES.



   Newspapers, soft drink, ice and similar vending machines are permitted
as accessory uses, in areas zoned commercial or industrial. Newspaper vending
machines are not subject to setbacks provided they do not violate other
sections of this subchapter.  Soft drink and other machines shall be grouped
in an area up against a building and shall not be on any public sidewalk or
right-of-way.



(Ord. CO-90-2, passed 3-26-90)



§ 155.145  SIDEWALK ITEMS.



   Tables and chairs may be used outside on public right-of-way sidewalks
in the Historic Downtown Area, in front of food and drink establishments,
with the following requirements:



   (A)   Tables and chairs will not be permanently anchored to sidewalk.



   (B)   Pedestrian travel non-obstructed area will be maintained at no
less than 40% of the sidewalk or not less than four feet.



(Ord CO-07-16, passed 11-12-07)



WEST STATE ROAD 28 CORRIDOR OVERLAY ZONE



§ 155.170  PURPOSE, INTENT AND AUTHORITY.



   (A)   It is the purpose of the West State Road 28 Corridor Overlay
Zone (the “Overlay Zone”) to promote and protect the public health,
safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare by providing for consistent
and coordinated treatment of the properties bordering West State Road 28 in
the City of Frankfort, Indiana.



   (B)   The Plan Commission and Common Council, in establishing this
zone, are relying on I.C. 36-7-4-600 et seq.  and I.C. 36-7-4-1400 et seq. 
This zoning district is, likewise, intended to serve as a tool for
implementing the development policies and guidelines set for the Corridor in
the Comprehensive Plan.  West State Road 28 is a limited access highway and
an important economic development corridor to the City of Frankfort and
Clinton County.  West State Road 28 is a premier location and employment
center whose viability, quality, and character are important to the community
as a whole, adjacent residents, employees, business owners and taxing
districts.  Therefore, it is the further purpose of the West State Road 28
Corridor Overlay Zone:



      (1)   To promote coordinated, quality development per the land
use recommendations set forth in the Master Plan;



      (2)   To establish consistent architectural and design
guidelines to establish a consistent and uniform appearance along the
corridor;



      (3)   To provide for the preservation of natural features and
open space; and



      (4)   Establish the appearance of a premier business address
in Frankfort and Clinton County.



(Ord. 08-04, passed 7-14-08; Am. Ord. 14-23, passed 1-26-15)



§ 155.171  DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.



   Figure 1: State Road 28 Overlay Boundaries (Plan View), set forth in
Ordinance 14-23 and incorporated herein by reference, shows the established
boundaries of the Overlay Zone for Frankfort and Clinton County, in the State
of Indiana. This subchapter shall be effective immediately upon its passage
as to all real estate then located within the corporate boundaries of the
city. It is the intent of this subchapter that its provisions also apply to
any real estate within the Overlay Zone that is not presently within the
corporate boundaries of the city at such time as any of such real estate is
annexed by or otherwise becomes a part of the city.



(Ord. 08-04, passed 7-14-08; Am. Ord. 14-23, passed 1-26-15)



§ 155.172  PLAN COMMISSION APPROVAL.



   (A)   The City Building Inspector must approve, approve with
conditions, or disapprove the Development Plan for any tract of land in the
Overlay Zone per the provisions of this subchapter. All submitted development
plans should adhere to the requirements listed in § 155.174. This section
does not apply to construction of any residential accessory structures or
construction of any signs or addition to a principal structure not exceeding
2,000 square feet and not visible from State Road 28. The City Building
Inspector may send any development plans to the Frankfort Plan Commission for
review.



   (B)   Before making a decision, the City Building Inspector shall
convene a Technical Review Committee comprised of representatives from
Frankfort Power & Light, Frankfort Sewer Maintenance, Frankfort Water
Department, Frankfort Fire Department, Frankfort Street Department, the
Clinton County Health Department, the Clinton County Surveyor, City of
Frankfort Plan Commission, Frankfort Board of Zoning Appeals, Frankfort Main
Street, Vectren Gas, Frankfort Police Department, Airport Board, Clinton
County Area Plan, Frankfort Zoning Administrator, Frankfort Council
Committee, Frankfort Board of Works, and the Clinton County Chamber of
Commerce. The Committee shall examine the plans presented for compliance with
this subchapter and give their recommendation to the City Building Inspector.



(Ord. 08-04, passed 7-14-08; Am. Ord. 14-23, passed 1-26-15)



§ 155.173  OVERLAY APPLICABILITY.



   This District is created as a special overlay district to be
superimposed on base districts by approval of the Common Council. Boundaries
of this overlay are shown on Figure 1: State Road 28 Overlay District
Boundaries (Plan View), set forth in Ordinance 14-23 and incorporated herein
by reference, and may be revised by the Common Council through the rezoning
process. Development standards provided herein are intended to supplement
those permitted in the underlying zoning classification and in some cases may
be more restrictive than those of the underlying zoning classification. When
the requirements of the underlying zoning district and the Overlay District
appear to be in conflict, the more restrictive shall apply.



(Ord. 08-04, passed 7-14-08; Am. Ord. 14-23, passed 1-26-15)



§ 155.174  APPLICATION PROCEDURE.



   See § 155.191, Development Plans.



(Ord. 08-04, passed 7-14-08; Am. Ord. 14-23, passed 1-26-15)



§ 155.175  VALIDITY OF APPROVAL OF THE APPLICATION BY THE PLAN COMMISSION.



   An approved development plan petition shall be valid for two years from
the date of approval. If construction of the building(s) has (have) not
started at the end of the two-year period, the development plan request shall
be resubmitted to the Plan Commission for consideration and disposition.



(Ord. 08-04, passed 7-14-08; Am. Ord. 14-23, passed 1-26-15)



§ 155.176  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this subchapter the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   GREEN SPACE AREA.  That portion of the front yard of a lot that is
immediately adjacent and parallel to the right-of-way of State Road 28 and
all other county roads within the identified boundaries and having a minimum
depth of 60 feet from the right-of-way line.



(Ord. 08-04, passed 7-14-08; Am. Ord. 14-23, passed 1-26-15)



§ 155.177  OVERLAY DISTRICT TIER APPLICABILITY AND PURPOSE.



   Within the designated Overlay District boundaries, there shall be a
primary tier in which there is the greater desire to manage the appearance of
land uses fronting State Road 28. This primary tier, as shown on Figure 2:
State Road 28 Overlay District Tiers (Aerial View), set forth in Ordinance
14-23 and incorporated herein by reference, shall include all property and
buildings fronting on State Road 28. The secondary tier is an area greater
than the primary tier and extends farther north and south of State Road 28 as
shown on Figure 2: State Road 28 Overlay District (Aerial View), set forth in
Ordinance 14-23 and incorporated herein by reference. The secondary tier
shall contain additional development regulations from the base zoning
district but shall be less restrictive than the primary tier. Unless
specified within a specific regulation, all standards shall apply to both the
primary and secondary tiers.



(Ord. 08-04, passed 7-14-08; Am. Ord. 14-23, passed 1-26-15)



§ 155.178  PERMITTED USES.



   All uses which are permitted in a given site’s underlying primary
zoning districts, except those uses expressly excluded in § 155.180 are
permitted in the Overlay Zone.



(Ord. 08-04, passed 7-14-08; Am. Ord. 14-23, passed 1-26-15)



§ 155.179  PERMITTED SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS.



   All special exceptions, which are permitted by approval by the Board of
Zoning Appeals, in the underlying primary zoning district(s), except the uses
expressly excluded in § 155.180 are permitted in the Overlay Zone.



(Ord. 08-04, passed 7-14-08; Am. Ord. 14-23, passed 1-26-15)



§ 155.180  EXCLUDED USES.



   The following uses are prohibited in the primary tier Overlay Zone:



   (A)   Adult businesses;



   (B)   Amusement park;



   (C)   Automotive graveyard;



   (D)   Bulk storage of petroleum products not used for on-site
manufacturing;



   (E)   Car and truck washes;



   (F)   Confined feeding operations;



   (G)   Explosives manufacturing;



   (H)   Fertilizer manufacturing, stock yards, slaughtering, leather
curing and tanning;



   (I)   Garbage disposal plant/sanitary landfill;



   (J)   Incineration for reduction of refuse;



   (K)   Jail;



   (L)   Junk or salvage yard;



   (M)   Manufactured home dwelling sales;



   (N)   Mineral extraction;



   (O)   Mobile home park;



   (P)   Ordnance products;



   (Q)   Outdoor storage, with the exception of propane tanks. Propane
tanks shall not be in the front yard between the roadway and the building
unless otherwise screened with plant materials.



   (R)   Penal or correctional institution;



   (S)   Petroleum refining;



   (T)   Race/go cart track;



   (U)   Reclaiming processes involving materials or chemicals that are
considered dangerous to the health, safety, and welfare of the general public
as determined by the State Board of Health or by the Clinton County Health
Department;



   (V)   Refining or manufacturing of asphalt, cement, gypsum, lime, or
wood preservatives;



   (W)   Refining or manufacturing of petroleum products;



   (X)   Permanent roadside sales stand;



   (Y)   Sand and gravel extraction or sales;



   (Z)   Storage of disabled vehicles;



   (AA)   Waste transfer stations;



   (BB)   Non-residentially zoned residential uses.



(Ord. 08-04, passed 7-14-08; Am. Ord. 14-23, passed 1-26-15)



§ 155.181  ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND USES.



   All accessory buildings and uses which are permitted in the underlying
zoning district(s) shall be permitted, except that any detached accessory
buildings in any development plan shall be architecturally compatible with
the primary building(s) with which it is associated.



(Ord. 08-04, passed 7-14-08; Am. Ord. 14-23, passed 1-26-15)



§ 155.182  MINIMUM LOT AREA.



   (A)   The minimum lot area required within the primary tier Overlay
Zone is 10,000 square feet for non-residential uses with sewer and one acre
for non-residential uses without sewer. The minimum lot area for residential
uses with sewer is 8,700 square feet and one acre without sewer. All lots
within the primary tier Overlay Zone shall be subject to development plan
approval, with the exception of individual lots for single-family dwellings.
For lots located only partially within the primary tier Overlay Zone, a
development plan shall be submitted to the Plan Commission for the entire
tract to be developed.



   (B)   If a parcel of land or subdivision lot was recorded prior to
the effective date of this subchapter, and the parcel or lot does not contain
the minimum lot area required by this section, the parcel or lot
(“undersized lot”) may be used for any use permitted in the Overlay Zone
provided that:



      (1)   At the time of recordation of the undersized lot or on
the effective date of this subchapter, the undersized lot met the
requirements for minimum lot area then in effect in the underlying primary
zoning district(s).



      (2)   The owner of the undersized lot must include, up to the
minimum tract size, any adjoining vacant land (not separated by a street or
public way) owned, or owned by an affiliate, on or before the effective date
of this subchapter or at the time of application which, if combined with the
undersized lot, would create a tract which conforms, or more closely
conforms, to the minimum tract size requirements of this section; and



      (3)   All other development requirements applicable to the
Overlay Zone can be met.



   (C)   This section does not preclude the sale or other transfer of
any parcel of land within a tract after the approval of a development plan
for the entire tract. However, the development of the parcel must still
conform to the development plan for the entire tract as approved or amended
by the Plan Commission, and all other applicable requirements contained in
this subchapter.



(Ord. 08-04, passed 7-14-08; Am. Ord. 14-23, passed 1-26-15)



§ 155.183  DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Green space area.  For all lots located within the primary
tier fronting State Road 28 must have a 60-foot wide green space area within
the required front yard. This area shall be landscaped in accordance with
Section 404.15.



   (B)   Remodel, expansion or improvement of existing structure or
parcels.  If a parcel is improved or an existing structure expanded or
remodeled within the primary tier, fronting State Road 28, then that parcel
or structure shall be subject to the regulations contained in this Section
404, State Road 28 Corridor Overlay District at the discretion of the Plan
Commission and/or Zoning Administrator.



(Ord. 08-04, passed 7-14-08; Am. Ord. 14-23, passed 1-26-15)



§ 155.184  ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN REQUIREMENTS.



   In reviewing the architectural design of building(s) proposed to be
built in the primary tier Overlay Zone, factors to be considered by the Plan
Commission shall include but are not limited to the following:



   (A)   Context.  All buildings shall be designed with respect to the
general character of the State Road 28 Corridor and, particularly, with due
consideration to buildings located on the lots that abut the project site.



   (B)   Massing.  A single, large, dominant structure mass shall be
avoided in new buildings and, to the extent reasonably feasible, in
development project involving changes to the mass of existing buildings.



   (C)   Facade treatment.



      (1)   Facades along the State Road 28 frontage shall add
architectural interest and variety and avoid the effect of a single, long or
massive wall with no relation to human size. No wall that faces a street or
connecting walkway shall have a blank, uninterrupted length exceeding 50 feet
without including, but not be limited to, at least two of the following:



         (a)   Change in plane;



         (b)   Change in texture or masonry pattern;



         (c)   Windows, trellis with vines;



         (d)   Color, texture, and/or material; or



         (e)   An equivalent element.



      (2)   Facades shall have at least one of the elements of
division (C)(1) above that repeat horizontally. All elements shall repeat at
intervals of no more than 50 feet, either horizontally or vertically.



   (D)   Roofs.  All facades shall have a recognizable “top”
consisting of at least one element below:



      (1)   Parapets concealing flat roofs and rooftop equipment
from public view. The average height of such parapets shall not exceed 15% of
the height of the supporting wall and such parapets shall not at any point
exceed one-third of the height of the supporting wall;



      (2)   Overhanging eaves, extending no less than three feet
past the supporting walls;



      (3)   Sloping roofs that do not exceed the average height of
the supporting walls, with an average slope of greater than or equal to one
foot of vertical rise for every three feet of horizontal run and less than or
equal to one foot of vertical rise for every one foot of horizontal run; or



      (4)   Three or more roof slope planes.



   (E)   Entryways.  Use creative entry treatments and other focal
points such as canopies, awnings, or  cornice treatments.



   (F)   Building elements and accessory structures.



      (1)   Separate building elements or accessory structures
should be designated as an integral part of the building design.



      (2)   Use signs that are complementary to and integrated with
building design so that they do not dominate facades or appear tacked on.



      (3)   Screen appurtenances or design them as integral parts of
the buildings so that they are not visible from the street.



      (4)   Screen docks, garage doors and service areas to minimize
their visibility from adjacent streets.



   (G)   Landscape design.  All landscaping shall be in conformance
with § 155.185 as a means to enhance the built environment.



(Ord. 08-04, passed 7-14-08; Am. Ord. 14-23, passed 1-26-15)



§ 155.185  LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS.



   In reviewing the landscape requirements for proposed construction in
the primary and secondary tier Overlay Zone, factors to be considered by the
Plan Commission shall include but are not limited to the following:



   (A)   Landscape plan.  The applicant shall submit a landscape plan
to the Zoning Administrator as part of the development plan application, per
§ 155.174. Table 1: Table of Recommended Shrubs and Table 2: Table of
Recommended Trees, set forth in Ordinance 14-23 and incorporated herein by
reference, lists the plant materials recommended for use in the landscaping
of a property in the Overlay District.



   (B)   Areas to be landscaped.



      (1)   Green space area.  The 60-foot green space area in the
primary tier shall be composed of grass and landscape areas. The
incorporation of walkways and bikeways into the design is encouraged;
however, no parking areas, through roads, buildings, accessory structures,
etc. shall be established within this area. Landscaping shall not be placed
in the 30-foot wide utility easement, as shown in Figure 3: Green Space Area,
set forth in Ordinance 14-23 and incorporated herein by reference.



      (2)   Foundation.  Foundation plantings shall be included
along the front and any side of buildings visible from the public
right-of-way and/or have primary pedestrian access.



   (C)   Protection of existing trees.  Sites with existing trees in
the primary tier should make reasonable efforts to protect and incorporate
them into the overall site design. To encourage tree preservation, each tree
preserved greater than nine-inch caliper shall convert as credits for
required landscaping. Credits for each preserved nine-inch caliper tree shall
be:



      (1)   Two required shade trees; or



      (2)   Four ornamental trees.



      (3)   Screening areas.  All air conditioning units, HVAC
systems, exhaust pipes or stacks, overhead doors, legally non-conforming
outside storage areas, and satellite dishes shall be integrated into the
overall building design or screened from the State Road 28 right-of-way and
adjoining residential zones or uses, by means of walls, fencing, parapets,
penthouse screens, landscaping, camouflage or other approved method.



   (D)   Landscaping standards.  All plant material proposed to be
used in accordance with any landscape plan shall meet the following
specifications:



      (1)   Shade trees: A minimum of two and one-half inch caliper
with a mixture of sizes at initial installation;



      (2)   Ornamental trees: A minimum of one and one-half inch
caliper with a mixture of sizes at initial installation;



      (3)   Evergreen trees: A minimum height of four feet with a
mixture of sizes at initial installation;



      (4)   Deciduous shrubs: A minimum height of 18 inches;



      (5)   Evergreen shrubs: A minimum height of 18 inches.



   (E)   Green space area.  The following standards in this division
shall apply to all lots located within the primary tier and have frontage on
State Road 28. The primary landscaping materials used in the 60-foot green
space area, including the 30-foot easement for utilities, shall be shade
trees, ornamental trees, shrubs, ground cover and grass.



      (1)   A minimum of three shade trees, two ornamental trees and
ten shrubs shall be provided per 100 linear feet of green space area.



      (2)   The submitted landscape plan for the green space area
parallel to the State Road 28 right-of-way may show the trees in either a
lineal or a clustered design.



      (3)   All green space areas shall have an earthen mound that
is located in the 30-foot green space planting easement, if feasible. The
mound shall be covered with grass and shall parallel State Road 28. The mound
shall be varied in height, but no section may be lower than three feet above
surrounding grade and it must have rounded flanks.



   (F)   Foundation plantings. 



      (1)   The primary landscaping materials used adjacent to
buildings shall be shrubs, ground cover and ornamental grasses. Ornamental
trees and perennials are also encouraged.



      (2)   The minimum width of the planting area shall be five
feet, except when adjoining a parking area that is located in the front yard
along State Road 28, where the minimum width shall be ten feet.



      (3)   In this foundation planting area, there shall be ten
shrubs per 100 lineal feet of planting strip. Shrubs can be placed linearly
or clustered.



   (G)   Parking lots.



      (1)   Parking lot interior planting. Where commercial, office,
and industrial parking lots are located within the primary tier, are located
in the front or side yards of the building, and are visible from State Road
28 the following shall apply:



         (a)   A minimum of one shade tree and four shrubs shall
be planted within each parking lot for every seven spaces provided, or not
less than ten trees per acre of parking.



      (2)   Parking lot perimeter planting.  Where parking areas,
for both tiers, are located in the front yard and front directly on a
roadway, a six-foot wide perimeter planting area shall be provided along the
front and sides of those areas, as shown in Figures 7: Perimeter Parking Lot
Planting and 8: Perimeter Parking Lot Planting, set forth in Ordinance 14-23
and incorporated herein by reference.



         (a)   The required planting unit for this area shall
include three shade trees, two ornamental trees, and ten shrubs per 100
linear feet.



         (b)   The perimeter planting area shall be provided in
addition to the green space area.



   (H)   Landscaping installation and maintenance.



      (1)   Installation. All landscaping approved as part of the
landscape plan portion of the development plan approval shall be installed
prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy by the Zoning
Administrator. If it is not possible to install the required landscaping
because of weather conditions, the property owner shall post a bond prior to
the issuance of the certificate of occupancy for an amount equal to 125% of
the total installed cost of the required landscaping.



      (2)   Maintenance.



         (a)   It shall be the responsibility of the owners and
their agents to ensure proper maintenance of all trees, shrubs and other
landscaping materials required by this subchapter as part of the review of
the development plan in accordance with the standards set by this subchapter.
This is to include, but is not limited to, replacing dead plantings with
identical varieties or a suitable substitute approved by the Executive
Director, irrigation and mulching of planting areas, and keeping the area
free of refuse, debris, and weeds.



         (b)   All dead plant material shall be replaced within
one year, by the next planting season of their death, or upon written notice
of condition.



      (3)   Changes after approval.  No landscaping which has been
approved by the Zoning Administrator may later be materially altered,
eliminated or sacrificed, without first obtaining further approval by the
Zoning Administrator.



      (4)   Inspection.



(Ord. 08-04, passed 7-14-08; Am. Ord. 14-23, passed 1-26-15)



§ 155.186  PARKING REQUIREMENTS.



   In reviewing the parking requirements proposed to be constructed in the
primary and secondary tier Overlay Zone, factors to be considered by the Plan
Commission shall include but are not limited to the following:



   (A)   Landscaping standards. See § 155.185(G) above.



   (B)   Parking requirements and design.



      (1)   The required number of parking spaces and the dimensions
of those parking spaces is established in § 155.006.



      (2)   There shall be an appropriate number of parking spaces
reserved for use by handicapped individuals, per state and federal
requirements.



      (3)   Above grade, structured parking facilities shall have on
all sides architectural features that are compatible with the principal
building(s) with which they are associated.



      (4)   Parking should be located behind the primary structure,
where feasible.



   (C)   Parking lots shall be designed to provide coordinated access
to parking areas on adjoining tracts or parcels within the primary tier
Overlay Zone. As part of the development plan submission, the petitioner
shall provide a site circulation plan that illustrates to the Plan Commission
how coordinated access will occur relative to the overall State Road 28
Corridor.



   (D)   All parking areas and drives (including residential driveways)
shall be paved with asphalt or concrete. Brick pavers or other decorative
pavements may be used as accents in parking area design. Pour-in-place
concrete curbs shall be used.



(Ord. 08-04, passed 7-14-08; Am. Ord. 14-23, passed 1-26-15)



§ 155.187  SIGNS.



   In reviewing the sign requirements proposed to be constructed in the
primary tier Overlay Zone, factors to be considered by the Plan Commission
shall include, but are not limited to, the standards in § 155.130 as well as
the following:



   (A)   Signage plan. The applicant shall submit a signage plan
pursuant to the process in § 155.172 as part of the development plan
application.



   (B)   General requirements.



      (1)   In the primary tier Overlay District, signage shall be
designed as an integral part of the architectural and landscaping plans. The
colors, materials, and style of signage shall be architecturally compatible
and accentuate the buildings and landscaping on the site. The colors,
materials, and lighting of every sign shall be restrained and harmonious with
the building and site to which it principally relates.



      (2)   Off-premise signs shall be prohibited in the primary
tier of the State Road 28 Overlay District Corridor, unless as otherwise
specified in this section.



      (3)   No awning in the primary tier shall have any wording or
logos.



      (4)   Private traffic direction signs and pavement markings
for the direction and control of traffic into, out of, and within the site
shall conform to the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices as published
by the Indiana Department of Highways.



      (5)   The integration of project signage, particularly the
sharing of poles to identify multiple businesses, is encouraged within the
primary tier of the Overlay District. The Plan Commission shall have the
authority to approve off-premise signage should it determine that such
signage would promote the intent and purposes of the State Road 28 Corridor
Overlay Zone.



      (6)   Every sign shall have good scale and proportion in its
design and in its visual relationship to buildings and surroundings, as shown
in Figure 9: Monument Sign, set forth in Ordinance 14-23 and incorporated
herein by reference.



      (7)   The number of graphic elements on a sign shall be held
to the minimum needed to convey the sign’s major message and shall be
composed in proportion to the area of the sign face.



      (8)   Each sign shall be compatible with signs on adjoining
premises and shall not compete for attention.



      (9)   Identification signs of a prototype design and
corporation logos shall conform to the criteria for all other signs.



   (C)   Off-premise sign regulations.  Off-premise signs shall only
be permitted by right for unified centers such as business parks, office
parks, industrial parks and shopping centers under the provisions contained
herein in the primary tier of the Overlay District. Off-premise signs shall
only identify a building, business, profession or industry not fronting on
State Road 28, but has vehicle access to the State Road 28 Corridor by means
of an easement or county road. Only one such sign shall be displayed for each
unified center. Off-premise signs shall meet the following requirements:



      (1)   Such signs shall not exceed 32 square feet in sign area
for a sign mounted flat on a building, 32 square feet for a monument sign,
and 120 square feet for a freestanding sign.



      (2)   Monument signs shall not exceed six feet in height, and
freestanding signs shall not exceed 25 feet.



   (D)   Sign landscaping. The landscaping plan for any unified
freestanding signs shall be created, as follows:



      (1)   A defined landscaped area shall be placed at the base of
the sign in a design harmonious with the landscape plan for the entire site.
The landscape design should account for seasonal changes and maintain its
attractiveness throughout the year. The required landscaped area shall be
parallel to the sign face.



      (2)   All sign bases must have landscaping extending a minimum
of three feet from all sides of the base.



      (3)   A landscaped area shall contain shrubs or perennial
flowers.



      (4)   The area shall be maintained to keep it free of weeds,
debris and brush.



      (5)   A sketch of the sign and landscaped area shall be
submitted with the sign permit application for review.



(Ord. 08-04, passed 7-14-08; Am. Ord. 14-23, passed 1-26-15)



§ 155.188  LIGHTING REQUIREMENTS.



   A lighting plan for the proposed development (excluding single-family
development) within this Overlay District shall be filed as part of the
development plan application, per § 155.192.



(Ord 08-04, passed 7-14-08; Am. Ord. 14-23, passed 1-26-15)



§ 155.189  ACCESS TO INDIVIDUAL TRACTS.



   As State Road 28 is a limited access highway, and as access to
individual tracts along this highway is either not in existence or not
clearly defined in many cases, access roads will need to be built. In the
primary and secondary tiers of the Overlay District, common entrances shared
by several properties and developments shall be encouraged, and may be
required at the discretion of the Plan Commission, as shown in Figure 13:
Limited Access to Individual Tracts, set forth in Ordinance 14-23 and
incorporated herein by reference. In those cases where tracts can be accessed
via connection to a primary or secondary collector street, local street, or
adjoining parking lot, curb cuts shall not be established on State Road 28.
In order to preserve the aesthetic benefits provided by the green space area,
access roads shall be provided at the rear of all tracts, whenever possible.
Access roads to contiguous tracts shall be coordinated so as to form one main
access road serving adjoining developments. These roads should be designed so
as to funnel traffic onto major collector roads rather than into residential
areas and local county roads that may adjoin or be near this Overlay Zone
that are not designed to handle the capacity. The Plan Commission shall
encourage maximum distances between curb cuts to State Road 28 in cooperation
with the Indiana Department of Transportation.



(Ord. 08-04, passed 7-14-08; Am. Ord. 14-23, passed 1-26-15)



§ 155.190  OTHER REQUIREMENTS.



   The Plan Commission shall consider the following factors but are not
exclusively limited to them when reviewing development proposals in the
primary and secondary tier Overlay Zones:



   (A)   Outside storage of refuse.



      (1)   The subchapter prohibits all unenclosed storage of
refuse (whether or not in containers) or display or merchandise on any
property. All refuse shall be contained, enclosed, and screened on all sides
with a roof structure with a minimum six-foot tall opaque wall, as shown in
Figures 14: Screened Refuse 1 and 15: Screened Refuse 2, set forth in
Ordinance 14-23 and incorporated herein by reference.



      (2)   Refuse collection and recycling areas shall be in the
rear of all buildings and discouraged from view by traffic along State Road
28. Trash receptacles shall be screened on three sides with a minimum
six-foot opaque wall or plant materials, as shown in Figures 14: Screened
Refuse 1 and 15: Screened Refuse 2, set forth in Ordinance 14-23 and
incorporated herein by reference.



      (3)   All refuse collection containers shall be
architecturally compatible with the principal building.



   (B)   Loading areas.



      (1)   The subchapter prohibits the placement of any loading
areas on either the front facade of any building or facing the State Road 28
right-of-way. Petitioners must identify all loading areas on the submitted
plan.



      (2)   Loading spaces, truck bays, railcar ramps, and overhead
doors shall be at the rear or side of a building.



      (3)   Loading areas shall be screened using masonry wall(s),
plant material, or a combination thereof, subject to technical review.



(Ord. 08-04, passed 7-14-08; Am. Ord. 14-23, passed 1-26-15)



§ 155.191  DEVELOPMENT PLANS.



   No improvement location permit shall be issued for any structure or use
in the State Road 28 Overlay District until a development plan has been
submitted, reviewed and approved by the Frankfort Plan Commission in
accordance with these provisions.



   (A)   The application for approval of a proposed development plan
shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator and shall be accompanied by a
fee as specified by the Fee Schedule. The application shall include a drawing
of the proposed development drawn in accordance with standard architectural
and engineering practices and shall show the following:



      (1)   Property lines and total acreage of the parcel proposed
for development.



      (2)   All existing street right-of-ways and easements related
to the development.



      (3)   Location of existing structures, relevant natural
features and other improvements to the property which may affect the
development of the site.



      (4)   Location of proposed structures, walkways, driveways,
entrances, parking facilities, loading space, landscaping, signs, lighting,
fencing, bufferyards, and other site improvements.



      (5)   Contours and sufficient elevations to show proposed
gradings and other site improvements or amenities.



      (6)   Location and approximate size of utilities to serve the
development.



      (7)   A drainage plan which has been approved by the Clinton
County Drainage Board.



      (8)   Architectural design features which comply with the
requirements of this subchapter.



   (B)   Upon submission of a development plan which meets the above
criteria, the Zoning Administrator shall docket the development plan for Plan
Commission review and approval. A public hearing is not required before the
Plan Commission, However, if a variance or a special exception is necessary
from the Board of Zoning Appeals for a proposal, the Board approval must be
received prior to submission to the Commission.



   (C)   Following its review, the Commission may grant preliminary
approval to the proposal, and such approval will authorize the applicant to
proceed with the preparation of a final development plan.



   (D)   The Plan Commission shall not grant preliminary approval
unless all screening, landscaping, parking, loading, outdoor storage, and all
other general development standards of this subchapter and the Comprehensive
Plan are met. Additionally, the Commission shall ensure that all utilities
and drainage are properly planned for and designed. The Commission may
request that other interested agencies review the plan prior to Commission
approval.   



   (E)   Final approval may be granted to a development plan by the
Zoning Administrator after preliminary approval has been granted and when any
conditions which may have been attached to preliminary approval have been met.



(Ord. 08-04, passed 7-14-08; Am. Ord. 14-23, passed 1-26-15)



§ 155.192  OUTDOOR LIGHTING.



   All areas containing outdoor lighting, including but not limited to
floodlighting, security lighting, area lighting, or parking lot lighting
shall comply with the requirement of this chapter. Luminaires shall not be
closer to the property line than a distance equal to three times the
fixture’s mounting height above grade at the property line.



(Ord. 08-04, passed 7-14-08; Am. Ord. 14-23, passed 1-26-15)



§ 155.193  DEFINITIONS FOR §§  155.192 THROUGH 155.205.



   For purposes of §§ 155.192 through 155.205 the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



   AXIS OF ILLUMINATION or CENTERLINE BEAM. The midline of the primary
beam of light emitted by a spotlight, floodlight or other fixture.



   CONSTANT LIGHTING. A light fixture meant to operate continually, and
not meant to operate only briefly upon activation by a motion sensor or other
device. A motion detector activated light would be a non-constant light.



   FIXTURE.  The bulb and the assembly that holds the bulb (or lamp), in
a lighting system, including the elements that provide light output control
such as a reflector (mirror) or refractor (lens) and the ballast,
photosensor, and housing.



   FLOODLIGHT. 



      (1)   A luminaire or bulb which projects light in a specific
direction in a wide beam, typically 100 degrees or more.



      (2)   A fixture or bulb which is intended to project light
primarily in a broad directed beam, typically 100 degrees wide.



   FOOT-CANDLE.  A measure of illumination striking a surface. Measured
by a light meter.



   FULL-CUTOFF (fco).  A light fixture which cuts off all upward
transmission of light.



   FULLY SHIELDED.  A fixture with housing or attachment thereto which
prevents a line of sight to the bulb when viewed from another property and
which prevents a line of sight to any part of the light source at or above a
horizontal plane running through the lowest portion of the fixture.



   GAS DISCHARGE LAMP. Family of bulb type that produces illumination by
passing an electric current through gas. Includes low and high-pressure
sodium, mercury vapor, metal halide and florescent.



   GLARE.  Discomfort experienced by an observer with a direct line of
sight to a light source which often results in annoyance, discomfort or loss
of visual performance causing visual impairment.



   HID LIGHTING.  A family of bulb type known as high intensity
discharge, including high-pressure sodium, mercury vapor, and metal halide.



   HORIZONTAL (OR VERTICAL) FOOT-CANDLES.  The amount of light striking a
vertical or horizontal plane.



   INVENTORY OF LIGHTING. A list of fixtures relative to a parcel,
indicating fixture cutoff design, location, and bulb type, wattage, and bulb
manufacturer from which a lumen rating can be determined.



   IESNA.  Illuminating Engineering Society of North America.



   LAMP.  The bulb.



   LIGHT SOURCE.  Source from which light emanates either directly from
the bulb, or indirectly from a reflective enclosure, lens, or diffuser.



   LIGHT TRESPASS, OR SPILLAGE.  Light projected onto property or onto a
right-of-way from another property.



   LUMEN.  The unit used to measure the actual amount of light that is
produced by a bulb as provided by the manufacturer. A 60-watt incandescent
household bulb is usually 890 lumens. For the purposes of this subchapter,
for HID lighting LUMENS means initial lumens.



   LUMEN CAP.  The specified maximum number of lumens allowed for an
application of outdoor lighting.



   LUMINAIRE.  The complete lighting unit, including the lamp, fixture,
and other parts.



   OUTDOOR LIGHT.  A fixture which illuminates an exterior area. Includes
lighting at locations such as under canopies, pavilions, or drive-through
bays not fully enclosed such that the fixture or the illuminated area is
visible from beyond the property line.



   SPOTLIGHT.  A fixture or bulb which projects light in a specific
direction in a narrow beam, typically 45 degrees or less.



(Ord. 08-04, passed 7-14-08; Am. Ord. 14-23, passed 1-26-15)



§ 155.194  LIGHT TRESPASS.



   All areas containing outdoor lighting shall limit light spillage onto
adjacent property, when measured at any point along a property line to the
requirements set forth below. Compliance shall be achieved by utilizing
fixture shielding, directional control designed into fixtures, fixture
location, height, or aim, or a combination of these or other factors.



 

Adjoining Districts
 
Light Spillage Measured in Foot-candles


Residential A, B, C, and D, LB

Public right-of-way
 


0.10


RB, GB
 
0.20


Residential S, I-1, I-2, I-3
 
0.50



 



(Ord. 08-04, passed 7-14-08; Am. Ord. 14-23, passed 1-26-15)



§ 155.195  ILLUMINATION OF BUILDINGS AND OTHER VERTICAL STRUCTURES.



   When buildings or other structures are illuminated, the design for the
illumination must be in accordance with the following:



   (A)   The maximum illumination on any vertical surface or angular
roof surface shall not exceed 1.0 foot-candle;



   (B)   Lighting fixtures shall be located and/or aimed such that
light is directed only onto the building surface. All fixtures used to
illuminate buildings shall be fully shielded;



   (C)   For statues, monuments, fountains, or other objects for which
it may not be possible to reliably and consistently illuminate with downward
lighting, upward lighting may be used only in the form of spotlights which
confine the illumination to the object of interest; and



   (D)   If upward lighting is used to illuminate flags, only
spotlights (1,500 lumen maximum) shall be used; floodlights directed above
the horizontal shall not be used to illuminate a flag.



(Ord. 08-04, passed 7-14-08 ; Am. Ord. 14-23, passed 1-26-15)



§ 155.196  PARKING AREAS.



   All lighting fixtures serving parking lots shall be full cutoff
fixtures. The minimum illumination level for a parking lot shall be no more
than 0.4 horizontal foot-candles at grade level and the ratio of the average
illumination to the minimum illumination shall not exceed 4:1. Parking lot
light fixtures shall be fully shielded from off site. Such shielding shall
obstruct a line of sight to the bulb with an opaque material when viewed from
the property line. Light poles used in lots designed to contain 100 vehicles
or less shall not exceed 20 feet in height.



(Ord. 08-04, passed 7-14-08 ; Am. Ord. 14-23, passed 1-26-15)



§ 155.197  LIGHTING OF EXTERIOR DISPLAY OR OPEN SALES AREAS.



   Areas designated as exterior display or open sales areas shall be
illuminated so that the average horizontal illumination at grade level does
not exceed 4.0 foot-candles, and the ratio of average to minimum illumination
shall not exceed 4:1. The average and minimum shall be computed for only that
area designated as exterior display or open sales area. Light fixtures shall
be fully shielded from off site. Such shielding shall obstruct a line of
sight to the bulb with an opaque material when viewed from the property line.



(Ord. 08-04, passed 7-14-08 ; Am. Ord. 14-23, passed 1-26-15)



§ 155.198  LIGHTING OF WALKWAYS, BIKEWAYS, PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS.



   Where special lighting is to be provided for walkways, bikeways, or
parks, the following requirements shall apply:



   (A)   The walkway, pathway, or ground area shall be illuminated to a
level of no more than 0.5 average horizontal foot-candles;



   (B)   The vertical illumination levels at a height of five feet
above grade shall be no more than 0.5 average vertical foot-candles; and



   (C)   Lighting fixtures shall be designed to direct light downward,
and the initial output of light sources shall not exceed 1,000 lumens.



(Ord. 08-04, passed 7-14-08 ; Am. Ord. 14-23, passed 1-26-15)



§ 155.199  LIGHTING OF CANOPIES, BAYS AND LOADING AND UNLOADING SPACES.



   (A)   The minimum horizontal illumination under canopies shall not
exceed 5.0 foot-candles at grade level, and the average maintained horizontal
illumination shall not exceed 15 foot-candles. The ratio of average to
minimum illumination shall not exceed 4:1.



   (B)   Areas used for parking or vehicle storage shall be illuminated
in accordance with the requirements for parking lot lighting.



   (C)   Light fixtures mounted on or under canopy ceilings, in bays,
and in loading and unloading spaces shall be full cutoff and fully shielded,
unless indirect lighting is be used whereby light is directed upward and then
reflected down from the ceiling of the structure. In this case, light
fixtures must be shielded so that direct illumination is focused exclusively
on the ceiling of the structure.



   (D)   Lights shall not be mounted on the top or sides of a canopy,
and the sides of a canopy shall not be illuminated.



   (E)   Lighting for drive-through bays must be fully shielded as if
located outside.



(Ord. 08-04, passed 7-14-08 ; Am. Ord. 14-23, passed 1-26-15)



§ 155.200  OUTDOOR ACTIVITY FACILITIES.



   (A)   Outdoor activity facilities may have unique lighting needs
pertaining to the performing or playing area. A design plan for such a
facility shall detail the lighting requirements of the performing or playing
area and how unwanted glare, illumination of surrounding streets and
properties, and nighttime atmospheric light pollution will be minimized.



   (B)   Limits on light trespass appearing in § 155.194 apply to such
outdoor facilities. If floodlighting is used in place of full cutoff
fixtures, the center beam shall be aimed below the horizontal plane at an
angle not less than one-half the angular beam spread of the fixture. Glare
shall be controlled by fixture design, location, and shielding, natural or
positioned obstructions on the parcel where the facilities are located. Every
such lighting system design and installation shall be certified by a
registered engineer as conforming to all applicable restrictions of this
subchapter.



   (C)   Except for professional or amateur events covered by televised
broadcast, 30 foot-candle horizontal illumination of the playing field or
performing area shall not be exceeded. Parking facilities, walkways, and
other lighting applications associated with venues for the outdoor activities
covered herein shall conform to the requirements specified in the sections of
this subchapter applicable to those lighting applications.



(Ord. 08-04, passed 7-14-08 ; Am. Ord. 14-23, passed 1-26-15)



§ 155.201  STREET LIGHTING.



   Unless street light fixtures of a particular period or architectural
style are used, all new, repaired or replaced street lighting, whether public
or private, shall utilize full cutoff fixtures. If street light fixtures of a
particular period or architectural style are used then the maximum lumens
generated by each fixture not designed or installed as full cutoff shall not
exceed 2,000. In no case shall the resulting illumination exceed levels
contained in the Recommended Practices published by the Illuminating
Engineering Society of North America.



(Ord. 08-04, passed 7-14-08 ; Am. Ord. 14-23, passed 1-26-15)



§ 155.202  NEON LIGHTING.



   Light sources consisting of glass tubes filled with neon, argon,
krypton, or other similar gas (hereafter referred to as "neon lighting") are
excluded from shielding and line-of-sight requirements, however such lighting
shall be included in the light trespass requirements of § 155.194. For the
purposes of this subchapter, signs using neon lighting shall be considered
internally illuminated signs and shall be subject to the requirements
specified for internally illuminated signs in § 155.203(C). Neon lighting
shall not be considered as security lighting.



(Ord. 08-04, passed 7-14-08 ; Am. Ord. 14-23, passed 1-26-15)



§ 155.203  SIGN ILLUMINATION.



   (A)   Whenever an external artificial light source is used to
illuminate a sign, such source shall be fully shielded. A receptacle or
device housing a permitted light source shall be top mounted and directed
below the horizontal, except for ground-mounted signs no higher than six feet
which may be illuminated with ground-mounted or bottom-mounted lighting
fixtures.



   (B)   The average level of illumination on the vertical surface of
an externally illuminated sign shall not exceed three foot-candles, unless
permitted ground-mounted or bottom-mounted lighting fixtures are used in
which case the average level of illumination on the vertical surface of the
sign shall not exceed two foot-candles. No exposed bulb or lamp shall be used
on the exterior surface of any sign so as to expose the face of the bulb,
light or lamp to any public right-of-way or adjacent property.



   (C)   Internally illuminated signs constructed with an opaque or
colored background and lighter contrasting text or symbols are preferred;
such construction shall be required for internally illuminated signs within
600 feet of a Residential District; the average level of illumination on the
vertical surface shall not exceed three foot-candles.



(Ord. 08-04, passed 7-14-08 ; Am. Ord. 14-23, passed 1-26-15)



§ 155.204  OTHER OUTDOOR LIGHTING.



   (A)   Outdoor lighting not otherwise specified in this subchaper
emitting more than 1,200 lumens (except motion detector activated lighting)
shall be full cutoff and fully shielded. Bulbs in outdoor light fixtures
emitting from 600 to 1,200 lumens may be installed in fixtures that are not
full cutoff and may be visible from the property line, provided, however,
such bulbs shall be frosted glass or covered by frosted glass or other
similarly translucent material.



   (B)   A spotlight or floodlight of less than 1,800 lumens need not
be full cutoff or fully shielded if its center beam is aimed at a point not
beyond any property lines and no less than 45 degrees below horizontal, is
used for security lighting purposes only, and is motion detector activated
and cycles off within five minutes after the cessation of motion within its
field of view. Such security lighting shall not be activated by normal
business or resident activity.



   (C)   Tower or antenna lighting shall not be permitted unless
required by the Federal Aviation Administration. Required lighting shall be
of the lowest allowed intensity and red unless specifically forbidden under
FAA requirements.



   (D)   The use of search lights, laser lighting, or lights that
pulse, flash, rotate or simulate motion for advertising or promotions is
prohibited with the exception of grand openings that have obtained a permit.



(Ord. 08-04, passed 7-14-08 ; Am. Ord. 14-23, passed 1-26-15)



§ 155.205  LIGHTING PLAN.



   Wherever a lighting plan is called for, such plan shall include the
following:



   (A)   Lighting plan showing buildings, landscaping, parking areas,
and the locations of all proposed exterior lighting fixtures, with
designation of cutoff and/or shielded fixtures;



   (B)   A description of the outdoor light fixtures which may include
but is not limited to manufacturer's catalog cuts, photometric report with
candela distribution, drawings, and shielding information;



   (C)   Proposed mounting height of all exterior lighting fixtures;



   (D)   Analysis and illuminance level diagrams showing that the
proposed installation conforms to the lighting level standards in this
subchapter;



   (E)   For buildings to be illuminated in accordance with the
requirements of this subchapter, the applicant shall include drawings of all
relevant building elevations showing the fixtures, the portions of the walls
to be illuminated, the illuminance levels of the walls, and the aiming points
for any remote light fixtures; and



   (G)   Periodic review of compliance with the submitted lighting plan
may occur at any time.



(Ord. 08-04, passed 7-14-08; Am. Ord. 14-23, passed 1-26-15)



CROSSTOWN OVERLAY DISTRICT



§ 155.210 INTENT.



   The purpose of the Crosstown Overlay District is:



   (A)   To provide special design and usage requirements and entryway
enhancements along major street corridors to meet the goals of the Frankfort
Comprehensive Plan;



   (B)   To establish consistent architectural and design guidelines to
establish a consistent and uniform appearance along the corridor;



   (C)   To provide for the continued of primarily residential use of
properties within the district while accommodating non-residential uses in
existing sites and commercial conversions; and



   (D)   To provide for the preservation of natural features and open
space.



(Ord. 15-07, passed 9-14-15)



§ 155.211  DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.



   Map 1, appearing below, shows the boundaries of the Crosstown Overlay
District. The Overlay District consists of two components. The first
component consists of the State Road 39 corridor from the north corporate
limits to the south corporate limits. The second component consists of the
State Road 28 corridor between Prairie Avenue where the West State Road 28
Overlay District ends and Hoke Avenue where the East State Road 28 Overlay
District begins. Any parcels which abut either street corridor shall be
considered to be entirely within the Crosstown Overlay District. Whenever the
Crosstown Overlay District includes property within the Downtown Frankfort
Historic District, the standards of the Frankfort Downtown Historic District
shall take precedence.







 



(Ord. 15-07, passed 9-14-15)



§ 155.212  REVIEW PROCESS.



   Except as provided below, the City Building Inspector must approve,
approve with conditions, or disapprove the development plan within the
overlay district. The Building Inspector may send any development plan to the
Frankfort Plan Commission for review. Development plans consisting of a
parcel of 10,000 square feet or more in size, the conversion of any
single-family residential use to more than one dwelling unit or
non-residential use and any new principal structure that is being constructed
shall be reviewed and approved by the Plan Commission. Before the Building
Inspector and/or Plan Commission makes a decision, the proposal shall be
reviewed by a technical review committee comprised of appropriate parties and
agencies as determined by the Building Inspector.



(Ord. 15-07, passed 9-14-15)



§ 155.213  USES.



   All land usage requirements in the underlying districts are applicable
in the Crosstown Overlay District, except as provided below:



   (A)   The following uses are permitted by right: expansion of
existing single-family homes, reduction in number of dwelling units in two-
or multi-family structures and the construction of any accessory structure
for a single-family dwelling.



   (B)   The following uses are not permitted in the Crosstown Overlay
District: adult businesses, off-premise signs (billboards), permanent and
temporary roadside sales stands (except for agricultural produce which is
permitted), junk or salvage yards, manufactured homes or heavy equipment
storage or sales, waste incineration or waste transfer stations, and
manufacturing or business uses with processes that are considered dangerous
to the health, safety or welfare of the general public as determined by the
State Board of Health or Clinton County Health Department.



   (C)   The following or similar uses are special exception uses in
the Crosstown Overlay District: change of use from single-family residential
to any other use, change of use of any existing non-conforming commercial or
industrial uses or structures and any special exception use in the East State
Road 28 Overlay District.



   (D)   Accessory uses and structures shall be architecturally
compatible with the primary use or structure within the Overlay District.



(Ord. 15-07, passed 9-14-15)



§ 155.214  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   All development within the Crosstown Overlay District shall comply with
applicable lot size, height and other standards in the underlying district,
in addition to the following design standards.



   (A)   Green space areas. Green space shall be provided, except for
cases where average setback is closer, for all development that fronts on
State Road 39 and State Road 28.



      (1)   For all parcels that are undeveloped there must be a
20-foot wide green space area adjacent to and parallel to the road. The front
half of this green space must consist of grass and be reserved for utility
easement and or sidewalks. The other half shall consist of attractive
planting areas and shall include flowers, shrubs, and trees for a minimum of
50% of their length and must include some flowering vegetation. The remainder
shall be planted with grass.



      (2)    If a parcel is already improved, has a calculated
average setback for new construction that is within the first 20 feet, or has
an existing structure being expanded or remodeled within the overlay zone
fronting State Road 39 or State Road 28, then that parcel or structure shall
be subject to the green space regulations to the extent possible due to space
limitations as determined by the Building Inspector and/or Plan Commission.







 



   (B)   Building design standards. The following standards apply to
the design of structures within the Crosstown Overlay District.



      (1)   New buildings shall be compatible in scale, color,
massing and pitch with existing buildings within one block of property within
the Overlay District. Building additions shall utilize similar roof styles
and pitches as those found on the existing building, or alternative designs
that are compatible with the existing building design as determined by the
Building Inspector.



      (2)   New buildings shall be limited to three stories or 35
feet, whichever is greater and building additions shall be no taller than the
existing structure being added to.



      (3)   Primary building materials for new structures shall
consist of high quality, long lasting materials such as brick, stone, stucco
or acceptable stucco-like products, wood, or fiber cement materials. Building
additions and accessory buildings shall be constructed of materials that are
compatible with the existing building.



      (4)   Any porches that are removed must be rebuilt compatible
with the size, style and design of the porch that is removed as originally
designed when the house was first built.



      (5)   In residentially zoned areas, new buildings shall have a
residential appearance in terms of their overall scale, massing and design
details.



      (6)   All non-residential uses and structures shall comply
with applicable building design standards of the Crosstown East State Road 28
Overlay District.



   (C)   Setbacks. A build-to zone that is based on the setbacks
present on adjacent properties shall be established to regulate setbacks for
new buildings and additions. The front building wall shall be located within
the established build-to zone. Build-to zones shall be established as follows:



      (1)   For new buildings, the front wall of the building shall
be located within five feet of the average of the setbacks on the two
adjacent properties, but no closer to the street than the closest of the
adjacent structures or five feet, whichever is greater.



      (2)   Building additions are aligned on the street side of
existing structures. Open front porches and stoops that are no more than one
story in height may encroach into the front setback by up to five feet, and
may include a roof. However, a minimum five-foot setback must be maintained.



      (3)   Average setbacks shall take precedence over required
green space where there is a conflict between the two.



   (D)   Sidewalks and walkways. Pedestrian walkways and sidewalks
shall be provided on each lot in order to promote pedestrian access and
reduce vehicle traffic impacts. Sidewalks and pedestrian walkways shall meet
the following requirements. Green space required by division (A) above may be
used to meet the requirements of this section to the extent possible.



      (1)   For all uses, sidewalks shall be provided along all
sides of the lot consistent with the design and construction requirements of
the Frankfort Zoning and/or Subdivision Control Ordinance and Complete Street
Policy. Sidewalks shall be connected to adjacent or nearby existing sidewalks
to the extent possible.



      (2)   For non-residential uses, pedestrian walkways shall be
provided from the sidewalks to the main customer entrance of the structures
on each lot and along the full length of any facade of a building that
includes a customer entrance or abuts a parking area and shall meet
appropriate standards of the East State Road 28 Overlay District.



   (E)   Outdoor display of merchandise. In non-residentially zoned
areas, merchandise may be stored or displayed for sale to customers only in
areas near the primary structure on each property. The storage of outdoor
merchandise for sale elsewhere on the property shall be seasonal. Permanent
outdoor storage areas shall not be in a required front setback area and shall
be (1) enclosed by a minimum six-foot tall wall, or (2) composed of a
three-foot tall base wall topped by wrought iron or tubular steel fencing. No
merchandise shall be visible above the wall or fencing.



   (F)   Parking. Parking is encouraged to be located behind or along
the side of buildings to the extent possible. The parking area shall be
improved with an impervious surface.



      (1)   All vehicle maneuvering shall be accommodated on-site,
with no backing into the public street from on-site parking spaces.



      (2)   Single lane drives to rear yard parking areas shall be
permitted when existing building changes in use. However, such drive should
be widened to two lanes near the street where possible to allow vehicles to
pass while entering and exiting the site.



      (3)   For non-residential uses, parking areas containing more
than four parking spaces shall be screened from adjacent residentially zoned
properties by landscaping or wood fencing.



   (G)   Refuse storage areas. All unenclosed storage of refuse is
prohibited (whether or not in containers). All refuse shall be contained,
enclosed, and screened on all sides with a roofed structure with a minimum
six-foot tall screen that is architecturally compatible with the principal
structure. Refuse collection and recycling areas shall be in the rear of all
structures away from view by traffic along State Road 39 and State Road 28.
All trash and refuse shall be stored in these designated areas until 7:00
p.m. of the day before trash pick up occurs when trash may be placed at its
designated pick up location.



   (H)   Lighting. A lighting plan for the proposed development shall
be filed as part of the development plan application as required by the
lighting standards of § 155.201 of this chapter.



   (I)   Signage. In residentially zoned areas, permanent signs for
commercial purposes shall be prohibited. In commercially zoned areas, in
addition to the sign standards of the underlying district, the following
signage requirements shall be complied with to the extent possible:



      (1)   Signage shall be designed as an integral part of the
architectural and landscaping plans. The colors, materials, scale and style
of signage shall be architecturally compatible and accentuate the buildings
and landscaping of the site and adjacent properties. The number of graphic
elements on a sign shall be held to the minimum needed to convey the sign's
major message and shall be composed in proportion to the area of the sign
face.



      (2)   No awning in the Overlay District shall have any wording
or logos.



      (3)   Private traffic direction signs and pavement markings
for the direction and control of traffic into, out of, and within the site
shall conform to the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices as published
by the Indiana Department of Transportation.



      (4)   The integration of project signage, particularly the
sharing of poles to identify multiple businesses, is encouraged with the
Overlay District.



      (5)   Off-premise signs shall only be permitted by right for
unified centers such as office or industrial parks or shopping centers. Such
off-premise signs shall only identify a building, business, profession or
industry not fronting on State Road 39 or State Road 28, but having vehicle
access to the road by means of easement or shared access. There may be only
one sign for each unified center and shall not exceed 32 square feet for
building mounted signs or 120 square feet for a free-standing sign. The signs
shall have landscaping extending a minimum of three feet from all sides of
the base.



   (J)   Common entrances shared by several properties and development
shall be encouraged in the Crosstown Overlay District. Access road to
contiguous tracts shall be coordinated so as to form one main access road
serving adjoin developments.







 



(Ord. 15-07, passed 9-14-15)



§ 155.215  SEVERABILITY.



   If any section, clause, provision, or portion of the Overlay Section of
the zoning code is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of
competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this chapter shall not be affected.



(Ord. 15-07, passed 9-14-15)



FRANKFORT DOWNTOWN HISTORIC DISTRICT



§ 155.230  FRANKFORT DOWNTOWN HISTORIC DISTRICT ESTABLISHED.



   There is hereby established the Frankfort Downtown Historic District,
as described in the map attached to Ord. 16-22 as Exhibit A, and in the legal
description attached to Ord. 16-22 as Exhibit B, and made a part hereof;
which district is approved as a local historic district in accordance with
I.C. 36-7-11-7 and § 155.404.



(Ord. 16-22, passed 1-23-17)



§ 155.231  HISTORICAL STANDARDS.



   (A)   The historical standards for the Frankfort Downtown Historic
District (revised January 3, 2017), a copy of which are attached to Ord.
16-22 as Exhibit C and made a part hereof, are hereby approved and adopted.



   (B)   The classification and designation of certain buildings,
structures and sites within the Frankfort Downtown Historic District, as
referred to in the historical standards attached to Ord. 16-22 as Exhibit C,
are hereby approved and adopted.



   (C)   At least two copies of Ord. 16-22, together with the map
attached thereto as Exhibit A and the historical standards attached thereto
as Exhibit C, shall be kept on file with both the Office of the
Clerk-Treasurer and the Office of the City Engineer.



(Ord. 16-22, passed 1-23-17)



AIRPORT OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICT



§ 155.240  AIRPORT OVERLAY DISTRICT.



   The Airport Overlay Zoning (AO) District shall include all zones as
indicated on the Frankfort Municipal Airport Airspace Plan, dated October 3,
2006, which is a part of this subchapter and incorporated herein by
reference. All land so indicated is hereby zoned and classified as the
Airport Overlay Zoning District.



(Ord. 10-01, passed 1-25-10)



§ 155.241  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   It is hereby found that an airport hazard has the potential for
endangering the lives and property of users of Frankfort Municipal Airport,
and property or occupants of land in its vicinity; that an airport hazard may
affect existing and future instrument approach minimums of Frankfort
Municipal Airport; and that an airport hazard may reduce the size of areas
available for the landing, takeoff, and maneuvering of aircraft, thus tending
to destroy or impair the utility of Frankfort Municipal Airport and the
public investment therein. Accordingly, it is declared:



   (A)   That the creation or establishment of an airport hazard has
the potential of being a public nuisance and may injure the region served by
the Frankfort Municipal Airport;



   (B)   That it is necessary in the interest of the public health,
public safety, and general welfare that the creation or establishment of
airport hazards be prevented; and



   (C)   That the prevention of the creation or establishment of
hazards to air navigation, the elimination, removal, alteration or mitigation
of hazards to air navigation, or marking and lighting of obstructions are
public purposes for which a political subdivision may raise and expend public
funds and acquire land or interests in land.



(Ord. 10-01, passed 1-25-10)



§ 155.242  AIRPORT ZONES.



   In order to carry out the provisions of the Airport Overlay District,
there are hereby created and established certain zones which include all of
the land lying within the approach zones, conical zone, horizontal zone,
transitional zones, noise sensitive zone and wildlife attractant zones as
they apply to the Frankfort Municipal Airport. Such zones are shown on the
Frankfort Municipal Airport Airspace Plan consisting of two sheets, dated
October 3, 2006, which is attached to Ordinance 10-01 and made a part hereof
and incorporated by reference as if fully set forth herein. An area located
in more than one of the following zones is considered to be only in the zone
with the more restrictive height limitation as defined in § 155.243. The
various zones are hereby established in accordance with FAR Part 77 and
defined as follows:



   (A)   Runway 4-22 Approach Zones, larger than utility with visual
approaches.  The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width
of the primary surface which is 500 feet wide. The approach zone extends
outward uniformly to a width of 1,500 feet at a horizontal distance of 5,000
feet from the primary surface. Its centerline is the continuation of the
centerline of the runway.



   (B)   Runway 9-27 Approach Zones, with precision instrument
approaches. The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of
the primary surface which is 1,000 feet wide. The approach zone expands
outward uniformly to a width of 16,000 feet at a horizontal distance of
50,000 feet from the primary surface. Its centerline being the continuation
of the centerline of the runway.



   (C)   Conical Zone. The conical zone is hereby established as the
area that commences at the periphery of the horizontal zone and extends
outward there from a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet. The conical zone does
not include the precision instrument approach zone and the transitional zones.



   (D)   Horizontal Zone.  The horizontal zone is hereby established
by swinging arcs of 10,000 feet radii from the center of each end of the
primary surface of Runway 9-27, and connecting the adjacent arcs by drawing
lines tangent to those arcs. The horizontal zone does not include the
approach and transitional zones.



   (E)   Transitional Zones.  These zones are hereby established as
the area beneath the transitional surfaces. These surfaces extend outward and
upward perpendicular to the runway centerline and the runway extended
centerline. Transitional zones, for those portions of the precision approach
zones which project through and beyond the limits of the conical surface,
extend a distance of 5,000 feet measured horizontally from the edge of the
approach zones and perpendicular to the extended runway centerline.



   (F)   Noise Sensitive Zone.  This zone is hereby established as the
areas lying 1,500 feet on either side of the centerline and extended
centerline of the runways for a distance of one nautical mile from the point
of which the extended runway centerline crosses the airport boundary.



   (G)   Wildlife Attractant Zone A. This zone is hereby established
within a distance of 10,000 feet from the farthest edge of the airport's air
operations area (AOA).



   (H)   Wildlife Attractant Zone B.  This zone is hereby established
beyond 10,000 from the farthest edge of the airport's air operations area
(AOA) and within five statute miles from the farthest edge of the airport's
AOA.



(Ord. 10-01, passed 1-25-10)



§ 155.243  HEIGHT LIMITATIONS.



   Within the Airport Overlay District, the following height limitations
apply.



   (A)   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed as prohibiting
the planting, growth, construction or maintenance of any tree or structure to
maximum height of 50 feet above the ground. Except as otherwise provided in
this subchapter, no structure or tree shall be erected, altered, or
maintained, or be allowed to grow in any zone created by this subchapter to a
height in excess of the applicable height limits herein established for such
zone. The applicable height limitations are hereby established for each of
the zones in question as follows:



      (1)   Runway 4-22 Approach Zones, larger than utility with
visual approaches. Slope upward 20 feet horizontally for each foot
vertically, beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary
surface and extending to a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet along the
extended runway.



      (2)   Runway 9-27 Approach Zones, with precision instrument
approaches.  Slopes upward 50 feet horizontally for each foot vertically
beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and
extending to a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet along the extended runway
centerline at which point the slope changes to an upward slope of 40 feet
horizontally for each foot vertically for an additional horizontal distance
of 40,000 feet.



      (3)   Conical Zone. Slopes upward and outward 20 feet
horizontally for each foot vertically beginning at the periphery of the
horizontal zone and at 150 feet above the airport elevation and extending to
a height of 350 feet above the airport elevation.



      (4)   Horizontal Zone.  Elevated 150 feet above the airport
elevation at a height of 1,011 feet above mean sea level.



      (5)   Transitional Zones.  Slopes upward and outward seven
feet horizontally for each foot vertically, beginning at the sides of and at
the same elevation as the primary surface and the approach surfaces and
extending to a height of 150 feet above the airport elevation which is 1,011
feet above mean sea level. In addition to the foregoing, there are
established height limits sloping seven feet outward for each foot upward
beginning at the sides of and the same elevation as the approach surface, and
extending to where they intersect the conical surface. Where the precision
instrument runway approach zone projects beyond the conical zone, height
limits sloping upward and outward seven feet horizontally for each foot
vertically shall by maintained beginning at the sides of and at the same
elevation as the precision instrument runway approach surface, and extending
to a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet measured at right angles to the
extended runway centerline.



   (B)   Additional height limitations. Except as otherwise provided in
the Airport Overlay District, no structure or tree shall be erected, altered,
or maintained, or be allowed to grow in any zone created by the Airport
Overlay District to a height in excess of the additional height limits herein
established by I.C. 8-21-10-7 and defined as follows:



      (1)   A height that is 500 feet above ground level or 1,361
feet above mean sea level at the site of the object.



      (2)   A height that is 200 feet above ground level or 1,061
feet above mean sea level, within three nautical miles of the established
reference point of the airport, and that height increases in the proportion
of 100 feet for each additional nautical mile of distance from the airport up
to a maximum of 500 feet.



(Ord. 10-01, passed 1-25-10)



§ 155.244  NOISE SENSITIVE ZONE.



   Except as provided below, the underlying district land usage specified
in this section of this subchapter shall be met in the Noise Sensitive Zone.



   (A)   Schools, libraries and hospitals are prohibited.



   (B)   New residential uses are subject to written acknowledgment
which must be recorded for the subject property prior to the issuance for an
improvement location permit.



      "The owners of subject property shall be aware that they are in
the vicinity of the Frankfort Airport. They are hereby made known by this
notification that there are activities at this Airport which produce noise,
vibration, light, glare and odor at all hours of the day and night and which
are used or intended to be used for the taking off and landing of aircraft
and any appurtenance areas which are used or intended to be used for airport
buildings or facilities, including runways, taxiways, hangars and tie-downs
areas that go on during the operation of an airport. Each owner and their
heirs, assigns, and successors in interest shall not initiate or support any
action in any court or before any governmental agency and are precluded from
protest, objection, interference with, restriction of or reduction of the
operation of the airport, complaining, seeking damages and/or attempting to
enjoin the use of property (land) for such purpose. This condition and
agreement shall also run with the land as is irrevocable".



(Ord. 10-01, passed 1-25-10)



§ 155.245  WILDLIFE ATTRACTANT ZONES.



   The following standards apply to wildlife attractant zones.



   (A)   Wildlife Attractant Zone A. In accordance with AC 150/5200-33A
and notwithstanding any other provisions of this subchapter, no use may be
made of land or water within any zone established by this subchapter in such
a manner as to create a wildlife attractant hazard within a distance of
10,000 feet from the farthest edge of the airport's air operations area
(AOA). These wildlife attractant hazards include, but are not limited to, the
construction of municipal solid waste landfills, trash transfer stations not
fully enclosed, underwater waste discharges, construction and demolition
debris facilities co-located with another waste disposal operations, fly ash
disposal from general incinerators, wastewater treatment facilities,
artificial marshes, wetlands, dredge spoil containment areas, livestock
production, aquaculture, and golf courses.



   (B)   Wildlife Attractant Zone B.  In the event the above mentioned
wildlife attractants are considered for construction beyond 10,000 from the
farthest edge of the airport's air operations area (AOA) and within five
statute miles from the farthest edge of the airport's AOA, they may be
restricted if the wildlife attractant could cause hazardous movement into or
across the approach or departure surface from the airport. The application
for the wildlife attractant shall be submitted to the Airport Authority for
review and comment within 15 days prior to granting a permit for
construction. In the event the Airport Authority finds the wildlife
attractant objectionable because it is a hazard to air navigation,
appropriate mitigation would be required prior to approving a permit. In the
event the mitigation required creates an undo financial hardship on the
applicant, the applicant may ask for financial assistance through the Airport
Authority. In the event the Airport Authority is unable to grant financial
assistance for the mitigation, the requirements maybe forgone and a permit
granted with no further action required on the part of the applicant. These
wildlife attractant hazards include, but are not limited to, the construction
of municipal solid waste landfills, trash transfer stations not fully
enclosed, underwater waste discharges, construction and demolition debris
facilities co-located with another waste disposal operations, fly ash
disposal from general incinerators, wastewater treatment facilities,
artificial marshes, wetlands, dredge spoil containment areas, livestock
production, aquaculture, and golf courses.



(Ord. 10-01, passed 1-25-10)



§ 155.246  RELATION TO UNDERLYING ZONE.



   This District is created as a special overlay district to be
superimposed on underlying primary zoning districts. Development standards
provided herein are intended to supplement those permitted in the underlying
primary zoning district and in some cases may be more restrictive than those
of the underlying zoning district. When the requirements of the underlying
zoning district and the overlay district appear to be in conflict, the more
restrictive shall apply.



   (A)   Except as specified by § 155.244 above, all uses which are
permitted by right or are permitted by special exception in the underlying
primary zoning districts are permitted by right or by special exception, as
applicable, in the Airport Overlay District.



   (B)   Uses which are prohibited in the underlying primary zoning
district are prohibited in the Airport Overlay District.



(Ord. 10-01, passed 1-25-10)



§ 155.247  COMMUNICATION AND VISIBILITY INTERFERENCE PROHIBITED.



   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this subchapter, no use may be
made of land or water within the established Airport Overlay District in such
a manner as to create electrical interference with navigational signals or
radio communication between the airport and aircraft, make it difficult for
pilots to distinguish between airport lights and others, result in glare in
the eyes of pilots using the airport, impair visibility in the vicinity of
the airport, create bird strike hazards, or otherwise in any way create a
hazard, endanger or interfere with the landing, takeoff, or maneuvering of
aircraft intending to use the airport.



(Ord. 10-01, passed 1-25-10)



§ 155.248  MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS.



   The following miscellaneous provisions apply to the Airport Overlay
District.



   (A)   Regulations not retroactive.  The regulations prescribed in
the Airport Overlay District shall not be construed to require the removal,
lowering, or other change or alteration of any structure or tree not
conforming to the regulations as of the effective date of adoption of the
Airport Overlay District, or otherwise interfere with the continuance of a
nonconforming use. Nothing contained herein shall require any change in the
construction, alteration, or intended use of any structure, the construction
or alteration of which was begun prior to the effective date of adoption of
the Airport Overlay District, and is diligently prosecuted.



   (B)   Existing uses.  No permit shall be granted that would allow
the establishment or creation of an obstruction or permit a nonconforming use
or structure to become a greater hazard to air navigation, than it was on the
effective date of adoption of the Airport Overlay District or any amendments
thereto or than it is when the application for a permit is made.



(Ord. 10-01, passed 1-25-10)



§ 155.249  ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.



   It shall be the duty of the Frankfort Building Inspector to administer
and enforce this subchapter as specified in § 155.125. No material change
shall be made in the use of land, no structure shall be erected, altered or
otherwise established in any zone hereby created unless a permit shall have
been applied for and granted by the Building Inspector. Prior to issuance of
the permit, the Airport Authority shall be notified on a form approved by the
Plan Commission and Airport Authority.



(Ord. 10-01, passed 1-25-10)



§ 155.250  VARIANCES.



   The Frankfort Board of Zoning Appeals shall consider variance request
from the provisions of this section according to the procedures in §
155.128. In addition to the requirements of § 155.128 the application for
variance shall be accompanied by a determination from the Airport Authority
as to the effect of the proposal on the operation of air navigation
facilities and the safe, efficient use of navigable airspace.



(Ord. 10-01, passed 1-25-10)



§ 155.251  OBSTRUCTION MARKING AND LIGHTING.



   Any permit or variance granted may, if such action is deemed advisable
to effectuate the purpose of this subchapter and be reasonable in the
circumstances, be so conditioned as to require the owner of the structure or
tree in question to install, operate, and maintain, at the owner's expense,
such markings and lights as may be necessary. If deemed proper by the Airport
Authority, this condition may be modified to require the owner to permit the
City of Frankfort Municipal, at its own expense, to install, operate, and
maintain the necessary markings and lights.



(Ord. 10-01, passed 1-25-10)



EAST STATE ROAD 28 OVERLAY DISTRICT



§ 155.265  INTENT.



   The purpose of the East State Road 28 Overlay District is:



   (A)   To provide special design and usage requirements and entryway
enhancements to meet the goals of the Frankfort Comprehensive Plan;



   (B)   To establish consistent architectural and design guidelines to
establish a consistent and uniform appearance along the corridor; and



   (C)   To provide for the preservation of natural features and open
space.



(Ord. 14-22, passed 1-26-15)



§ 155.266  DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.



   Map 1, set forth in Ordinance 14-22 and incorporated herein by
reference, shows the boundaries of the East State Road 28 Overlay District.
The Overlay District consists of two tiers. Tier one is all land west of
Maish Road that is within the overlay district and tier two is all land that
is east of Maish Road.



(Ord. 14-22, passed 1-26-15)



§ 155.267  REVIEW PROCESS.



   The City Building Inspector must approve, approve with conditions, or
disapprove the development plan within the Overlay District. The Building
Inspector may send any development plan to the Frankfort Plan Commission for
review. Development plans consisting of a parcel of 20,000 square feet  or
more in size or any new principal structure that is being constructed shall
be reviewed and approved by the Plan Commission. Before making a decision by
the Building Inspector and/or Plan Commission, the proposal shall be reviewed
by a technical review committee comprised of appropriate parties and agencies
as determined by the Building Inspector.



(Ord. 14-22, passed 1-26-15)



§ 155.268  USES.



   Except as provided below, all land usage requirements in the underlying
districts are applicable in the East State Road 28 Overlay District.



   (A)   All existing single family residential and agricultural uses
shall be exempt from the requirements of this Overlay District. Any
residential accessory structures or construction of an addition to a
principal structure not exceeding 2,000 square feet and not visible from
State Road 28 are also exempt.



   (B)   The following uses are not permitted in the East State Road 28
Overlay District: adult businesses, off-premise signs (billboards), permanent
and temporary roadside sales stands (except for agricultural produce which is
permitted), junk or salvage yards, manufactured homes or heavy equipment
storage or sales, waste incineration or waste transfer stations, and
manufacturing or business uses with processes that are considered dangerous
to the health, safety or welfare of the general public as determined by the
State Board of Health or Clinton County Health Department.



   (C)   The following or similar uses are special exception uses in
the East State Road 28 Overlay District: drive-through windows at any
establishment, new and used motor and recreational vehicles and boat sales,
truck and trailer rentals or sales, automotive repair and service, outdoor
storage, self-service car washes, self storage facilities, wholesale or
warehouse establishments not entirely contained within buildings, and any
manufacturing establishment permitted in the overlying district.



   (D)   Accessory uses and structures shall be architecturally
compatible with the primary use or structure within the Overlay District.



(Ord. 14-22, passed 1-26-15)



§ 155.269  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   All development within the East State Road 28 Overlay District shall
comply with applicable lot size, height and other standards in the underlying
district, in addition to the following design standards.



   (A)   Green space areas. Green space shall be provided for all
development that front on State Road 28.



      (1)   For all lots in tier one that front on State Road 28
there must be a 20-foot wide green space area adjacent to and parallel to the
road. The front half of this green space must consist of grass and be
reserved for utility easement and or sidewalks. The other half shall consist
of attractive planting areas and shall include flowers, shrubs, and trees for
a minimum of 50% of their length and must include some flowering vegetation.
The remainder shall be planted with grass.



      (2)   For all lots in tier two that front on State Road 28
there must a 30-foot wide green space adjacent to and parallel to the road.
The front half of this green space must consist of grass and be reserved for
utility easement and or sidewalks. The other half shall consist of attractive
planting areas and shall include flowers, shrubs, and trees for a minimum of
50% of their length and must include some flowering vegetation. The remainder
shall be planted with grass.



      (3)   If a parcel is already improved or an existing structure
is expanded or remodeled within the Overlay Zone fronting State Road 28, then
that parcel or structure shall be subject to the regulations to the extent
possible due to space limitations as determined by the Building Inspector
and/or Plan Commission.



   (B)   Architectural standards (facade walls). A FACADE WALL shall be
defined as any exterior wall visible from a street (public or private) or
other East State Road 28 Overlay zoned property. All facade walls shall meet
the following requirements:



      (1)   Exterior materials. Metal building construction and post
building construction (also known as pre-engineered building systems) shall
not be permitted. The use of smooth-faced concrete block, untextured
smooth-faced tilt-up panels, and standing seam metal panels shall be
prohibited. The City Building Inspector shall approve or deny the use of all
composite and alternative materials that replicate the appearance and
durability of those listed below. All facade wall exterior building materials
shall be high quality materials, and shall be limited to any combination of
the following: brick or face tile; wood; native stone; glass; tilt-up
concrete panels or tinted and/or textured concrete masonry units (such as
split-face block and burnished block); architectural pre-cast concrete; and
architectural metal.



      (2)   Exterior colors. Exterior facade wall colors shall be
low reflectance, subtle, neutral, or earth tones. The use of high intensity,
primary, metallic, black or fluorescent colors shall be prohibited. Building
trim and accent areas may feature brighter colors or primary colors. Such
building trim and accent areas shall not exceed 10% of any single exterior
wall area excluding all windows, doors, and glass construction materials.



      (3)   Roof design. All roofs or parapets should vary
three-dimensionally to add visual interest to the building and shall include
architectural detailing, cornices, moldings, trims, variations in brick
coursing, and other similar detailing. All roofs shall comply with the
following:



         (a)   All roof-top mechanical equipment, such as HVAC
units, shall be screened from the view of all streets (public and private)
and all properties in the Overlay District by parapets, dormers, or other
screens. The material of all such screens shall be consistent with the
exterior materials used on the facade of the structure.



         (b)   Sloped roofs shall not exceed an average height
equal to that of the supporting walls.



         (c)   Sloped roofs shall have overhanging eaves that
extend past the supporting walls.



         (d)   Sloped roofs shall either be of architectural
standing seam metal, tile, slate, or dimensional shingles.



      (4)   Main entrance. The main entrance to the primary
structure shall be located on the facade wall that fronts on a public street.
If the structure fronts on two or more public streets, the main entrance
shall be located on the facade wall that fronts on the street with the
greatest traffic volume. The main entrance of the structure must be
articulated through the use of architectural detailing.



      (5)   Entry features. Entry features shall be provided at the
main entrance to each primary structure and shall include at the main
entrance to each primary structure and shall include at least three of the
following design elements:



         (a)   Raised corniced parapets over the door, peaked
roof forms having an average slope greater than or equal to a minimum 5/12
pitch, arches, or architectural details such as tile work and moldings that
are integrated into the building structure and design;



         (b)   Integral planters or wing walls that incorporate
landscaped areas and or places for sitting;



         (c)   Enhanced exterior light such as wall sconces,
building mounted accent lights, or decorative pedestal lights;



         (d)   A prominent three-dimensional entryway feature,
such as a clock tower or other similar architectural design element,
projecting from the vertical plane of the main exterior wall by a minimum of
four feet and raised above the adjoining parapet wall/roof by a minimum of
three feet; or



         (e)   Pilasters projecting from the plane of the wall by
a minimum of eight inches and/or architectural or decorative columns that
create visual breaks and interest in the facade walls.



      (6)   Display windows. All commercial building facade walls
shall have display windows, faux windows, or decorative windows for no less
than 50% of the facade wall’s horizontal length along all pedestrian
walkways.



   (C)   Sidewalks and pedestrian walkways. Pedestrian walkways and
sidewalks shall be provided on each lot in order to promote pedestrian access
and reduce vehicle traffic impacts. Sidewalks and pedestrian walkways shall
meet the following requirements. Green space required by division (A) above
may be used to meet the requirements of this section to the extent possible.



      (1)   Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be provided along all sides
of the lot consistent with the design and construction requirements of the
Frankfort Zoning and/or Subdivision Control Ordinance. Sidewalks shall be
connected to adjacent or nearby existing sidewalks to the extent possible.



      (2)   Pedestrian walkways. Pedestrian walkways shall be
provided from the sidewalks to the main customer entrance of the structures
on each lot and along the full length of any facade of a building that
includes a customer entrance or abuts a parking area.



         (a)   Walkways connecting the structure entries with the
sidewalks shall be concrete, and a minimum of five feet in width. They shall
be bordered on each side by a planting area that is a minimum two feet in
width. The planting areas on each side of the sidewalk shall each include
flowers, shrubs, and trees for a minimum of 50% of their length and must
include some flowering vegetation. The remainder shall be planted with grass.



         (b)   Where walkways are parallel to parking lots and/or
interior drives the bordering landscape area shall be a minimum of five feet
in width, and shall be curbed on the side adjoining the vehicle area.



         (c)   Where walkways pass through vehicle use areas they
shall be of a paving material different from that of the vehicle use area,
such as unique pavers, bricks, or scored concrete, to distinguish them as a
pedestrian route.



         (d)   Walkways along the facades of the building shall
be concrete, shall be a minimum of five feet in width, and shall be separated
from the building by a landscape area that is a minimum of five feet in
width. The landscape area shall include benches and seating areas, and be
planted with flowers, trees, and shrubs for a minimum of 50% of its length.



         (e)   Weather protection features, such as awnings or
arcades shall be provided over all sidewalks within ten feet of all customer
entrances.



   (D)   Outdoor merchandise storage areas. Merchandise may be stored
or displayed for sale to customers only in areas near the primary structure
on each property. The storage of outdoor merchandise for sale elsewhere on
the property shall be seasonal. Permanent outdoor storage areas shall not be
in a required front setback area and shall be (1) enclosed by a minimum
six-foot tall wall, or (2) composed of a three-foot tall base wall topped by
wrought iron or tubular steel fencing. No merchandise other than trees shall
be visible above the wall or fencing. Each wall shall comply with the
building materials requirements of division (B)(1) and (2) above.



   (E)   Outdoor storage of refuse. All unenclosed storage of refuse is
prohibited (whether or not in containers). All refuse shall be contained,
enclosed, and screened on all sides with a roofed structure with a minimum
six-foot tall screen that is architecturally compatible with the principal
structure. Refuse collection and recycling areas shall be in the rear of all
structures away from view by traffic along State Road 28.



   (F)   Lighting. A lighting plan for the proposed development shall
be filed as part of the development plan application as required by the
lighting standards of § 155.201.



   (G)   Signage. In addition to the sign standards of the underlying
district, the following signage requirements shall be complied with to the
extent possible:



      (1)   Signage shall be designed as an integral part of the
architectural and landscaping plans. The colors, materials, scale and style
of signage shall be architecturally compatible and accentuate the buildings
and landscaping of the site and adjacent properties. The number of graphic
elements on a sign shall be held to the minimum needed to convey the sign’s
major message and shall be composed in proportion to the area of the sign
face.



      (2)   No awning in the Overlay District shall have any wording
or logos.



      (3)   Private traffic direction signs and pavement markings
for the direction and control of traffic into, out of, and within the site
shall conform to the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices as published
by the Indiana Department of Transportation.



      (4)   The integration of project signage, particularly the
sharing of poles to identify multiple businesses, is encouraged with the
Overlay District.



      (5)   Off-premise signs shall only be permitted by right for
unified centers such as office or industrial parks or shopping centers. Such
off-premise signs shall only identify a building, business, profession or
industry not fronting on State Road 28, but having vehicle access to the road
by means of easement or shared access. There may be only one sign for each
unified center and shall not exceed 32 square feet for building-mounted signs
or 120 square feet for a free-standing sign. The signs shall have landscaping
extending a minimum of three feet from all sides of the base.



   (H)   Common access. Common entrances shared by several properties
and development shall be encouraged in the East State Road 28 Overlay
District. Access road to contiguous tracts shall be coordinated so as to form
one main access road serving adjoin developments.



(Ord. 14-22, passed 1-26-15)



HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION



§ 155.400  PURPOSE.



   (A)   Purposes of historic preservation and protection:



      (1)   To promote the educational, cultural and general welfare
of the citizens of Frankfort and to ensure the harmonious and orderly growth
and development of the municipality;



      (2)   To maintain established residential neighborhoods in
danger of having their distinctiveness destroyed;



      (3)   To enhance property values and attract new residents;



      (4)   To ensure the viability of the traditional downtown area
and to enhance heritage tourism within the City of Frankfort.



   (B)   It is deemed essential by the City of Frankfort that qualities
relating to its history and harmonious outward appearance of its structures
be preserved.



   (C)   This purpose is advanced through the restoration and
preservation of historic areas and buildings, the construction of compatible
new buildings where appropriate, and the maintenance and insurance of
compatibility in regards to style, form, proportion, texture, and material
between historic buildings and those of contemporary design. It is the
intention of the City of Frankfort through this subchapter to preserve and
protect historic and architecturally worthy buildings, structures, sites,
monuments, streetscapes, and neighborhoods which impart a distinct aesthetic
quality to the city and serve as visible reminders of its historic heritage.



(Ord. 15-02, passed 3-23-15)



§ 155.401  DEFINITIONS.



   The following terms shall have the following meanings unless a contrary
meaning is required by the context or is specifically prescribed. Words in
the present tense include the future tense. The singular number includes the
plural, and the plural, the singular. The word “shall” is always
mandatory. The word “person” includes a firm, a partnership, a limited
liability company, or a corporation, as well as an individual. Terms not
defined in this section have the meanings customarily assigned to them.



   ALTERATION. A material or material with a permanent color change in the
external architectural features of any building, structure, or site within a
local historic district.



   CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS (COA). A document, similar to a building
permit, issued by the Historic Preservation Commission to individuals or
entities proposing to make exterior alterations to any property located
within a Local Historic District.



   CITY. The City of Frankfort, Indiana.



   CLASSIFICATIONS.



      (1)   OUTSTANDING (O). The “O” classification means that
the property has sufficient historic or architectural significance that is
listed, or is eligible for individual listing, on the National Register of
Historic Places. Outstanding resources can be of local, state, or national
importance.



      (2)   NOTABLE (N). A classification of “N” means that the
property does not merit the outstanding rating, but it is still above average
in its importance. A notable structure may be eligible for the National
Register.



      (3)   CONTRIBUTING (C). The “C” classification means the
property is at least 40 years old, but does not meet the criteria for an
“O” or “N” classification. Such resources are important to the
density or continuity of the area’s historic fabric. Contributing
structures can be listed in the National Register only as part of a historic
district.



      (4)   NON-CONTRIBUTING (NC). Property classified as “NC”
is not included in an inventory unless it is located within the boundaries of
a Local Historic District. Such properties may be less than 50 years old, or
they may be older structures that have been altered in such a way that they
have lost their historic character, or they may be otherwise incompatible
with their historic surroundings. These properties are not eligible for
listing on the National Register.



   DEMOLITION. The complete or substantial removal of any building,
structure, or site located in a Local Historic District.



   HISTORIC BUILDING. Any building or structure that is listed or eligible
for listing on the State or National Register of Historic Places, or a
National Historic Landmark District; is designated as a historic property
under local or state law or survey; is a contributing resource to a State or
National Register Historic District or a National Historic Landmark.



   LOCAL HISTORIC DISTRICT. A single building, structure, object, or site
or a concentration of buildings, structures, objects, spaces, or sites, the
boundaries of which are described or delineated on a map approved in an
ordinance adopted under this title.



   INTERESTED PARTY. Includes but is not limited to one or more of the
following:



      (1)   The Mayor.



      (2)   The City Council.



      (3)   A neighborhood association, whether incorporated or
unincorporated, a majority of whose members are residents of a Local Historic
District as designated by an ordinance adopted under and pursuant to these
provisions.



      (4)   An owner or occupant of property located in a Local
Historic District established by an ordinance adopted under and pursuant to
these provisions.



      (5)   Historic Landmarks Foundation of Indiana, Inc., or any
of its successors.



      (6)   The state historic preservation officer designated under
I.C. 14-3-3.4-10.



   INTERIM PROTECTION. May be exercised to protect a historic building,
structure, object or site from alteration or demolition. A historic building,
structure, object or site under INTERIM PROTECTION is subject to all
regulations pertaining to buildings, structures, objects or sites located
within established local historic districts.



   NATIONAL REGISTER DISTRICT. A historic district listed on the National
Register of Historic Places. The National Register is this country’s
official list of historic properties and resources worthy of preservation. It
includes individual buildings, structures, districts, sites and objects that
are considered to be significant in American history, architecture,
engineering, archeology and/or culture. The National Register makes available
specific federal and state tax incentives for preservation purposes, provides
a limited degree of protection from the effects of federally assisted
undertakings, and qualifies property owners for federal and state grants for
preservation purposes, when funds are available.



   PRESERVATION GUIDELINES. Criteria, locally developed and adopted by the
Frankfort Historic Preservation Commission, which identify local design
concerns in an effort to assist property owners in maintaining the character
of the designated district or buildings during the process of rehabilitation
or new construction. PRESERVATION GUIDELINES may also be referred to as
HISTORICAL STANDARDS, DESIGN STANDARDS, or DESIGN GUIDELINES.



   PUBLIC WAY. Any avenue of public travel or right of way. This includes
alleys, sidewalks, streets, and any public facility or property owned or with
an easement or similar rights by the City of Frankfort, Clinton County, the
State of Indiana, or the federal government.



   ROUTINE MAINTENANCE. Work for which no certificate of appropriateness
is required.



   STREETSCAPE. Appearance from a public way, the distinguishing
characteristics of which are created by the width of the street and
sidewalks, their paving materials and color, the design of the street
furniture and furnishings (e.g., street lights, trash receptacles, benches,
or other accouterments, and the like) use of plant materials such as trees
and shrubs, and the setback, mass, and proportion of those buildings which
enclose the street.



   VISUAL COMPATIBILITY. Those elements of design that meet the guidelines
set forth in § 155.408.



(Ord. 15-02, passed 3-23-15)



§ 155.402  ESTABLISHMENT; ORGANIZATION.



   (A)   There is hereby established the Historic Preservation
Commission of the City of Frankfort, Indiana (hereinafter referred to as the
“Commission”).



   (B)   The Commission shall consist of five voting members, each of
whom shall be a resident of the city and interested in the preservation and
development of historic areas. The voting members shall be appointed by the
Mayor subject to the approval of the Common Council. Nonvoting, advisory
member(s) may be appointed to the Commission by the Mayor with approval by
the City Council. Commission members shall serve without compensation, except
for reasonable out-of-pocket expenses incurred in the performance of their
duties.



   (C)   The terms of voting members shall be for three years. However,
in order to stagger subsequent terms, the initial voting members of the
Commission shall serve for the following terms: one member for one year; two
members for two years; and two members for three years. The term for
nonvoting, advisory members shall be for three years. A vacancy shall be
filled within 90 days for the duration of the term.



   (D)   The Frankfort Building Inspector shall serve as the ex-officio
administrator to the Commission. The administrator shall provide staff
assistance to the Commission, act as the Commission’s secretary, and issue
certificates of appropriateness as directed by the Commission.



   (E)   The Commission shall elect from its members a Chairman and
Vice-Chairman who shall serve for one year and who may be re-elected.



   (F)   The Commission shall adopt rules for the transaction of its
business not inconsistent with this subchapter. These rules must include the
time and place of regular meetings and a procedure for the calling of special
meetings.



   (G)   Commission meetings must be open to the public in accordance
with Indiana’s Open Door Law and a public record shall be kept of the
Commission’s resolutions, proceedings, and actions. The Commission shall
hold regular meetings, at least monthly, except when it has no business
pending. Special meetings may be called in a manner determined by the
Commission and its rules.



   (H)   The Commission is established and this subchapter is enacted
pursuant to I.C. 36-7-11-1 through 21, and such statutory provisions shall
govern except where specific provisions of this subchapter may conflict with
or deviate therefrom, in which case the more restrictive provisions shall
apply.



(Ord. 15-02, passed 3-23-15)



§ 155.403  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   (A)   The Commission shall be concerned with those elements of
development, redevelopment, rehabilitation, and preservation that affect
visual quality in a Local Historic District, which include but are not
limited to viewsheds, landscapes, and streetscapes of historic importance.
The Commission may not consider details of design, interior arrangements, or
building features, if those details, arrangements, or features are not
subject to public view, and may not make any requirement except for the
purpose of preventing development, alteration, or demolition in the Historic
District obviously incongruous with the Historic District.



   (B)   The Commission shall conduct surveys and establish Local
Historic Districts in accordance with the provisions of § 155.404.



   (C)   If adopted, these guidelines shall be published and made
readily accessible to the general public.



   (D)   The Commission shall promote public interest in historic
preservation by initiating and carrying on a public relations and community
education program.



(Ord. 15-02, passed 3-23-15)



§ 155.404  LOCAL HISTORIC DISTRICTS AND GUIDELINES.



   (A)   All recommendations for the establishment of a Local Historic
District (LHD) shall be in the form of a written report and must be based on
the criteria outlined in this section. A recommendation for establishing a
LHD may be initiated from either of the following two sources:



      (1)   Based on its survey, the Commission may draw and submit
LHD maps to the City Council for approval.



      (2)   Owners of real property wishing to establish a LHD which
includes their property may petition the Commission to consider drawing and
submitting a map or maps of the property to the City Council for its
approval. The Commission may establish in its rules certain criteria to be
met before it considers a petition.



   (B)   In order to establish a LHD, the Commission shall first
prepare a map describing the District in accordance with the following:



      (1)   The map shall be based on a survey conducted by the
Commission and shall describe the boundaries of the District and shall
identify historic buildings, structures, and sites located within the
District.



      (2)   A District may be limited to the boundaries of a
property containing a single building, structure, or site.



   (C)   (1)   The Commission shall classify and designate on the
map all buildings, structures, and sites within each Historic District
described on the map. Buildings, structures, and sites shall be classified as
historic or non-historic. Historic buildings, structures, and sites must
possess identified historic or architectural merit of a degree warranting
their preservation. The Commission shall further classify and designate all
buildings and structures within a proposed Historic District as follows:



         (a)   Outstanding;



         (b)   Notable; or



         (c)   Contributing.



      (2)   Non-historic buildings, structures, and sites are those
not classified on the map as historic.



   (D)   Before a District is established and the building
classifications take effect, the map setting forth the District’s
boundaries and building classifications must be submitted to, and be approved
in an ordinance by, the City Council.



   (E)   The map establishing boundaries of a Local Historic District
must be recorded in the Office of the Clinton County Recorder.



(Ord. 15-02, passed 3-23-15)



§ 155.405  INTERIM PROTECTION.



   (A)   When submitting a map to the City Council under § 155.404,
the Commission may declare one or more buildings or structures that are
classified and designated as historic on the map to be under interim
protection.



   (B)   Not more than two working days after declaring a building,
structure, or site to be under interim protection under this section, the
Commission shall, by personal delivery or first class mail, provide the owner
or occupant of the building, structure, or site with a written notice of the
declaration. In the event the owner cannot be located after due diligence,
the Commission shall affix notice of interim protection to the building,
structure, or site. The written notice must:



      (1)   Cite the authority of the Commission to put the
building, structure, or site under interim protection under this section;



      (2)   Explain the effect of putting the building, structure,
or site under interim protection; and



      (3)   Indicate that the interim protection is temporary.



   (C)   A building or structure put under interim protection under
division (A) remains under interim protection until the map is:



      (1)   Submitted to; and



      (2)   Approved in an ordinance or rejected by the Common
Council. If the Common Council fails to act upon a submitted ordinance within
120 days of the date the ordinance was filed with the City Clerk, interim
protection will expire.



   (D)   While a building, structure, or site is under interim
protection under this section:



      (1)   The building, structure, or site may not be demolished
or moved; and



      (2)   The exterior appearance of the building, structure, or
site may not be conspicuously changed by:



         (a)   Addition;



         (b)   Reconstruction;



         (c)   Alteration.



   (E)   The Commission may approve a certificate of appropriateness at
any time during the period of interim protection, provided the proposed
change meets the criteria for considering effect of actions on historic
buildings in § 155.406(D) and any proposed preservation guideline or any
other guideline prepared for the building, structure, or site, but the
certificate of appropriateness shall have no effect, and no action may be
taken pursuant thereto, unless the map including the building, structure, or
site is approved by the City Council.



(Ord. 15-02, passed 3-23-15)



§ 155.406  CERTIFICATES OF APPROPRIATENESS (COA).



   (A)   A certificate of appropriateness must be issued by the
Commission before a permit is issued for, or work is begun on any of the
following:



      (1)   Within all areas of a Local Historic District:



         (a)   The demolition of any building or structure;



         (b)   The moving of any building or structure;



         (c)   A conspicuous change in the exterior appearance of
any historic building or any part of or appurtenance to such a building,
including walls, fences, light fixtures, steps, paving, streetscape and signs
by additions, reconstruction, or alteration;



         (d)   Any new construction of a principle building or
accessory building or structure subject to view from a public way; or



         (e)   A conspicuous change in the exterior appearance of
non-historic buildings subject to view from a public way by additions,
reconstruction, and/or alteration.



   (B)   An application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be
made in the Office of the Building Inspector of the City of Frankfort on
forms provided by that office. All applicants shall be subject to the rules
and requirements established by the Commission. Rules may include, but are
not limited to, filing deadlines and application requirements such as
sketches, drawings, photographs, descriptions, or other information which the
Commission requires to make a decision.



   (C)   The Commission may advise and make recommendations to the
applicant before action on an application for a certificate of
appropriateness.



      (1)   (a)   If an application for a certificate of
appropriateness:



            1.   Is approved by the Commission; or



            2.   Is not acted on by the Commission within 30
days after it is filed;



         (b)   A certificate of appropriateness shall be issued.
If the certificate is issued, the applicant must proceed in the same manner
as applications for building or demolition permits as required by the city,
if any, are processed. If no building or demolition permits are required by
the city, the applicant may proceed with the work authorized by the
certificate.



      (2)   If the Commission denies an application for a
certificate of appropriateness within 30 days after it is filed, the
certificate may not be issued. The Commission must state its reasons for the
denial in writing, and must advise the applicant. An application that has
been denied may not be processed as an application for a building or
demolition permit and does not authorize any work by the applicant. The
applicant may appeal the denial of a certificate of appropriateness as set
forth in § 155.410.



      (3)   The Commission may grant an extension of the 30-day
limit prescribed by divisions (C)(1) and (2) if the applicant agrees to it.



   (D)   The Commission, in considering the appropriateness of any
reconstruction, alteration, maintenance, or moving of a historic building,
structure, site or any part of the appurtenance to such building or
structure, including walls, fences, light fixtures, steps, paving, and signs
shall require that such work be done in a manner that will preserve the
historic and architectural character of the building, structure, or
appurtenance. In considering historic and architectural character, the
Commission shall consider, among other things, the following:



      (1)   Purposes of this title;



      (2)   Historic and architectural value and significance of the
building, structure, site or appurtenance;



      (3)   Compatibility and significance of additions,
alterations, details, materials, or other non-original elements which may be
of a different style and construction date than the original;



      (4)   The texture, material, style, and detailing of the
building, structure, site or appurtenance;



      (5)   The continued preservation and protection of original or
otherwise significant structure, material, and ornamentation;



      (6)   The relationship of buildings, structures,
appurtenances, or architectural features similar to those within the same
historic district visual compatibility as defined in § 155.408; and



      (7)   The position of the building or structure in relation to
the street, public right-of-way and to other buildings and structures.



   (E)   Once a certificate of appropriateness is issued, the form must
be posted on site in a conspicuous area prior to the commencement of approved
work.



(Ord. 15-02, passed 3-23-15)



§ 155.407  STAFF APPROVALS.



   (A)   The Commission may authorize the staff of the Office of the
Building Inspector, on behalf of the Commission, to grant or deny an
application for a certificate of appropriateness via an adopted resolution.



   (B)   The Commission shall specify by resolution the types of
applications for certificates of appropriateness that the staff of the
Commission is authorized to grant or deny. The staff may not be authorized to
grant or deny an application for a certificate of appropriateness for the
following:



      (1)   The demolition of a building, structure, or site.



      (2)   The moving of a building or structure.



      (3)   The construction of an addition to a building or
structure.



      (4)   The construction of a new building or structure.



   (C)   If any applicant is aggrieved by staff’s denial of a
certificate of appropriateness, within seven days of notice of the denial,
the applicant may request that the application for a certificate of
appropriateness be heard by the Historic Preservation Commission at the next
regularly scheduled meeting.



(Ord. 15-02, passed 3-23-15)



§ 155.408  VISUAL COMPATIBILITY.



   (A)   To preserve and encourage the integrity of historic buildings,
structures, sites, monuments, streetscapes, and neighborhoods and to ensure
their compatibility with any new work, the construction of a new building or
structure, and the moving, reconstruction, alteration, major maintenance, or
repair conspicuously affecting the external appearance of any non-historic
building, structure, or appurtenance within a Local Historic District must be
generally of a design, form, proportion, mass, configuration, building
material, texture, and location on a lot compatible with other buildings in
the Local Historic District and with places to which it is visually related.



   (B)   Within a Local Historic District, new buildings, structures,
as well as buildings, structures, and appurtenances that are moved,
reconstructed, materially altered, or repaired, must be visually compatible
with buildings and places to which they are visually related generally in
terms of the following visual compatibility factors:



      (1)   Height. The height of proposed buildings must be
visually compatible with adjacent buildings.



      (2)   Proportion of building’s facade. The relationship of
the width of a building to the height of the front elevation must be visually
compatible with buildings, squares, and places to which it is visually
related.



      (3)   Proportion of openings within the facility. The
relationship of the width of the windows to the height of the windows in a
building must be visually compatible with buildings, squares, and places to
which it is visually related.



      (4)   Relationship of solids to voids on facades. The
relationship of solids to voids on the facade of a building must be visually
compatible with buildings, squares, and places to which it is visually
related.



      (5)   Rhythm of spacing of buildings on streets. The
relationship of a building to the open space between it and adjoining
buildings must be visually compatible with buildings, squares, and places to
which it is visually related.



      (6)   Rhythm of entrances and porch projections. The
relationship of entrances and porch projections of a building to sidewalks
and driveways must be visually compatible with buildings, squares, and places
to which it is visually related.



      (7)   Relationship of materials, texture, and color. The
relationship of the materials, including color of permanent materials, and
texture, of the facade of a building must be visually compatible with
buildings, squares, and places to which it is visually related.



      (8)   Roof shapes. The roof shape of a building must be
visually compatible with the buildings, squares, and places to which it is
visually related.



      (9)   Wall of continuity. Appurtenances of a building or site,
such as walls, wrought iron fences, landscape/planting masses, and building
facades, must form cohesive walls of enclosure along the street, if necessary
to ensure visual compatibility of the building to the buildings and places to
which it is visually related.



      (10)   Scale of the building. The size of a building and the
building mass of a building in relation to open spaces, windows, door
openings, porches, and balconies must be visually compatible with the
buildings and places to which it is visually related.



      (11)   Directional expression of front elevation. A building
must be visually compatible with buildings, squares, and places to which it
is visually related in its directional character, including vertical
character, horizontal character, or non-directional character.



(Ord. 15-02, passed 3-23-15)



§ 155.409  PRESERVATION OF HISTORIC AND ARCHITECTURAL CHARACTER UPON
ALTERATION OR RELOCATION MANDATED.



   (A)   A historic building or structure or any part or appurtenance
to such a building or structure, including stone walls, fences, light
fixtures, steps, paving, and signs may be moved, reconstructed, altered, or
maintained only in a manner that will preserve the historic and architectural
character of the building, structure, or appurtenance.



   (B)   A historic building may be relocated to another site only if
it is shown that preservation on its current site is inconsistent with
division (A).



(Ord. 15-02, passed 3-23-15)



§ 155.410  APPEAL PROVISIONS.



   In the event any party receives a decision from the Historic
Preservation Commission which it desires to appeal, the party may initiate an
appeal with the Frankfort Board of Zoning Appeals as follows:



   (A)   Within 30 days after receiving the decision of the Historic
Preservation Commission as set forth in § 155.406, the applicant shall file
with the Boarding of Zoning Appeals a written explanation of why the
applicant believes the decision of the Commission is in error.



   (B)   Within 30 days after the request for review by the Board of
Zoning Appeals is filed, a decision shall be issued which shall either affirm
the decision of the Historic Preservation Commission or reverse the decision.
Should the decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals be in favor of the
applicant, the Historic Preservation Commission shall then issue the
certificate of appropriateness.



   (C)   If the Historic Preservation Commission has denied an
application to demolish a building, the applicant may appeal the decision to
the Board of Zoning Appeals as set forth in divisions (A) and (B) above.  If
the applicant establishes to the Board of Zoning Appeals that a historic
building is incapable of earning an economic return on its value, as
appraised by a qualified real estate appraiser, the Board of Zoning Appeals
may order the building demolished and the applicant shall reapply for its
certificate of appropriateness citing the order. However, in such event,
before a demolition permit is issued or demolition proceeds, the Plan
Commission shall accomplish the following:



      (1)   Notice of the proposed demolition must be posted on the
building for at least 60 days but not more than one year, as determined by
the Commission. The notice, as posted, must be clearly visible from the
street.



      (2)   Notice of the proposed demolition must be published in a
newspaper of general local circulation at least three times before
demolition, with the first publication not more than 15 days after the
reapplication for permit was filed. The final publication shall be at least
15 days before the date of the issuance of the permit.



(Ord. 15-02, passed 3-23-15)



§ 155.411  MAINTENANCE.



   (A)   Historic buildings, structures, and sites shall be maintained
to meet the applicable requirements established under state statue for
buildings generally so as to prevent the loss of historic material and the
deterioration of important character defining details and features.



   (B)   Nothing in this section shall be construed so as to prevent
the ordinary repairs and maintenance of any building, structure, or site,
provided that such repairs or maintenance do not result in a conspicuous
change in the design, form, proportion, mass, configuration, building
material, texture, location, or external visual appearance of any structure,
or part thereof.



(Ord. 15-02, passed 3-23-15)



§ 155.412  RELATIONSHIPS WITH ZONING DISTRICTS.



   Zoning districts lying within the boundaries of any Local Historic
District are subject to regulations for both the zoning district and the
Local Historic District. If there is a conflict between the requirements of
the zoning district and the requirements of the Local Historic District, the
more restrictive requirements shall apply.



(Ord. 15-02, passed 3-23-15)



§ 155.413  (RESERVED).



§ 155.414  INTERESTED PARTIES.



   (A)   An interested party has a private right of action to enforce
and prevent violations of this chapter, and has the right to restrain or
enjoin, temporarily or permanently, any person from violating a provision of
this chapter.



   (B)   The interested party does not have to allege or prove
irreparable harm or injury to any person or property to obtain relief under
this section.



   (C)   The interested party bringing an action under this section
does not have to post a bond unless the court, after a hearing, determines
that a bond should be required in the interest of justice.



   (D)   The interested party that brings an action under this section
is not liable to any person for damages resulting from bringing or
prosecuting the action unless the action was brought without good faith or
without a reasonable belief that a provision of this chapter, had been, or
was about to be violated.



   (E)   An interested party who obtains a favorable judgment in an
action under this section may recover reasonable attorney fees and court
costs from the person against whom judgment was rendered.



   (F)   An action arising under this section must be brought in the
Circuit or Superior Court of Clinton County and no change of venue from the
county shall be allowed in the action.



   (G)   The remedy provided in this section is in addition to other
remedies that may be available at law or in equity.



(Ord. 15-02, passed 3-23-15)



§ 155.415  ENFORCEMENT; PENALTIES; JUDICIAL REVIEW.



   (A)   In the event of a violation of this subchapter by any person,
whether as principal, agent, owner, lessee, tenant, contractor, builder,
architect, engineer, or otherwise, Commission staff must notify the
individual(s) responsible for the violation in writing. Violators will have
15 business days following the notice to correct the violation to the
standards of the Commission without penalty. If the violation is such that it
is not fully curable within 15 business days, the violators must commence
such curing within 15 business days following the notice to correct the
violation and continue with due diligence thereafter. If after 15 business
days the violation is still in effect, or a reasonable cure has not been
commenced, the responsible party will be fined for each offense as follows:



      (1)   Twenty-five hundred dollars for demolition in part or in
total;



      (2)   Fifty dollars for all other offenses;



      (3)   Fines shall accrue daily for each offense, beginning on
the day the offense is reported and documented by Commission staff, with a
maximum accrued fine of $7,500 per parcel;



      (4)   Any and all fines collected from violations of this
chapter must be used to benefit historic buildings and structures located
within established Local Historic Districts.



   (C)   Each day of the existence of any violations of this chapter
shall be a separate offense.



   (D)   The erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair,
demolition, moving, or maintenance of any building, structure, or
appurtenance which is begun, continued, or maintained contrary to any
provisions of this chapter is hereby declared to be a nuisance and in
violation of this chapter and unlawful. The city may institute a suit for
injunction in the Circuit Court or Superior Court of Clinton County to
restrain any person or government unit from violating any provision of this
chapter and to cause such violation to be prevented, abated, or removed.



   (E)   The remedies provided for in this section shall be cumulative
and not exclusive and shall be in addition to any other remedies provided by
law.



(Ord. 15-02, passed 3-23-15)



§ 155.416  SEVERABILITY.



   If any section, clause, provision, or portion of this chapter is
adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction,
the remainder of this chapter shall not be affected thereby.



(Ord. 15-02, passed 3-23-15)



§ 155.999  PENALTY.



   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any person, firm,
corporation, association, or organization who shall violate a provision of
this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine as follows:



   (A)   For a first offense, the fine shall be not less than $50 nor
more than $100, together with the court costs, as determined by the court.



   (B)   For a second offense of the same nature and occurring with
respect to the same property, the fine shall be not less than $150 nor more
than $250, together with court costs, as determined by the court.



   (C)   For the third offense of the same nature and occurring with
respect to the same property, the fine shall be not less than $350 nor more
than $2,500, together with court costs, as determined by the court.



('75 Code, § l.08)  (Ord. PO-67-1, passed 2-21-67; Am. Ord. PO-77-2, passed
12-21-77; Am. Ord. 06-3, passed 2-13-06)



APPENDIX A:  ZONING CHARTS



Section



   1.   Residential uses and requirements



   2.   Business uses and requirements



   3.   Business uses, loading and unloading berths required



   4.   Business uses, parking spaces required



   5.   Industrial uses and requirements



   6.   Industrial uses loading and unloading berth requirements



   7.   Contingent uses and requirements



   8.   Contingent uses, maximum height



   9.   Special exceptions and requirements



§ 1  RESIDENTIAL USES AND REQUIREMENTS.



 


 

Type of Residential Use



Requirements
 
Single-Family    Dwelling
 
Two-Family Dwelling
 
Multi-Family Dwelling to be Occupied by** Not More Than Five Families




District in which use is permitted
 
S,A,B,C,D,LB,GB, RB*, and I-3
 
C,D,LB, and GB
 
D,LB, and GB


Minimum lot size in square feet per dwelling unit in districts indicated
 
A        8,000 B,C, and D, LB, and GB 6,000
 
C,D,LB, and GB    3,000
 
D,LB, and GB    1,500


Minimum lot size in square feet per dwelling unit in districts where the
following utility systems are installed and utilized.
 
S,RB, and I-3      8,000
 

 



   A.   Approved sanitary sewer system
 

 

 



   B.   Approved public or community water supply system
 

 

 



Minimum lot width in feet in districts indicated
 
A          66 B,C,D,LB, and GB      50
 
C,D,LB, and GB      50
 
D,LB, and GB      50


Minimum lot width in feet per dwelling unit in the districts indicated when
an approved sanitary sewer system is installed and utilized
 
S,RB, and I-3          85, and the minimum lot size shall be 16,000
square feet per dwelling unit
 

 



In the absence or non-utilization of any of the above described utility
systems, A or B, add the following width in feet per dwelling unit to the
minimum lot width per dwelling unit in districts indicated as follows.
 
S,RB, and I-3
(A)        20
(B)        20
 

 



Maximum building height in feet and stories in districts indicated
 
S,A,RB, and I-3    25 feet or 2 stories B,C,D,LB, and GB    35 feet or
2-1/2 stories
 
C,D,LB, and GB  35 feet or 2-1/2 stories
 
D,LB, and GB    35 feet or 2-1/2 stories


Minimum front yard in feet
 
All        25
 
All      25
 
D,LB, and GB      25


Minimum side yard (one)
 
10% of the required minimum lot width
 
10% of the required minimum lot width
 
10% of the required minimum lot width


Minimum side yards (both or two) in per cent of actual lot width
 
20
 
20
 
20


Minimum rear yard in feet
 
20
 
20
 
15


Minimum ground floor area in square feet in districts indicated
 
One Story
S,C,D,RB,LB,GB, and I-3    672
B          720
A          846
 
One Story
C      960
D,LB, and GB      750
 
No ground floor area minimum, but each dwelling unit shall have at least 500
square feet gross floor area



 
Over One Story
S,A,B,C,D,RB,LB, and I-3    650
GB      600

 
Over One Story
C      720
D,LB, and GB      600
 




 
Provided gross floor area is at least equal to the minimum ground floor area
requirement for a one story dwelling
 
Provided gross floor area is at least equal to the minimum ground floor area
requirement for a one story dwelling
 



Number of vehicle parking spaces to be provided on the lot
 
One
 
Two
 
One per each dwelling unit


Vision clearance on corner lot
 
Yes
 
Yes
 
Yes



 

 

 





 



*For dwellings in the RB Roadside Business District, see §§ 155.100 through
155.105, and § 9 of this Appendix.



**For multi-family dwellings to be occupied by more than five families, see
§ 9 of this Appendix, "Special Exceptions and Requirements."  (Apartment,
Garden or Apartment, High Rise)



(Ord. CO-67-2, passed 2-21-67; Am. Ord. CO-77-21, passed 10-19-77)



§ 2  BUSINESS USES AND REQUIREMENTS.



 


 
Type of Business Use


Requirements
 
Local Business
 
General Business and Roadside Business




Districts in which use is permitted
 
LB,GB,RB,* and I-l
 

 
GB,RB, and I-l
 




 

 

 

 



Minimum front yard in feet in districts indicated
 
I-l (opposite GB or I-l)
 
None
 
GB
 
None


I-l (opposite other districts)
 
25
 
RB
 
75


LB
 
25
 
I-l (opposite GB or I-l)
 
None


GB
 
None
 
I-l (opposite other districts)
 
25


RB
 
75
 

 




 

 

 

 



Minimum side yard in feet along the side street line of a corner lot where
block is adjoined by a residence district
 
LB,GB, and I-l
 
5
 
GB and I-l
 
5


RB 
 
10
 
RB
 
10



 

 

 

 



Minimum side yard in feet where a business district adjoins a residence
district within the block frontage
 
LB,GB, and I-l
 
5
 
GB and I-l
 
5


RB
 
20
 
RB
 
20



 

 

 

 



Minimum side yard in blocks not including a residence district, in feet
 
LB,GB, and I-l
 
None
 
GB and I-l
 
None


RB
 
10
 
RB
 
10



 

 

 

 



Maximum building height in feet in districts indicated
 
GB and I-l, or 8 stories
 
100 feet
 
GB and I-l, or 8 stories
 
100 feet


LB and RB, 35 feet or 2-1/2 stories
 

 
RB, 35 feet or 2-1/2 stories
 



Minimum rear yard in feet
 
GB and I-l
 
10
 
GB
 
10



 
LB and RB
 
15
 
RB and I-l
 
15



 

 

 

 



Vision clearance on corner lots
 
LB and RB
 
Yes
 
RB
 
Yes



 
GB and I-l
 
No
 
GB and I-l
 
No




 



*For Business Uses proposed to be located in the RB District, see §§
155.100 through 155.105 and § 9 of this Appendix.



(Ord. CO-67-2, passed 2-21-67)



§ 3  BUSINESS USES, LOADING AND UNLOADING BERTHS REQUIRED.



 

Type of Use
 
Gross Floor Area
(Sq. Ft.)
 
Loading and Unloading Berths Required




Retail stores
 
3,000 to 15,000
 
1


Department stores
 
15,001 to 40,000
 
2


Wholesale establishments, storage uses, and other business uses
 
Each 25,000 additional
 
1 Additional



 

 



Office buildings
 
100,000 or less
 
1



 
100,001 to 336,000
 
2



 
Each 200,000 additional
 
1 Additional




 



(Ord. CO-67-2, passed 2-21-67)



§ 4  BUSINESS USES, PARKING SPACES REQUIRED.



 

Type of Use
 
Number of Parking Spaces Required




Local business uses listed in the following sections.
 



§ 155.041(A)(3),(B) through (G) and (H)(3)
 
One for each 125 square feet of net floor area.


§ 155.041(H)(1) and (2)
 
One for each 200 square feet of net floor area.


§ 155.041(I)
 
Space to accommodate 50% of the active membership at one space per each three
members, or as determined by the Board of Zoning Appeals.  The determination
shall be based upon the expected number of parking spaces the particular
lodge or club use would require to satisfy estimated peak parking load
requirements.


§ 155.041(K)
 
One for each 200 square feet of net floor area.


§ 155.041(M)
 
As determined by the Board unless specified elsewhere in this chapter. The
determination shall be based upon the expected number of parking spaces the
particular type of business use would require to satisfy estimated peak
parking load requirements.


Roadside Business Uses
 



§ 155.042(C)
 
One for each 200 square feet of net floor area.


§ 155.042(D)
 
One for each six seats.


§ 155.042(E)
 
Three for each lane plus one for each six spectator seats.


§ 155.042(F)
 
One for each three employees plus one for each sleeping unit.


§ 155.042(G) and (H)
 
One space for each three animals to be confined in temporary or permanent
pens or cages.


§ 155.042(I)
 
One per employee, plus one for each six seats in main auditorium.


§ 155.042(J)
 
One per employee on largest shift.


§ 155.042(K)
 
One for each three employees plus one for each ten seats in waiting room.
Other retail uses in connection therewith shall provide one space for each
two employees.


§ 155.042(1) and (M)
 
One for each three employees or occupants, the maximum number of employees or
occupants to be used in determining spaces.


§ 155.042(N)
 
As determined by the Board.  The determination shall be based upon the
expected number of parking spaces the particular type of business use would
require to satisfy estimated peak parking load requirements.


General Business Uses
 
Same as above requirements.




 



(Ord. CO-67-2, passed 2-21-67)



§ 5  INDUSTRIAL USES AND REQUIREMENTS.



 


 
Type of Use


Requirement
 
Enclosed Industrial
 
Open Industrial




Districts in which use is permitted
 
RB,GB, I-l, I-2, and I-3
 

 
I-l
 




 

 

 

 



Minimum front yard in feet
 
RB and I-2
 
75
 
I-l (opposite GB or I-l)
 
None


GB
 
None
 
I-l (opposite other districts)
 
25


I-l (opposite GB or I-l)
 
None
 

 



I-l (opposite other districts)
 
15
 

 



I-3
 
60
 

 




 

 

 

 



Minimum side yard required in feet when district indicated abuts or adjoins
(or is within) a GB, RB, I-l, I-2, or I-3 District
 
GB and I-l
 
None
 
I-l
 
10


RB and I-2
 
10
 

 



I-3
 
20
 

 




 

 

 

 



Minimum side yard required in feet when district indicated abuts or adjoins a
district or any lot used for dwelling purposes.  (This requirement may apply
to any or both side yards, as the case may be)
 
GB and I-l
 
5
 
I-l 
 
20


RB,I-2 and I-3
 
20
 

 




 

 

 

 



Minimum side yard in feet, if provided
 
5
 

 
5
 




 

 

 

 



Vision clearance on corner lots
 
GB, and I-l
 
No
 

 



RB, I-2 and I-3
 
Yes
 

 
Yes



 

 

 

 



Maximum building height in feet or stories in districts indicated
 
GB and I-l,
 
100 feet
 
I-l, 100 feet or 8 stories
 



RB,I-2, and I-3, 60 feet or 5 stories
 

 

 




 

 

 

 



Minimum rear yard in feet
 
GB and I-l
 
10
 

 
15


RB and I-2
 
15
 

 



I-3
 
20
 

 





 



*For Enclosed Industrial Uses proposed to be located in the RB District, see
§§ 155.100 through 155.105 and § 9 of this Appendix.



(Ord. CO-67-2, passed 2-21-67)



§ 6  INDUSTRIAL USES LOADING AND UNLOADING BERTH REQUIREMENTS.



 

Gross Floor Area of Industrial Use in Square
 
Number of Berths Required


15,000 or less
 
1


15,001 to 40,000
 
2


40,001 to 100,000
 
3


Each 40,000 additional
 
1 additional



 



(Ord. CO-67-2, passed 2-21-67)



§ 7  CONTINGENT USES AND REQUIREMENTS.



 

Type of Use
 
Districts in which Use is Permitted*
 
Number of Parking Spaces to be Provided




Boarding or lodging house
 
C,D,LB, and GB
 
One for each three occupants


Church or temple
 
All, except I-l and I-2
 
One for each six seats in main auditorium


Educational institution
 
All, except I-l and I-2
 
One for each three members of staff plus one for each eight seats in
auditorium


Home occupation
 
All
 
One additional


Lodge or private club (which is of a non-commercial character)
 
All, except A and B
 
One for each 125 square feet floor area of buildings


Mortuary
 
All, except S,A, and B
 
One for each six seats in main auditorium


Municipal or governmental building or use
 
All
 
One for each 125 square feet floor area of buildings


Power substation or telephone exchange
 
All
 
One per two employees or combined employment of the two largest successive
shifts


Public utility installation terminal facility
 
I-l,I-2, and I-3
 
One per two employees or combined employment of the two largest successive
shifts


Professional office in residence
 
All
 
Two additional


Temporary sign, pertaining to lease, hire, or sale of a building or premises
 
All
 
Not applicable


Sewage treatment or disposal plant
 
All
 
One per two employees or combined employment of the two largest successive
shifts



 

 





 



*See § 9 of this Appendix for Contingent Uses proposed to be located in the
RB District.



(Ord. CO-67-2, passed 2-21-67)



§ 8  CONTINGENT USES, MAXIMUM HEIGHT.



 

Districts in which Use is Permitted
 
Maximum Building Height In Feet


S,A,RB, and I-3
 
25 feet or 2 stories


B,C,D, and LB
 
35 feet or 2-1/2 stories


GB,I-l, and I-2
 
60 feet or 5 stories



 



(Ord. CO-67-2, passed 2-21-67)



§ 9  SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS AND REQUIREMENTS.



 

Special Exceptions
 
Districts in which Use May Be Permitted
 
Requirement Designation




Airport
 
S,I-l,I-2,I-3, and RB
 
all,d,gl,i13,j,k, m2,n


Apartment, garden
 
S,D,LB,GB, and RB
 
See § 155.103


Apartment, high rise
 
S,D,LB,GB, and RB
 
See § 155.104


Artificial Lake of three or more acres
 
All
 
gl,j


Cemetery
 
All
 
a12,bl,f,hl,j,k,ml


Contingent uses in RB District
 
RB
 
al,bl,j,k,ml,n


Country Club or Golf Course
 
All
 
a14,bl,i14,j,k,ml


Filling Station
 
LB,GB,RB, and I-l
 
al,bl,f,hl,j,k,ml, n,o


Heliport
 
All
 
a10,d,g4,i13,j,k,m2


Hospital
 
All
 
a4,b3,i5,j,m3


Junk Yard
 
I-l
 
b2,d,g3, or g5,i6, k,ml,o


Mobile Home Park
 
All, except A,B, and C
 
a5,b3,f,hl,i8,j,k, ml,n


Neighborhood Convenience Center Plan
 
All, except A
 
j, See § 155.060 through 155.062


Nursing Home or Home for Aged
 
All, except A,B, and I-l
 
f,hl,i10,ml,n


Nursing Home Conversion
 
C,D,LB, and GB
 
e2,f,hl,i10,ml,n


Outdoor commercial enterprise
 
All, except A,B,C, and D
 
b2,c,f,gl,hl,i9,j, k,ml,n


Outdoor theater
 
RB,I-l,I-2, and I-3
 
b4,g4,j,k,m3,n


Penal or correction institution
 
I-l,I-2, and I-3
 
a12,b4,g5,i15,j, m3,n




 



 

Special Exceptions
 
Districts in which Use May Be Permitted
 
Requirement Designation




Private recreational development
 
All
 
b2,f,hl,i15,j,k,ml


Private school, including kindergarten or day nursery
 
All, except A,B, and I-l
 
a8,b5,e2,g2,i7,j,k, ml,n


Produce Terminal, or truck freight terminal
 
GB,RB,I-l, I-2, and I-3
 
a6,b2,f,hl,i6,j,k, m5,n


Professional Office Center
 
All, except S,A, B,C,I-2, and I-3
 
al,b5,e2,f,hl,i2,j, k,ml,n


Public Camp
 
S,I-2, and I-3
 
a4,b4,j,k,ml,n


Public or Commercial Sanitary Fill
 
All
 
b4,j,o


Public or Employee
 
All, except
 
a2,j,k,l


Parking Areas
 
A and B
 



Public Park or Public Recreational Facility
 
All
 
f,j,k,ml,n


Radio or Television
 
All
 
j,k,m2


Transmitting Tower Raising and Breeding of Non-Farm Fowl and Animals,
Commercially, except Kennel
 
RB,I-1, and 1-2
 
a3,b2,d,ml,n


Refuse Dump
 
5,1-1,1-2, and 1-3
 
a4,d,gl,j,ml


Residence Use in the RB District
 
RB
 
al,bl,j,p


Roadside Business or Enclosed Industrial Use in RB District
 
RB
 
See §  155.101(D)


Seasonal Fishing or Hunting Lodge
 
S and I-3
 
bl,i15,j


Shopping Center Plan
 
All, except A
 
j, See §§ 155.060 through 155.062


Special School
 
D,LB,GB,RB, I-1, and I-2
 
a8,b5,g2,j3,ml,n


Tourist Home
 
All, except S,A, B,C,I-2, and I-3
 
al,bl,i12,k,m4,n


Wind energy system  over 35 feet
 
All
 
j, k, m2
All specific requirements of § 155.056


Wireless Facilities
 
LB, GB, RB, I1 and I2
 
gl, j, k, m1, m2, q and r




 



   If the nature of the special exception involves more than one of those
listed, the applicant may apply for an improvement location permit for the
special exception which most closely relates to the primary use, provided
that the requirements of all the related uses will be met.



Reqmt.



Desig.   Requirement



a.   Minimum Lot Area or Tract Area



   1.   #



   2.   1500 sq. ft.



   3.   25,000 sq. ft.



   4.   5 acres



   5.   5 acres including 3500 sq. ft. per mobile home stand



   6.   2 acres



   7.   40,000 sq. ft. but not less than 2500 sq. ft. per person cared
for



   8.   10,000 sq. ft.



   9.   8,000 sq. ft. but not less than 1,000 sq. ft. per person cared
for



   10.   one acre



   11.   80 acres



   12.   40 acres



   13.   20 acres (tract)



   14.   No requirement



b.  Minimum Yards (Feet)



   Front   Side (each)   Rear



l.   #   #   #



2.   #   40   40



3.   60   30   40



4.   100   75   40



   (Abutting residential)



   100   30   20



   (Abutting other use)



5.   #   10   #



6.   #   #   20



   Plus additional foot for each 2 feet above minimum height required



Reqmt.



Desig.   Requirement



c.   Building setback from centerline of interior road 40 (Feet)



d.   Use permitted not closer than 200 feet to a residential use



e.   Minimum gross floor area of principal buildings



   (Square Feet)



   l.   #



   2.   Over 1,000



f.   Plan of landscape development to be submitted with application (May
be combined with development plan



g.   Fence



   1.   6-foot wire mesh where accessible to the public



   2.   4-foot wire mesh around play area



   3.   Solid wall or solid painted fence 8 feet high except along
railroad right-of-way



   4.   4-foot wire mesh abutting residential use



   5.   8-foot wire mesh fence covered and maintained with thick ivy
growth



h.   Screen planting where abutting residential use (Tight screen,
effective at all times)



   1.   6-foot height by 6-foot width



i.   Number of Parking Spaces Required



   1.   2 per each dwelling unit



   2.   3 per prof. person plus 1 per each employee



   3.   1 per 3 employees plus 1 per 6 students



   4.   l per 3 employees plus 1 per 125 square feet of sales area



   5.   l per 4 beds plus 1 per doctor plus 1 per 3 employees plus 1
per hospital vehicle



   6.   l per 2 employees on largest shift



   7.   1 per 2 employees plus 1 per 5 children to be accommodated



   8.   1 per 2 employees plus 1 per mobile homestand



   9.   l per 3 employees plus 1 per 500 square feet of use area



   10.   l per each 5 patients, plus 1 per each staff member or supvr.
doctor, plus, 1 per each 3 employees.



   11.   3 per 4 employees plus 1 per 4 seats



   12.   1 per employee plus 1 per sleeping accommodation



   13.   1 per employee plus 1 per 3 seats in waiting room



   14.   30



   15.   As determined by the Board of zoning Appeals.



      The determination shall be based upon the expected number of
parking spaces the particular type of use would require to satisfy estimated
peak parking load requirements.



j.   Development plan to be submitted with application



k.   Outdoor advertising signs and outdoor artificial lighting shall be
approved by the Board



l.   No sales, dead storage, repair work, no dismantling on the lot



m.   Maximum height of structure (Feet)



   l.   #



   2.   As required by appropriate state or federal agency



   3.   65    4.   35



   5.   45



n.   Approval by Board of Public Works and Safety that sewers are adequate



o.   Use permitted not closer than 200 feet to the property line of any
tract which is either used or intended to be used for a public or semi-public
building or use.



p.   Except as provided in this chart, requirements are the same as those
set forth in § 1 of this Appendix.



q.   No wireless facilities are permitted within a three-block radius of
the downtown business district and Courthouse Square.



r.   To locate a wireless facility on any city or utility tower, man-made
structure, or city property, approval by the proper board must be given 
prior to all hearings.



NOTE:   Use of # symbol in this figure indicates that the requirements of
the district apply to the special exception where located in accordance with
the same requirements of the contingent uses as set forth in §§ 155.091
through 155.094 and § 8 of this Appendix.



(Ord. CO-67-2, passed 2-21-67; Am. Ord. CO-77-21, passed 10-19-77; Am. Ord.
CO-01-10, passed 11-12-01; Am. Ord. 11-06, passed 5-23-11)



APPENDIX B:  ZONING DEVELOPMENT PLAN



Section



   1.   Determination of zoning needs



   2.   Industrial districts



   3.   Commercial districts



   4.   Residence districts



   5.   Parks and recreational areas



   6.   Schools



   7.   Open land areas



   8.   Contingent uses and special exceptions



§ 1  DETERMINATION OF ZONING NEEDS.



   (A)   In developing recommendations for zoning revisions in the city
and its planning area, consideration has been given to zoning experience in
the city since the passage of the original zoning ordinance following its
drafting in 1953, industrial development which has taken place during the
past 12 years, and commercial and residential trends in the city and in other
communities.  These experiences and trends have not only been considered,
but a block by block reconnaissance survey of existing conditions was made
throughout the city and its environs.  These efforts have provided a clear
understanding of the zoning needs of the city which may be specified in
detail in the new zoning ordinance to be submitted later.  This Appendix
outlines the general requirements of the various districts and their
boundaries.



   (B)   The zoning plan, accompanied by the zoning ordinance,
establishes the boundaries and specifications for the general types of
industrial, business, and residential uses.  It does not specify the
locations of parks, schools, and other types of land use which are essential
elements of the development plan of the city and its expansion area.  These
are discussed in §§ 5, 6, and 7 of this Appendix.



§ 2  INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Industrial districts.  The determination of the boundaries of
industrial districts is very important in promoting the economic welfare of
the city.  Several fine new industries have located in the city during the
last decade and it is highly desirable that more of them seek sites in or
near the city.  The aesthetic aspects of the new plants west of the city
have combined to establish a most impressive and beautiful entrance to the
city.  It is more encouraging to note that industry itself has found out
that the location and construction of architecturally attractive buildings
and superior development of sites contribute to the profitable operation of
the industries.  Many years ago a famous landscape architect coined the
phrase, "What would be fair must first be fit".  Modern industrial design
certainly exemplifies this truism and the new plants are splendid examples
which support it.



   (B)   "I-1" Open Industrial District.  This district, which is
shown by an appropriate technique on the maps, includes substantially the
same area as the "I" Industrial District established by the present
ordinance.  The only changes are minor and were the result of the
reconnaissance referred to in § l.  Within this district, which includes
the Norfolk and Western Railroad Yards, industries which use both buildings
and areas around the buildings for manufacturing processes and storage of
materials, raw materials, or products may locate without restriction.  New
industries would have to conform to reasonable performance standards, which
will be set forth in detail in the report on the zoning ordinance, but
otherwise there would be a minimum of restrictions.  Residential or other
non-industrial uses would not be permitted in this district, however business
would be permitted.



   (C)   "I-2" Enclosed Industrial District.  This district includes
the frontage along State Highway 28 on the south side from Prairie Avenue to
the western limit of the planning area; and on the north side from the
lng-Rich Plant to the western limit.  It is shown appropriately on the
maps.  On the north the district extends to the property line of Norfolk and
Western Railroad and on the south the district is 1000 feet in depth,
measured from the center line of Highway 28.  The provisions of the zoning
ordinance will be designed to perpetuate the application of the principles of
industrial development which has produced such a fine effect by the existing
industries.  These provisions will encourage the location of similar plants
and will protect the existing industries from inferior or unpleasing
installations which might thoughtlessly come about unless the specifications
were adhered to.  No residential, commercial, or other land uses would be
permitted in this district.



   (D)   "I-3" Reserved Industrial District.  This district embraces
most of the area included in the M-l, M-2, M-3, and M-4 Districts in the
existing zoning ordinance.  It is the consultant's opinion that the
objectives of the present regulations can be met acceptably with only one
reserved district.  Industry would be permitted throughout this area. 
Enclosed industry is permitted in this district and there would be
substantially complete freedom to pick desirable sites.  It is recognized
that such a large area should not be reserved for industry exclusively. 
Therefore, there are no restrictions prohibiting its use for residential
development if there is demand for residential use prior to industrial
demands.  However, it would be unwise to permit commercial development
either as special exceptions or without restriction.  If there is a demand
for commercial use, the sites should be established by amendments to the
zoning ordinance or by utilization of shopping center plan procedures.



§ 3  COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Commercial districts.  It has been recognized that the
establishment of adequate commercial districts is vital to the economic
welfare of the community.  It is also recognized that the uncontrolled
location and construction of heterogeneous business establishments,
especially along highways entering a city, with varying types of architecture
and uses of land around buildings, is detrimental both to the community and
to the individual businesses. Many of the larger cities of the country suffer
from deplorable entrances.  Improvements in the appearance of central
business districts and other business uses can be brought about by concerted
action on the part of property owners.  The individual property owner can
improve his store front or the site of his business in the small local
business areas.  But through the adoption of reasonable requirements, the
zoning ordinance may be instrumental in preventing the development of
undesirable conditions along highway entrances.  It is the consultant's
opinion that there should be three types of business districts established in
the proposed zoning ordinance.



   (B)   "GB" General Business District.  The boundaries of this
district correspond generally to those established in the present zoning
ordinance.  The modifications in boundaries are minor and were determined
during the block by block reconnaissance.  All types of business including
industry conducted entirely within buildings would be permitted in the
district.



   (C)   "LB" Local Business District.  These smaller business
locations correspond very closely to those now established.  Local business
would require buildings to be set back 25 feet from the property lines of
bordering streets.  Nearly all types of retail business would be permitted
but no industry would be allowed.



   (D)   "RB" Roadside Business District.  This type of district is
not included in the present zoning ordinance.  Its use has become more and
more desirable during the last decade.  Within this district all types of
business would be permitted as well as enclosed industrial uses.  The
character of the district would be controlled primarily by requirement of a
deep setback and planned development.  This setback should be not less than
75 feet from the proposed property line of the street upon which the business
fronts.  The ordinance also restricts the front yard of the buildings
against storage of materials or products or general cluttering of the front
lawns, but would permit entrance drives, parking area and accessory uses such
as filling station pumps.



   (E)   Neighborhood convenience centers and shopping centers.  The
proposed zoning ordinance provides for the location of neighborhood
convenience centers on tracts of four acres, or more, and community shopping
centers on tracts of 20 acres or more, as special exceptions.  Standards are
established in the zoning ordinance, relative to site design, driveway
treatment, establishment of parking and lawn areas, buffer strips and screen
planting, and other landscape architectural treatment.  These centers would
be permitted by the Board of Zoning Appeals anywhere, if they conform to the
standards of planning and design, and after public hearings to determine
their desirability.



(Ord. 85-22, passed 1-27-86)



§ 4  RESIDENCE DISTRICTS.



   (A)   The proposed zoning ordinance includes five residential
districts instead of four which are in the present ordinance.  The principal
change consists of the proposal that a district be established which will
contain the majority of large, old houses which may eventually be converted
into three or more apartments.  The existing zoning ordinance permitted such
conversions and the erection of apartments in the "C" Residential
Districts.  The general characteristics of the residential districts are as
follows.



   (B)   "S" Suburban Residence District.  This district comprises the
territory beyond the city limits which has not be proposed for industrial or
business use.  Within this district only single-family dwellings would
normally be permitted.  They would require building sites with minimum areas
of 16,000 square feet and with minimum widths of 100 feet.  This regulation
would apply where public water supply and public sanitary sewers are not
available.  Where such utilities are both available the lot sizes could be
reduced to 8,000 square feet with minimum widths of 66 feet.  As the city
expands beyond the city limits of the planning area utilities services will
generally keep pace with development, which will permit the platting of lots
in the 8,000 square foot category.



   (C)   "A" Residence District.  The "A" Residence District would
permit only single-family dwellings on sites with minimum areas of 8,000
square feet and minimum widths of 66 feet.  These areas include newer
developments.  Much of the suburban area would actually correspond with the
"A" District where utilities are available.



   (D)   "B" Residence District.  This district has substantially the
same requirements as the present "B" District.  It is limited to
single-family dwellings on sites with minimum areas of 6,000 square feet and
minimum widths of 50 feet.  The block by block reconnaissance indicates the
wisdom of revising the coverage of this district. A comparison of the
existing zone map with the development plan will indicate where some of the
blocks now within the "C" District have been placed in the "B" District.



   (E)   "C" Residence District.  This district would permit both
single-family and two-family dwellings on lots with minimum areas of 6,000
square feet and minimum widths of 50 feet.  The present zoning ordinance
also permits conversion of large houses and the erection of apartments, but
it is proposed that this provision be eliminated from the proposed zoning
ordinance.



   (F)   "D" Residence District.  This district corresponds
substantially with the provisions of the existing "C" District, and permits
apartments and the conversion of large houses.  The block by block
reconnaissance revealed several blocks which would logically fall into this
category.



   (G)   Apartment dwellings.  During the last decade the demand for
apartments has become very great in cities of all sizes.  Provisions have
been developed in zoning ordinances to meet this contingency. The proposed
revised zoning ordinance contains provisions setting up definite standards
for the location of apartments and the provision of adequate open space
around them, so as to avoid damage to neighboring property and to meet the
demands for apartment living.  Garden apartments, which include buildings
which would not ordinarily exceed 2-1/2 stories in height and which would
have well planned and developed open space around them, could be located as
special exceptions in the "S" and "D" Residence Districts and in the "LB",
and "GB" Business Districts.  High rise apartments, that is, those which
might be erected to heights of several stories provided that the sites would
be large enough to ensure adequate open space about them, could also be
permitted as special exceptions in the "S" and "D" Residence Districts and
the "LB" and "GB" Business Districts.  These provisions will meet the
demands for apartments, but will make sure that their plans have been
carefully worked out, have received the approval of the Board of Zoning
Appeals, and that the public has had an opportunity to examine the plans and
present their opinions at public hearings.



§ 5  PARKS AND RECREATIONAL AREAS.



   (A)   The city took a wise step forward about 45 years ago when the
Travelers' Protective Association, an organization of traveling salesmen
stimulated a drive to acquire the present large city park, which was given
the name of Gem City TPA Park.  It has been of great recreational service,
not only to residents of the city, but for many other people within a radius
of 25 miles or more.  The park has an area of 89.3 acres, which is
supplemented by the ground owned by the Frankfort Country Club, which has an
area of 23 acres.  A golf course is laid out in the park and the country
club land and is used by members of the club and the public.  The park also
has a fine swimming pool, six tennis courts, two shelter buildings, picnic
grounds with tables and outdoor ovens, a band stand, a baseball field, and
abundant play apparatus.  It is indeed an all-purpose park worthy of any
city.



   (B)   In addition to the Gem City TPA Park, the city has Dorner
Park, with an area of about three acres, located south of Prairie Creek and
west of Clay Street, which has play equipment; John Redmon Park in the
southwest part of town, with an area of about three acres, used as a local
playground; Woodside Circle, with an area of about one acre, which has play
apparatus; Stott Field where football games are played; the athletic field
located south of the junior high school; and playgrounds at the Woodside
School and Lincoln School.  The most recent acquisition of park land is the
local park at the north end of the East Park Addition near the new high
school.  It has an area of about 11.5 acres and provides play facilities for
the children of the locality.  Located between the building sites and the
Norfolk and Western Railroad, it exemplifies a most appropriate use of
land.  All new subdivisions should provide similar local park and playground
facilities, of which this is such a good example.



   (C)   The new high school which has an area of nearly 80 acres has
ample area for the installation of all types of recreation and athletics
which will be required by the school children.  It is without doubt one of
the finest high school sites in existence anywhere.



   (D)   The total area of parks in the city at the time of preparation
of the master plan in 1952 was 116.1 acres.  Since then East Park has been
added, bringing the acreage to 126.2 acres, approximately.  This includes
the country club which is essentially a part of the park provisions.  The
population of the city in 1960 was 15,302 and it is safe to estimate that it
has at least 16,000 population in 1965.  The city, therefore, has one acre
of park land for each 125 residents.  This compares very favorably with the
desired standard of one acre of parks per 100 inhabitants.  Area- wise, the
city has about 8% of its area in park land.  This is somewhat below the
desired standard of 10%.



   (E)   The John Redmon Park should be enlarged so as to include the
triangle between Third Street and the Monon Railroad.  It will be of
increasing value to this part of the city.



(Ord. 85-22, passed 1-27-86)



§ 6  SCHOOLS.



   The city has reached an ideal situation with respect to schools with
the acquisition of the high school site of about 80 acres and the erection of
the modern high school building.  The five other elementary schools and the
junior high school provide adequate facilities for the existing city. 
However, the city is growing and much land to the southeast, northeast, and
northwest will be developed for residential use as time goes on.  The
southwest sector, in which more industrial development is expected, may also
have considerable residential growth.  It appears likely that fewer schools
with much larger sites will be located in the future, rather than smaller
installations about one mile apart.  This method requires more
transportation facilities but has proven to be more economical from both the
standpoints of construction costs and administration.  It, therefore,
appears that there will eventually be a need for four, or possibly five new
elementary school sites in the planning area.



§ 7  OPEN LAND AREAS.



   (A)   There are several areas around the city which appear to be
destined to remain as open land.  Among these are the fairgrounds.  It has
an area of 44.7 acres and, so far as can be estimated at this time, will
continue to be used for the Clinton County Fair for many years to come.  If
the fair is discontinued the area would be ideal for recreational purposes. 
As a matter of fact, it could be used at present for field games and other
recreation, when it is not being used for the fair.



   (B)   The Wesley Manor development which provides a modern home for
the aged will doubtless expand.  The open grounds will always be an asset to
the city, although their use is private.



   (C)   The Isaac Walton League property north of Gem City TPA Park is
also in reality a recreational facility which provides recreation for a
considerable group of the population.  If it is ever abandoned by the Isaac
Walton League it should be incorporated into the park system.



   (D)   The County Home has a site of about 80 acres, which will
doubtless remain as an open area.  If it should cease to be used as at
present, it could very logically be developed as a fine residential area.



   (E)   The Pilgrim Holiness College at Armstrong and Fifth Street,
which is indicated on the map as school property, is also a permanent open
land area and forms a valuable asset of the city.



§ 8  CONTINGENT USES AND SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS.



   The provisions for the location of contingent uses, such as schools,
churches, public buildings, and other uses remain substantially as they are
set forth in the existing ordinance. Provisions for the granting of special
exceptions for types of land use which are desired from time to time, but for
which actual districts cannot reasonably be set up, are contained in the
ordinance as proposed.  The standards which each kind of special exception
use must meet, will be clearly set forth in the list of such uses.


Disclaimer:
This Code of Ordinances and/or any other documents that appear on this site
may not reflect the most current legislation adopted by the Municipality.
American Legal Publishing Corporation provides these documents for
informational purposes only. These documents should not be relied upon as the
definitive authority for local legislation. Additionally, the formatting and
pagination of the posted documents varies from the formatting and pagination
of the official copy. The official printed copy of a Code of Ordinances
should be consulted prior to any action being taken.

For further information regarding the official version of any of this Code of
Ordinances or other documents posted on this site, please contact the
Municipality directly or contact American Legal Publishing toll-free at
800-445-5588.


                 © 2018 American Legal Publishing Corporation
                            techsupport@amlegal.com
                                1.800.445.5588.




CHAPTER 156:  BUILDING CODE



Section



General Requirements



   156.01   Title



   156.02   Purpose



   156.03   Definitions



   156.04   Scope



   156.05   Authority



   156.06   Severability



   156.07   Effect of adoption on prior ordinance



Building Permits



   156.10   Building permit required



   156.11   Application for building permit



   156.12   Issuance of building permit



   156.13   Certificate of occupancy



   156.14   Fees



Investigations and Inspections of Construction Activities



   156.20   General authority to make inspections and investigations



   156.21   Inspections by Fire Department



Enforcement and Penalties



   156.30   Withhold issuance of permits



   156.31   Permit revocation



   156.32   Stop-work order



   156.33   Civil action



   156.34   Monetary penalty



   156.35   Right of appeal



Minimum Construction Standards



   156.40   Adoption of rules by reference



   156.41   Lifting devices located within a private residence



GENERAL REQUIREMENTS



§ 156.01  TITLE.



   This chapter and all material included herein by reference shall be
known as the "Building Code of the City of Frankfort, Indiana."



(Ord. CO-05-06, passed 10-11-05)



§ 156.02  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to protect the life, public safety,
health and general welfare of the citizens of the City of Frankfort, Indiana,
and shall be construed in such a manner to effectuate this purpose.



(Ord. CO-05-06, passed 10-11-05)



§ 156.03  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BUILDING INSPECTOR. As used in this chapter, includes individuals
employed by the Building Department that are authorized to represent the
Building Inspector.



   CLASS 1 STRUCTURE.  Pursuant to I.C. 22-12-1-4 has the following
definition:



      (1)   CLASS 1 STRUCTURE means any part of the following:



         (a)   A building or structure that is intended to be or
is occupied or otherwise used in any part by any of the following:



            1.   The public.



            2.   Three or more tenants.



            3.   One or more persons who act as the employees
of another.



         (b)   A site improvement affecting access by persons
with physical disabilities to a building or structure described in subsection
(1).



         (c)   Any class of buildings or structures that the
Building Inspector's office determines by rules to affect a building or
structure described in subsection (1), except buildings or structures
described in subsections (3) through (6).



      (2)   Subsection (1)(a) includes a structure that contains
three or more condominium units (as defined in I.C. 32-25-2-9) or other units
that:



         (a)   Are intended to be or are used or leased by the
owner of the unit; and



         (b)   Are not completely separated from each other by an
unimproved space.



      (3)   Subsection (1)(a) does not include a building or
structure that:



         (a)   Is intended to be or is used only for an
agricultural purpose on the land where it is located; and



         (b)   Is not used for retail trade or is a stand used
for retail sales of farm produce for eight or less consecutive months in a
calendar year.



      (4)   Subsection (1)(a) does not include a Class 2 structure.



      (5)   Subsection (1)(a) does not include a vehicular bridge.



      (6)   Subsection (1)(a) does not include a structure that is
intended to be or is occupied solely to provide periodic maintenance or
repair of:



         (a)   The structure; or



         (b)   Mechanical or electrical equipment located within
and affixed to the structure.



      (7)   Pursuant to I.C. 22-12-1-24, structure includes swimming
pool.



   CLASS 2 STRUCTURE.  Pursuant to I.C. 22-12-1-5, has the following
definition:



      (1)   CLASS 2 STRUCTURE means any part of the following:



         (a)   A building or structure that is intended to
contain or contains only one dwelling unit or two dwelling units unless any
part of the building or structure is regularly used as CLASS 1 STRUCTURE.



         (b)   An outbuilding for a structure described in
subsection (1)(a), such as a garage, barn, or family swimming pool, unless
any part of the outbuilding is regularly used as a CLASS 1 STRUCTURE.



      (2)   Subsection (1) does not include a vehicular bridge.



      (3)   Pursuant to I.C. 22-12-1-24, structure includes swimming
pool.



   CONSTRUCTION.  Pursuant to I.C. 22-12-1-7, means any of the following:



      (1)   Fabrication of any part of an industrialized building
system or mobile structure for use at another site.



      (2)   Erection or assembly of any part of a Class 1 or Class 2
structure at the site where it will be used.



      (3)   Installation of any part of the permanent heating,
ventilating, air conditioning, electrical, plumbing, sanitary, emergency
detection, emergency communication, or fire or explosion suppression systems
for a Class 1 or Class 2 structure at the site where it will be used.



      (4)   Work undertaken to alter, remodel, rehabilitate, or add
to any part of a Class 1 or Class 2 structure.



      (5)   Work undertaken to relocate any part of a Class 1 or
Class 2 structure, except a mobile structure.



   INDUSTRIALIZED BUILDING SYSTEM.  Pursuant to I.C. 22-12-1-14, means
any part of a building or other structure that is in whole or in substantial
part fabricated in an off-site manufacturing facility for installation or
assembly at the building site as part of a Class 1 structure, a Class 2
structure, or another building or structure.  However, the term does not
include a mobile structure or a system that is capable of inspection at the
building site.



   MANUFACTURED HOME.  Pursuant to I.C. 22-12-1-16 has the meaning set
forth in 42 U.S.C. 5402 as it existed on January 1, 2003. This definition is
as follows: MANUFACTURED HOME means a structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width
or 40 body feet or more in length, or, when erected on site, is 320 or more
square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be
used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to
the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning,
and electrical systems contained therein; except that such term shall include
any structure which meets all the requirements of this paragraph except the
size requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily
files a certification required by the Secretary of Housing and Urban
Development and complies with the standards established under this 42 U.S.C.
5401 et seq. and except that such term shall not include any self-propelled
recreational vehicle.



   MOBILE STRUCTURE.  Pursuant to I.C. 22-12-1-17, has the following
definition:



      (1)   MOBILE STRUCTURE means any part of a fabricated unit
that is designed to be:



         (a)   Towed on its own chassis; and



         (b)   Connected to utilities for year-round occupancy or
use as a Class 1 structure, a Class 2 structure, or another structure.



      (2)   The term includes the following:



         (a)   Two or more components that can be retracted for
towing purposes and subsequently expanded for additional capacity.



         (b)   Two or more units that are separately towable but
designed to be jointed into one integral unit.



   PERSON. Pursuant to I.C. 22-12-1-18, means an individual, corporation,
limited liability company, partnership, unincorporated association, or
governmental entity.



   STRUCTURE. Both Class 1 and Class 2 structures, unless specifically
stated otherwise.



   VEHICULAR BRIDGE. Pursuant to I.C. 22-12-1-26, means any bridge that is
neither:



      (1)   A pedestrian walkway; nor



      (2)   A passageway for light vehicles; suspended between two
or more parts of a building or between two or more buildings.



(Ord. CO-05-06, passed 10-11-05)



§ 156.04  SCOPE.



   (A)   All construction shall be accomplished in compliance with the
provisions of this Building Code.



   (B)   Pursuant to I.C. 22-13-2-6, this Building Code shall not apply
to industrialized building systems or mobile structures certified under I.C.
22-15-4; however, the provisions of this Building Code and the rules
promulgated by the Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission do apply to
any construction related to an industrialized building system or mobile
structure not certified under I.C. 22-15-4.



   (C)   Pursuant to I.C. 22-13-2-9, this Building Code is not
applicable to regulated amusement devices, regulated boilers, regulated
pressure vessels, or regulated lifting devices.



(Ord. CO-05-06, passed 10-11-05)



§ 156.05  AUTHORITY.



   The Building Inspector is hereby authorized and directed to administer
and enforce the following:



   (A)   All of the provisions of this Building Code.



   (B)   Variances granted in accordance with I.C. 22-13-2-11.



   (C)   Orders issued under I.C. 22-12-7.



(Ord. CO-05-06, passed 10-11-05)



§ 156.06  SEVERABILITY.



   Should any provision (section, clause, phrase, word, or any other
portion) of this chapter be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to
be invalid for any reason, the remaining provisions shall not be affected, if
and only if such remaining provisions can, without the invalid provision or
provisions be given the effect intended in adopting this chapter. To this
end, the provisions of this chapter are severable.



(Ord. CO-05-06, passed 10-11-05)



§ 156.07  EFFECT OF ADOPTION ON PRIOR ORDINANCE.



   The expressed or implied repeal or amendment by this ordinance of any
other ordinance or part of any other ordinance does not affect any rights or
liabilities accrued, penalties incurred, or proceedings begun prior to the
effective date of this chapter. These rights, liabilities, and other
proceedings are continued and penalties shall be imposed and enforced under
the repealed or amended ordinance as if this chapter had not been adopted.



(Ord. CO-05-06, passed 10-11-05)



BUILDING PERMITS



§ 156.10  BUILDING PERMIT REQUIRED.



   Construction is prohibited unless in conformity with a valid building
permit obtained from the Building Inspector prior to commencement of
construction.



(Ord. CO-05-06, passed 10-11-05)



§ 156.11  APPLICATION FOR BUILDING PERMIT.



   (A)   Any person required to have a building permit shall submit a
complete application to the Building Inspector's office, at least seven
business days prior to the issuance of the building permit.



   (B)   This application shall be submitted on a form prepared by the
Building Inspector, and shall contain the following:



      (1)   Information that the Building Inspector determines to be
necessary to locate and contact the applicant.



      (2)   A clear and understandable copy of detailed plans and
specifications drawn to scale which indicate in a precise manner the nature
and location of all work to be accomplished.



      (3)   A plot plan drawn to scale; provided, however, such plot
plan shall not be required in the instance where all such construction is to
occur entirely within an existing structure. This plot plan shall reflect the
location of the structure in relation to existing property lines and show
streets, curbs and sidewalks and proposed changes or additions to such
streets, curbs and sidewalks.



      (4)   If required by Indiana law or any rule of the Fire
Prevention and Building Safety Commission, a copy of a design release for the
work to be done that has been issued by the State Building Inspector and the
State Fire Marshal pursuant to I.C. 22-15-3.



      (5)   Any additional information that the Building Inspector
finds to be necessary to determine that the construction will conform to all
applicable building laws and will not violate any other applicable ordinances
or laws.



      (6)   The fees established by Ordinance No. CO-04-23 entitled
An Ordinance Establishing Fees to be changed by the Engineer and Building
Inspector Department, shall be payable to the order of the city and shall be
turned over to the Clerk-Treasurer, to the credit of the General Fund of the
city.



   (C)   Application for a building permit shall be made by the person
entitled to obtain the permit or by an employee or agent of that person. The
Building Inspector may require that such an employee or agent provide written
authority to apply for a permit.



(Ord. CO-05-06, passed 10-11-05)



§ 156.12  ISSUANCE OF BUILDING PERMIT.



   The Building Inspector shall issue a building permit to a person after
the person has submitted a complete application, including any applicable
fee, provided that the proposed construction will conform to all applicable
building laws and will not violate any other applicable ordinances or laws.



(Ord. CO-05-06, passed 10-11-05)



§ 156.13  CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.



   No certificate of occupancy for any building or structure shall be
issued unless such building or structure was constructed in compliance with
the provisions of this Building Code.  It shall be unlawful to occupy any
such building or structure unless a full, partial, or temporary certificate
of occupancy has been issued by the Building Inspector.



(Ord. CO-05-06, passed 10-11-05)



§ 156.14  FEES.



 

Building Permits
Permit fees include all inspections




(1)   Single/duplex dwellings

   Including manufactured homes
 
$200 plus $.02 per sq. ft. over 1,500 sq. ft. total floor area


(2)   Multi-family dwellings
 
$200 first dwelling unit

$100 each additional unit


(3)   Mobile homes

   (in designated mobile home parks only)
 
$50


(4)   Industrial - each structure and addition
 
$500 per building plus $.03 per sq. ft. total floor area


(5)   Commercial - each structure and addition
 
$300 per building plus $.03 per sq. ft. total floor area


(6)   Contingent uses (See Appendix A, § 7)
 
$100 per building plus $.03 per sq. ft. total floor area


(7)   Commercial renovations

   (a)   Minor commercial renovations
 
$150 per building plus $.02 per sq. ft.

$55


(8)   Communication/cell tower

   Commercial only
 
$1,000


(9)   Residential

   (a)   Remodeling, all repairs and renovations

   (b)   Partial residential renovations

   (c)   Minor residential renovations

   (d)   Siding
 
 

$60

$40

$30

$20


(10)   Additions to existing structures, including attached garages.  Fee
applies up to a total of three rooms.  Greater improvements considered as
(1) above (for residential dwellings)
 
$55 per room


(11)   Detached garages
 
$55


(12)   Accessory items (no certificate of occupancy)

   (a)   Carports

   (b)   Storage buildings

   (c)   Decks, ramps and porches

      Attached by roof

   (d)   Electrical (includes service, panelboard and circuit
installations or revisions)

      Residential

      Commercial

   (e)   Fence

   (f)   Above-ground swimming pool over 36" tall

   (g)   In-ground swimming pool

   (h)   Demolition (structures only)

      All structures under 200 sq. ft.

      Residential

      Commercial

      Industrial

   (i)   Roof

   (j)   Sidewalks/curbs/driveway

   (k)   Parking lot commercial/industrial

   (l)   Wind energy system
 
 


$20

$25 not to exceed 200 sq. ft.

$35

$45

 

 

$45

$75


$20

$30

$120


$10


$70

$150

$200

$35

$25


$200

$500


Sign Permits
(No charge for directional signs (i.e. entrance/exit if under 15" x 50")
Sign erection (no building permit involved)


(1)   Signs up to 32 sq. ft.
 
$30 per face


(2)   Signs or billboards over 32 sq. ft.
 
$2 per sq. ft. per face


(3)   Portable signs (residential)
 
$7


(4)   Commercial/industrial
 
$30


Application for Certificate of Occupancy
(Application fee includes inspection)


(1)   Commercial and industrial
 
$50


(2)   Residential
 
$30


(3)   Contingent/conditional use
 
$35


(4)   Garage and remodeling
 
$25


30-Day Electrical Safety Inspection


(1)   Each inspection
 
$25


(2)   Each re-inspection
 
$25


(3)   Owner’s failure to appear for schedules inspection
 
$25




 



(Ord. CO-06-25, passed 1-8-07; Am. Ord. 11-08, passed 5-23-11; Am. Ord.
17-15, passed 11-13-17)



INVESTIGATIONS AND INSPECTIONS OF CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES



§ 156.20  GENERAL AUTHORITY TO MAKE INSPECTIONS AND INVESTIGATIONS.



   (A)   All construction shall be subject to periodic inspections by
the Building Inspector irrespective of whether a building permit has been or
is required to be obtained.



   (B)   The Building Inspector may at any reasonable time go in, upon,
around or about the premises where any structure subject to the provisions of
this Building Code or to the rules of the Fire Prevention and Building Safety
Commission is located for the purposes of inspection and investigation of
such structure.  Such inspection and investigation may be made before and/or
after construction on the project is completed for the purposes of
determining whether the structure meets building standards and procedures,
and ascertaining whether the construction and procedures have been
accomplished in a manner consistent with this Building Code and the rules of
the Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission.



(Ord. CO-05-06, passed 10-11-05)



§ 156.21  INSPECTIONS BY FIRE DEPARTMENT.



   The Building Inspector and the Fire Department shall work cooperatively
to conduct inspections and investigations to promote compliance with fire
safety laws (the Fire Department has independent authority to conduct
inspections and take enforcement actions under I.C. 36-8-17).



(Ord. CO-05-06, passed 10-11-05)



ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES



§ 156.30  WITHHOLD ISSUANCE OF PERMITS.



   (A)   Whenever a person which is either an applicant for a building
permit or an obtainer of a building permit owes fees (including checks
returned for insufficient funds, permit fees owed pursuant to Ordinance
CO-04-23, or inspection fees owed pursuant to Ordinance CO-04-23) to the
Building Inspector's office, the Building Inspector may withhold the issuance
of subsequently requested permits until such time that the debt is satisfied.



   (B)   Whenever a person applies for a building permit for a
structure that is not being used or constructed in conformance with
applicable provisions of an applicable zoning ordinance or other ordinance
relating to land use, the Building Inspector is authorized to withhold the
issuance of requested permits until such time that the property is brought
into conformance with applicable ordinances.



(Ord. CO-05-06, passed 10-11-05)



§ 156.31  PERMIT REVOCATION.



   The Building Inspector may revoke a building permit when any of the
following are applicable:



   (A)   The application, plans or supporting documents contain a false
statement or misrepresentation as to a material fact.



   (B)   The application, plans or supporting documents reflect a lack
of compliance with building standards and procedures.



   (C)   There is failure to comply with the Building Ordinance.



   (D)   The structure for which the building permit has been issued is
not being used or constructed in conformance with an applicable zoning
ordinance or other ordinance relating to land use.



(Ord. CO-05-06, passed 10-11-05)



§ 156.32  STOP-WORK ORDER.



   (A)   The Building Inspector may issue an order requiring suspension
of the pertinent construction (stop-work order) in accordance with this
section.



   (B)   The stop work order shall:



      (1)   Be in writing;



      (2)   State with specificity the construction to which it is
applicable and the reason for its issuance;



      (3)   Be posted on the property in a conspicuous place;



      (4)   If practicable, be given to:



         (a)   The person doing the construction; and



         (b)   To the owner of the property or the owner's agent;



      (5)   The stop-work order shall state the conditions under
which construction may be resumed.



   (C)   The Building Inspector may issue a stop-work order if:



      (1)   Construction is proceeding in an unsafe manner,
including, but not limited to, in violation of any standard set forth in this
Building Code or any state law pertaining to safety during construction.



      (2)   Construction is occurring in violation of this Building
Code or in such a manner that if construction is allowed to proceed, there is
a reasonable probability that it will substantially difficult to correct the
violation.



      (3)   Construction for which a building permit is required is
proceeding without a building permit being in force.



   (D)   The issuance of a stop-work order shall in no way limit the
operation of penalties provided elsewhere in this Building Code.



(Ord. CO-05-06, passed 10-11-05)



§ 156.33  CIVIL ACTION.



   Pursuant to I.C. 36-1-6-4, the city may initiate a civil action in a
court of competent jurisdiction to restrain any person from violating a
provision of this Building Code.



(Ord. CO-05-06, passed 10-11-05)



§ 156.34  MONETARY PENALTY.



   Any person violating any provision of this Building Code may be subject
to a fine in any sum not exceeding $2,500.  The assessment of a monetary
penalty shall in no way limit the operation of the penalties provided
elsewhere in this Building Code.



(Ord. CO-05-06, passed 10-11-05)



§ 156.35  RIGHT OF APPEAL.



   Any person aggrieved by an order issued under this Building Code shall
have the right to petition for review or appeal of any order of the Building
Inspector. Such a person may file a petition or appeal by using either, or
both, of the following procedures:



   (A)   Appeal to the Frankfort City Board of Public Works and Safety.



   (B)   Appeal to the Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission.



      (1)   A person aggrieved by an order issued under this
Building Code may appeal to the Fire Prevention and Building Safety
Commission, in accordance with I.C. 22-13-2-7.



      (2)   The Commission may modify or reverse any order issued by
the city that covers a subject governed by I.C. 22-12, I.C. 22-13, I.C.
22-14, I.C. 22-15, a fire safety, or a building rule.



      (3)   The Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission must
review orders that concern a Class 2 structure if the person aggrieved by the
order petitions for review under I.C. 4-21.5-3-7 within 30 days after the
issuance of the order.



      (4)   The Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission may
review all other orders issued under this Building Code.



      (5)   The review of an order by the Fire Prevention and
Building Safety Commission does not suspend the running of the time period
under any statute in which a person must petition a court for judicial review
of the order.



(Ord. CO-05-06, passed 10-11-05)



MINIMUM CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS



§ 156.40  ADOPTION OF RULES BY REFERENCE.



   (A)   Pursuant to I.C. 22-13-2-3(b), the rules of the Indiana Fire
Prevention and Building Safety Commission as set out in the following
Articles of Title 675 of the Indiana Administrative Code as hereby
incorporated by reference in this code and shall include any later amendments
to those rules.



      (1)   Article 13 - Building Codes.



         (a)   Fire and Building Safety Standards.



         (b)   Indiana Building Code.



      (2)   Article 14 - Indiana Residential Code.



      (3)   Article 16 - Indiana Plumbing Code.



      (4)   Article 17 - Indiana Electrical Code.



      (5)   Article 18 - Indiana Mechanical Code.



      (6)   Article 19 - Indiana Energy Conservation Code.



      (7)   Article 20 - Indiana Swimming Pool Code.



      (8)   Article 22 - Indiana Fire Code.



      (9)   Article 24 - Migrant Day Care Nursery Fire Safety Code.



      (10)   Article 25 - Indiana Fuel Gas Code.



   (B)   Two copies of the above building rules incorporated by
reference are on file in the office of the clerk for the legislative body for
public inspection as required as I.C. 36-1-5-4.



   (C)   The Building Inspector and the Fire Prevention and Building
Safety Commissioner may grant a variance to the fire safety laws and building
laws adopted in this Building Code.  Pursuant to I.C. 22-13-2-7(b), a
variance granted by the Building Inspector is not effective until it has been
approved by Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission.



(Ord. CO-05-06, passed 10-11-05)



§ 156.41  LIFTING DEVICES LOCATED WITHIN A PRIVATE RESIDENCE.



   (A)   Pursuant to I.C. 22-12-1-22(b)(12), lifting devices, such as
elevators and wheelchair lifts, located within a private residence are not
regulated lifting devices. Therefore, the following standards applicable to
lifting devices located within a private residence are incorporated by
reference:



      (1)   Part 5.3, Private Residence Elevators, ANSI/ASME
A17.1-2000, Safety Code for Elevators and Escalators published by the
American Society of Mechanical Engineers, Three Park Avenue, New York, New
York 10016.



      (2)   Part 5.4, Private Residence Inclined Elevators,
ANSI/ASME A17.1-2000, Safety Code for Elevators and Escalators published by
the American Society of Mechanical Engineers, Three Park Avenue, New York,
New York 10016.



      (3)   Section 5, Private Residence Vertical Platform Lifts,
ASME A18.1a, 2001, (Addenda to ASME 18.1-1999), Safety Standard for Platform
and Stairway Chair Lifts, published by the American Society of Mechanical
Engineers, Three Park Avenue, New York, New York 10016.



      (4)   Section 6, Private Residence Inclined Platform Lifts,
ASME A18.1a, 2001 (Addenda to ASME 18.1-1999), Safety Standard for Platform
and Stairway Chair Lifts, published by the American Society of Mechanical
Engineers, Three Park Avenue, New York, New York 10016.



      (5)   Section 7, Private Inclined Stairway Lifts, ASME A18.1a,
2001 (Addenda to ASME 18.1-1999), Safety Standard for Platform and Stairway
Chair Lifts, published by the American Society of Mechanical Engineers, Three
Park Avenue, New York, New York 10016.



   (B)   Two copies of the above lifting device standards incorporated
by reference are on file in the office of the clerk for the legislative body
for public inspection as required by I.C. 36-1-5-4.



(Ord. CO-05-06, passed 10-11-05)



CHAPTER 157:  FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS



Section



General Provisions



   157.01   Statutory authorization



   157.02   Findings of fact



   157.03   Statement of purpose



   157.04   Objectives



   157.05   Definitions



   157.06   Lands to which this chapter applies



   157.07   Basis for establishing regulatory flood data



   157.08   Establishment of floodplain development permit



   157.09   Compliance



   157.10   Abrogation and greater restrictions



   157.11   Discrepancy between mapped floodplain and actual ground
elevations



   157.12   Interpretation



   157.13   Warning and disclaimer of liability



   157.14   Increased cost of compliance (ICC)



Administration



   157.25   Designation of Administrator



   157.26   Permit procedures



   157.27   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator



Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction



   157.35   General standards



   157.36   Specific standards



   157.37   Standards for subdivision proposals



   157.38   Critical facility



   157.39   Standards for identified floodways



   157.40   Standards for identified fringe



   157.41   Standards for SFHAs without established base flood
elevation and/or floodways/fringes



   157.42   Standards for floodprone areas



Variance Procedures



   157.55   Designation of Variance and Appeals Board



   157.56   Duties of Variance and Appeals Board



   157.57   Variance procedures



   157.58   Conditions for variances



   157.59   Variance notification



   157.60   Historic structure



   157.61   Special conditions



 



   157.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 157.01  STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.



   The Indiana Legislature has in I.C. 36-7-4 and I.C. 14-28-4 granted the
power to local government units to control land use within their
jurisdictions. Therefore, the Common Council of the City of Frankfort does
hereby adopt the following floodplain management regulations.



(Ord. 11-15, passed 11-14-11)



§ 157.02  FINDINGS OF FACT.



   (A)   The flood hazard areas of the City of Frankfort are subject to
periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and
safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health,
safety, and general welfare.



   (B)   These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of
obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and
velocities, and by the occupancy in flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to
floods or hazardous to other lands which are inadequately elevated,
floodproofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages.



(Ord. 11-15, passed 11-14-11)



§ 157.03  STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.



   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety,
and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:



   (A)   Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health,
safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, which result in
damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;



   (B)   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities
which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of
initial construction;



   (C)   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream
channels, and natural protective barriers which are involved in the
accommodation of floodwaters;



   (D)   Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development
which may increase erosion or flood damage;



   (E)   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which
will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to
other lands; and



   (F)   Make federally subsidized flood insurance available for
structures and their contents in the city by fulfilling the requirements of
the National Flood Insurance Program.



(Ord. 11-15, passed 11-14-11)



§ 157.04  OBJECTIVES.



   The objectives of this chapter are:



   (A)   To protect human life and health;



   (B)   To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood
control projects;



   (C)   To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated
with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;



   (D)   To minimize prolonged business interruptions;



   (E)   To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as
water and gas mains, electric, telephone, and sewer lines, streets, and
bridges located in floodplains;



   (F)   To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound
use and development of floodprone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood
blight areas; and



   (G)   To ensure that potential homebuyers are notified that property
is in a flood area.



(Ord. 11-15, passed 11-14-11)



§ 157.05  DEFINITIONS.



   Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this
chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in
common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.



   A ZONE. Portions of the SFHA in which the principal source of flooding
is runoff from rainfall, snowmelt, or a combination of both. In A ZONES,
floodwaters may move slowly or rapidly, but waves are usually not a
significant threat to buildings. These areas are labeled as Zone A, Zone AE,
Zones A1-A30, Zone AO, Zone AH, Zone AR and Zone A99 on a FIRM or FHBM. The
definitions are presented below:



      (1)   ZONE A. Areas subject to inundation by the 1% annual
chance flood event.  Because detailed hydraulic analyses have not been
performed, no base flood elevation or depths are shown.  Mandatory flood
insurance purchase requirements apply.



      (2)   ZONE AE AND A1-A30. Areas subject to inundation by the
1% annual chance flood event determined by detailed methods. Base flood
elevations are shown within these zones. Mandatory flood insurance purchase
requirements apply.  (ZONE AE is on new and revised maps in place of ZONES
A1-A30.)



      (3)   ZONE AO.  Areas subject to inundation by the 1% annual
chance shallow flooding (usually sheet flow on sloping terrain) where average
depths are between one and three feet. Average flood depths derived from
detailed hydraulic analyses are shown within this zone. Mandatory flood
insurance purchase requirements apply.



      (4)   ZONE AH. Areas subject to inundation by the 1% annual
chance shallow flooding (usually areas of ponding) where average depths are
between one and three feet. Average flood depths derived from detailed
hydraulic analyses are shown within this zone. Mandatory flood insurance
purchase requirements apply.



      (5)   ZONE AR. Areas that result from the decertification of a
previously accredited flood protection system that is determined to be in the
process of being restored to provide base flood protection.  Mandatory flood
insurance purchase requirements apply.



      (6)   ZONE A99. Areas subject to inundation by the 1% annual
chance flood event, but which will ultimately be protected upon completion of
an under-construction federal flood protection system. These are areas of
special flood hazard where enough progress has been made on the construction
of a protection system, such as dikes, dams, and levees, to consider it
complete for insurance rating purposes. ZONE A99 may only be used when the
flood protection system has reached specified statutory progress toward
completion. No base flood elevations or depths are shown. Mandatory flood
insurance purchase requirements apply.



   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE (APPURTENANT STRUCTURE). A structure that is
located on the same parcel of property as the principal structure and the use
of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure. ACCESSORY
STRUCTURES should constitute a minimal initial investment, may not be used
for human habitation, and be designed to have minimal flood damage potential.
Examples of ACCESSORY STRUCTURES are detached garages, carports, storage
sheds, pole barns, and hay sheds.



   ADDITION (TO AN EXISTING STRUCTURE). Any walled and roofed expansion to
the perimeter of a structure in which the addition is connected by a common
load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition,
which is connected by a firewall or is separated by independent perimeter
load-bearing walls, is new construction.



   APPEAL. A request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator’s
interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.



   AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING. A designated AO or AH Zone on the
community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one
to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path
of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may
be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.



   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE). The elevation of the 1% annual chance flood.



   BASEMENT. That portion of a structure having its floor sub-grade (below
ground level) on all sides.



   BUILDING. See STRUCTURE.



   COMMUNITY. A political entity that has the authority to adopt and
enforce floodplain ordinances for the area under its jurisdiction.



   COMMUNITY RATING SYSTEM (CRS). A program developed by the Federal
Insurance Administration to provide incentives for those communities in the
regular program that have gone beyond the minimum floodplain management
requirements to develop extra measures to provide protection from flooding.



   CRITICAL FACILITY. A facility for which even a slight chance of
flooding might be too great.  CRITICAL FACILITIES include, but are not
limited to, schools, nursing homes, hospitals, police, fire, and emergency
response installations, installations which produce, use or store hazardous
materials or hazardous waste.



   DEVELOPMENT.



      (1)   Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate including but not limited to:



         (a)   Construction, reconstruction, or placement of a
structure or any addition to a structure;



         (b)   Installing a manufactured home on a site,
preparing a site for a manufactured home or installing a recreational vehicle
on a site for more than 180 days;



         (c)   Installing utilities, erection of walls and
fences, construction of roads, or similar projects;



         (d)   Construction of flood control structures such as
levees, dikes, dams, channel improvements, and the like;



         (e)   Mining, dredging, filling, grading, excavation, or
drilling operations;



         (f)   Construction and/or reconstruction of bridges or
culverts;



         (g)   Storage of materials; or



         (h)   Any other activity that might change the
direction, height, or velocity of flood or surface waters.



      (2)   DEVELOPMENT does not include activities such as the
maintenance of existing structures and facilities such as painting,
re-roofing; resurfacing roads; or gardening, plowing, and similar
agricultural practices that do not involve filling, grading, excavation, or
the construction of permanent structures.



   ELEVATED STRUCTURE. A non-basement structure built to have the lowest
floor elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation
perimeter walls, filled stem wall foundations (also called chain walls),
pilings, or columns (posts and piers).



   ELEVATION CERTIFICATE. A certified statement that verifies a
structure’s elevation information.



   EMERGENCY PROGRAM. The first phase under which a community participates
in the NFIP. It is intended to provide a first layer amount of insurance at
subsidized rates on all insurable structures in that community before the
effective date of the initial FIRM.



   ENCROACHMENT. The advance or infringement of uses, fill, excavation,
buildings, permanent structures or development into a floodplain, which may
impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.



   EXISTING CONSTRUCTION. Any structure for which the start of
construction commenced before the effective date of the community’s first
floodplain ordinance.



   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home
park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed
before the effective date of the community’s first floodplain ordinance.



   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).



   FEMA. The Federal Emergency Management Agency.



   FIVE HUNDRED YEAR FLOOD (500-YEAR FLOOD). The flood that has a 0.2%
chance of being equaled or exceeded in any year.



   FLOOD. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow, the unusual and
rapid accumulation, or the runoff of surface waters from any source.



   FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM). An official map on which the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) or Federal Insurance
Administration (FIA) has delineated the areas of flood hazards and regulatory
floodway.



   FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM). An official map of a community,
issued by FEMA, where the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard
have been identified as Zone A.



   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). An official map of a community, on
which FEMA has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk
premium zones applicable to the community.



   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS). The official hydraulic and hydrologic
report provided by FEMA.  The report contains flood profiles, as well as the
FIRM, FBFM (where applicable), and the water surface elevation of the base
flood.



   FLOOD PROTECTION GRADE (FPG). The elevation of the regulatory flood
plus two feet at any given location in the SFHA. (See FREEBOARD.)



   FLOODPLAIN. The channel proper and the areas adjoining any wetland,
lake, or watercourse which have been or hereafter may be covered by the
regulatory flood.  The FLOODPLAIN includes both the floodway and the fringe
districts.



   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT. The operation of an overall program of
corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving
and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including
but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works,
floodplain management regulations, and open space plans.



   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS This  chapter and other zoning
ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations,
special purpose ordinances, and other applications of police power which
control development in floodprone areas.  This term describes federal,
state, or local regulations in any combination thereof, which provide
standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and damage. FLOODPLAIN
MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS are also referred to as FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS,
FLOODPLAIN ORDINANCE, FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION ORDINANCE, and FLOODPLAIN
MANAGEMENT REQUIREMENTS.



   FLOODPRONE AREA. Any land area acknowledged by a community as being
susceptible to inundation by water from any source. (See FLOOD.)



   FLOODPROOFING (DRY FLOODPROOFING). A method of protecting a structure
that ensures that the structure, together with attendant utilities and
sanitary facilities, is watertight to the floodproofed design elevation with
walls that are substantially impermeable to the passage of water. All
structural components of these walls are capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic flood forces, including the effects of buoyancy, and anticipated
debris impact forces.



   FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATE. A form used to certify compliance for
non-residential structures as an alternative to elevating structures to or
above the FPG. This certification must be by a registered professional
engineer or architect.



   FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or stream and those portions of the
floodplains adjoining the channel which are reasonably required to
efficiently carry and discharge the peak flood flow of the regulatory flood
of any river or stream.



   FREEBOARD. A factor of safety, usually expressed in feet above the BFE,
which is applied for the purposes of floodplain management. It is used to
compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood
heights greater than those calculated for the base flood.



   FRINGE. Those portions of the floodplain lying outside the floodway.



   FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT FACILITY. A facility which cannot be used for
its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity
to water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and
unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding, ship repair, or seafood
processing facilities. The term does not include long-term storage,
manufacture, sales, or service facilities.



   HARDSHIP. As related to variances of this chapter, the exceptional
hardship that would result from a failure to grant the requested variance.
The City of Frankfort Common Council requires that the variance is
exceptional, unusual, and peculiar to the property involved. Mere economic or
financial hardship alone is not exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic
considerations, physical handicaps, personal preferences, or the disapproval
of one’s neighbors likewise cannot, as a rule, qualify as an exceptional
hardship. All of these problems can be resolved through other means without
granting a variance, even if the alternative is more expensive, or requires
the property owner to build elsewhere or put the parcel to a different use
than originally intended.



   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE. The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface, prior to the start of construction, next to the proposed walls of a
structure.



   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure individually listed on the National
Register of Historic Places or the Indiana State Register of Historic Sites
and Structures.



   INCREASED COST OF COMPLIANCE (ICC). The cost to repair a substantially
damaged structure that exceeds the minimal repair cost and that is required
to bring a substantially damaged structure into compliance with this chapter.
Acceptable mitigation measures are elevation, relocation, demolition, or any
combination thereof. All renewal and new business flood insurance policies
with effective dates on or after June 1, 1997, will include ICC coverage.



   LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA). An amendment to the currently effective
FEMA map that establishes that a property is not located in a SFHA. A LOMA is
only issued by FEMA.



   LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR). An official revision to the currently
effective FEMA map. It is issued by FEMA and changes flood zones,
delineations, and elevations.



   LETTER OF MAP REVISION BASED ON FILL (LOMR-F). An official revision by
letter to an effective NFIP map. A LOMR-F provides FEMA’s determination
concerning whether a structure or parcel has been elevated on fill above the
BFE and excluded from the SFHA.



   LOWEST ADJACENT GRADE. The lowest elevation, after completion of
construction, of the ground, sidewalk, patio, deck support, or basement
entryway immediately next to the structure.



   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest of the following:



      (1)   The top of the lowest level of the structure;



      (2)   The top of the basement floor;



      (3)   The top of the garage floor, if the garage is the lowest
level of  the structure;



      (4)   The top of the first floor of a structure elevated on
pilings or pillars;



      (5)   The top of the floor level of any enclosure, other than
a basement, below an elevated structure where the walls of the enclosure
provide any resistance to the flow of flood waters unless:



         (a)   The walls are designed to automatically equalize
the hydrostatic flood forces on the walls by allowing for the entry and exit
of flood waters by providing a minimum of two openings (in addition to
doorways and windows) in a minimum of two exterior walls having a total net
area of one square inch for every one square foot of enclosed area. The
bottom of all such openings shall be no higher than one  foot above the
exterior grade or the interior grade immediately beneath each opening,
whichever is higher; and



         (b)   Such enclosed space shall be usable solely for the
parking of vehicles and building access.



   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections,
which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without
a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. MANUFACTURED
HOME does not include a “recreational vehicle.”



   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels)
of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.



   MAP AMENDMENT. A change to an effective NFIP map that results in the
exclusion from the SFHA of an individual structure or a legally described
parcel of land that has been inadvertently included in the SFHA (i.e., no
alterations of topography have occurred since the date of the first NFIP map
that showed the structure or parcel to be within the SFHA).



   MAP PANEL NUMBER. The four-digit number followed by a letter suffix
assigned by FEMA on a flood map. The first four digits represent the map
panel, and the letter suffix represents the number of times the map panel has
been revised. (The letter “A” is not used by FEMA, the letter “B” is
the first revision.)



   MARKET VALUE. The building value, excluding the land (as agreed to
between a willing buyer and seller), as established by what the local real
estate market will bear. MARKET VALUE can be established by independent
certified appraisal, replacement cost depreciated by age of building (actual
cash value), or adjusted assessed values.



   MITIGATION. Sustained actions taken to reduce or eliminate long-term
risk to people and property from hazards and their effects. The purpose of
MITIGATION is twofold:



      (1)   To protect people and structures; and



      (2)   To minimize the cost of disaster response and recovery.



   NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM (NFIP). The federal program that makes
flood insurance available to owners of property in participating communities
nationwide through the cooperative efforts of the federal government and the
private insurance industry.



   NATIONAL GEODETIC VERTICAL DATUM (NGVD) OF 1929. As corrected in 1929
is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations
within the floodplain.



   NEW CONSTRUCTION. Any structure for which the start of construction
commenced after the effective date of the community’s first floodplain
ordinance.



   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots
on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum,
the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final
site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the
effective date of the community’s first floodplain ordinance.



   NORTH AMERICAN VERTICAL DATUM OF 1988 (NAVD 88). As adopted in 1993 is
a vertical control datum used as a reference for establishing varying
elevations within the floodplain.



   OBSTRUCTION. Includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf,
embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation,
canalization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel,
refuse, fill, structure, vegetation, or other material in, along, across or
projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the
direction and/or velocity of the flow of water; or due to its location, its
propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of water, or its
likelihood of being carried downstream.



   ONE HUNDRED YEAR FLOOD (100-YEAR FLOOD). The flood that has a 1% chance
of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. Any flood zone that begins
with the letter “A” is subject to the 1% annual chance flood. (See
“Regulatory Flood.”)



   ONE PERCENT (1%) ANNUAL CHANCE FLOOD. The flood that has a 1% chance of
being equaled or exceeded in any given year. Any flood zone that begins with
the letter “A” is subject to the 1% ANNUAL CHANCE FLOOD. (See
“Regulatory Flood.”)



   PARTICIPATING COMMUNITY. Any community that voluntarily elects to
participate in the NFIP by adopting and enforcing floodplain management
regulations that are consistent with the standards of the NFIP.



   PHYSICAL MAP REVISION (PMR). An official republication of a
community’s FEMA map to effect changes to base (1% annual chance) flood
elevations, floodplain boundary delineations, regulatory floodways, and
planimetric features. These changes typically occur as a result of structural
works or improvements, annexations resulting in additional flood hazard
areas, or correction to base flood elevations or SFHAs.



   POST-FIRM CONSTRUCTION. Construction or substantial improvement that
started on or after the effective date of the initial FIRM of the community
or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later.



   PRE-FIRM CONSTRUCTION. Construction or substantial improvement, which
started on or before December 31, 1974, or before the effective date of the
initial FIRM of the community, whichever is later.



   PROBATION. A means of formally notifying participating communities of
violations and deficiencies in the administration and enforcement of the
local floodplain management regulations.



   PUBLIC SAFETY AND NUISANCE. Anything which is injurious to the safety
or health of an entire community, neighborhood or any considerable number of
persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary
manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal, or basin.



   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle which is:



      (1)   Built on a single chassis;



      (2)   Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the
largest horizontal projections;



      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by
a light duty truck; and



      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling,
but as quarters for recreational camping, travel, or seasonal use.



   REGULAR PROGRAM. The phase of the community’s participation in the
NFIP where more comprehensive floodplain management requirements are imposed
and higher amounts of insurance are available based upon risk zones and
elevations determined in a FIS.



   REGULATORY FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year, as calculated by a method and procedure that is
acceptable to and approved by the Indiana Department of Natural Resources and
the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The REGULATORY FLOOD elevation at
any location is as defined in § 157.07. The REGULATORY FLOOD is also known
by the term BASE FLOOD, 1% ANNUAL CHANCE FLOOD, and 100-YEAR FLOOD.



   REPETITIVE LOSS. Flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two
separate occasions during a ten-year period ending on the date of the event
for which the second claim is made, in which the cost of repairing the flood
damage, on the average, equaled or exceeded 25% of the market value of the
structure at the time of each such flood event.



   SECTION 1316. That section of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968,
as amended, which states that no new flood insurance coverage shall be
provided for any property that the Administrator finds has been declared by a
duly constituted state or local zoning authority or other authorized public
body to be in violation of state or local laws, regulations, or ordinances
that intended to discourage or otherwise restrict land development or
occupancy in floodprone areas.



   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA). Those lands within the jurisdictions
of the city subject to inundation by the regulatory flood. The SFHAs of the
City of Frankfort are generally identified as such on the Clinton County and
Incorporated Areas Flood Insurance Rate Map prepared by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency, dated December 2, 2011. The SFHAs of those parts of
unincorporated Clinton County that are within the extraterritorial
jurisdiction of the city or that may be annexed into the city are generally
identified as such on the Clinton County and Incorporated Areas Flood
Insurance Rate Map prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and
dated December 2, 2011. (These areas are shown on a FHBM or FIRM as Zone A,
AE, A1-A30, AH, AR, A99, or AO).



   START OF CONSTRUCTION. Includes substantial improvement, and means the
date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of
the permit date. The ACTUAL START means the first placement or permanent
construction of a structure (including a manufactured home) on a site, such
as the pouring of slabs or footing, installation of piles, construction of
columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation for placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include
land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include
the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation
for a basement, footings, piers, foundations, or the erection of temporary
forms.  For substantial improvement, the ACTUAL START OF CONSTRUCTION means
the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of
a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of
the building.



   STRUCTURE. A structure that is principally above ground and is enclosed
by walls and a roof. The term includes a gas or liquid storage tank, a
manufactured home, or a prefabricated building. The term also includes
recreational vehicles to be installed on a site for more than 180 days.



   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.



   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition,
or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50%
of the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the
improvement. This term includes structures that have incurred repetitive loss
or substantial damage regardless of the actual repair work performed. The
term does not include improvements of structures to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code requirements or
any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not
preclude the structures continued designation as a historic structure.



   SUSPENSION. The removal of a participating community from the NFIP
because the community has not enacted and/or enforced the proper floodplain
management regulations required for participation in the NFIP.



   VARIANCE. A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter,
which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this chapter
where specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship.



   VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with this chapter.  A structure or other development without the
elevation, other certification, or other evidence of compliance required in
this chapter is presumed to be in VIOLATION until such time as that
documentation is provided.



   WATER SURFACE ELEVATION. The height, in relation to the North American
Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD 88) or National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929
(NGVD) (other datum where specified) of floods of various magnitudes and
frequencies in the floodplains of riverine areas.



   WATERCOURSE. A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel or other
topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically.
WATERCOURSE includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood
damage may occur.



   X ZONE. The area where the flood hazard is less than that in the SFHA.
SHADED X ZONES shown on recent FIRMs (B Zones on older FIRMs) designate areas
subject to inundation by the flood with a 0.2% chance of being equaled or
exceeded (the 500-year flood). UNSHADED X ZONES (C Zones on older FIRMs)
designate areas where the annual exceedance probability of flooding is less
than 0.2%.



   ZONE. A geographical area shown on a FHBM or FIRM that reflects the
severity or type of flooding in the area.



   ZONE A. (See definition for “A Zone.”)



   ZONE B, C, AND X. Areas identified in the community as areas of
moderate or minimal hazard from the principal source of flood in the area.
However, buildings in these zones could be flooded by severe, concentrated
rainfall coupled with inadequate local drainage systems. Flood insurance is
available in participating communities but is not required by regulation in
these zones. (ZONE X is used on new and revised maps in place of ZONES B and
C.)



(Ord. 11-15, passed 11-14-11)



§ 157.06  LANDS TO WHICH THIS CHAPTER APPLIES.



   This chapter shall apply to all SFHAs and known floodprone areas within
the jurisdiction of the City of Frankfort.



(Ord. 11-15, passed 11-14-11)



§ 157.07  BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING REGULATORY FLOOD DATA.



   This chapter’s protection standard is the regulatory flood. The best
available regulatory flood data is listed below. Whenever a party disagrees
with the best available data, the party submitting the detailed engineering
study needs to replace existing data with better data and submit it to the
Indiana Department of Natural Resources for review and approval.



   (A)   The regulatory flood elevation, floodway, and fringe limits
for the studied SFHAs within the jurisdiction of the City of Frankfort shall
be as delineated on the 1% annual chance flood profiles in the Flood
Insurance Study of Clinton County and Incorporated Areas dated December 2,
2011 and the corresponding Flood Insurance Rate Map prepared by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency and dated December 2, 2011.



   (B)   The regulatory flood elevation, floodway, and fringe limits
for each of the SFHAs within the jurisdiction of the City of Frankfort,
delineated as an “A Zone” on the Clinton County and Incorporated Areas
Flood Insurance Rate Map prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency
and dated December 2, 2011, shall be according to the best data available as
provided by the Indiana Department of Natural Resources; provided the
upstream drainage area from the subject site is greater than one square mile.



   (C)   In the absence of a published FEMA map, or absence of
identification on a FEMA map, the regulatory flood elevation, floodway, and
fringe limits of any watercourse in the community’s known floodprone areas
shall be according to the best data available as provided by the Indiana
Department of Natural Resources; provided the upstream drainage area from the
subject site is greater than one square mile.



(Ord. 11-15, passed 11-14-11)



§ 157.08  ESTABLISHMENT OF FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.



   A floodplain development permit shall be required in conformance with
the provisions of this chapter prior to the commencement of any development
activities in areas of special flood hazard.



(Ord. 11-15, passed 11-14-11)



§ 157.09  COMPLIANCE.



   No structure shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or
structurally altered within the SFHA without full compliance with the terms
of this chapter and other applicable regulations. No land or stream within
the SFHA shall hereafter be altered without full compliance with the terms of
this chapter and other applicable regulations.



(Ord. 11-15, passed 11-14-11)



§ 157.10  ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.



   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any
existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this
chapter and another ordinance conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more
stringent restrictions shall prevail.



(Ord. 11-15, passed 11-14-11)



§ 157.11  DISCREPANCY BETWEEN MAPPED FLOODPLAIN AND ACTUAL GROUND
ELEVATIONS.



   (A)   In cases where there is a discrepancy between the mapped
floodplain (SFHA) on the FIRM and the actual ground elevations, the elevation
provided on the profiles shall govern.



   (B)   If the elevation of the site in question is below the base
flood elevation, that site shall be included in the SFHA and regulated
accordingly.



   (C)   If the elevation (natural grade) of the site in question is
above the base flood elevation, that site shall be considered outside the
SFHA and the floodplain regulations will not be applied. The property owner
should be advised to apply for a LOMA.



(Ord. 11-15, passed 11-14-11)



§ 157.12  INTERPRETATION.



   In the interpretation and application of this chapter all provisions
shall be:



   (A)   Considered as minimum requirements;



   (B)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and



   (C)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted
under state statutes.



(Ord. 11-15, passed 11-14-11)



§ 157.13  WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.



   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on available information
derived from engineering and scientific methods of study.  Larger floods can
and will occur on rare occasions. Therefore, this chapter does not create any
liability on the part of the City of Frankfort, the Indiana Department of
Natural Resources, or the State of Indiana, for any flood damage that results
from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision made lawfully
thereunder.



(Ord. 11-15, passed 11-14-11)



§ 157.14  INCREASED COST OF COMPLIANCE (ICC).



   In order for buildings to qualify for a claim payment under ICC
coverage as a repetitive loss structure, the National Reform Act of 1994
requires that the building be covered by a contract for flood insurance and
incur flood-related damages on two occasions during a ten-year period ending
on the date of the event for which the second claim is made, in which the
cost of repairing the flood damage, on the average, equaled or exceeded 25%
of the market value of the building at the time of each such flood event.



(Ord. 11-15, passed 11-14-11)



ADMINISTRATION



§ 157.25  DESIGNATION OF ADMINISTRATOR.



   The Common Council of the City of Frankfort hereby appoints the City
Engineer/Building Inspector to administer and implement the provisions of
this chapter and is herein referred to as the Floodplain Administrator.



(Ord. 11-15, passed 11-14-11)



§ 157.26  PERMIT PROCEDURES.



   Application for a floodplain development permit shall be made to the
Floodplain Administrator on forms furnished by him or her prior to any
development activities, and may include, but not be limited to, the following
plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions,
and elevations of the area in question: existing or proposed structures,
earthen fill, storage of materials or equipment, drainage facilities, and the
location of the foregoing. Specifically the following information is required:



   (A)   Application stage.



      (1)   A description of the proposed development;



      (2)   Location of the proposed development sufficient to
accurately locate property and structure in relation to existing roads and
streams;



      (3)   A legal description of the property site;



      (4)   A site development plan showing existing and proposed
development locations and existing and proposed land grades;



      (5)   Elevation of the top of the lowest floor (including
basement) of all proposed buildings.  Elevation should be in NAVD 88 or NGVD;



      (6)   Elevation (in NAVD 88 or NGVD) to which any
non-residential structure will be floodproofed;



      (7)   Description of the extent to which any watercourse will
be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development; and



   (B)   Construction stage. Upon placement of the lowest floor, or
floodproofing, it shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the
Floodplain Administrator a certification of the NAVD 88 or NGVD elevation of
the lowest floor or floodproofed elevation, as built. The certification shall
be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor
or professional engineer and certified by the same.  When floodproofing is
utilized for a particular structure said certification shall be prepared by
or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and
certified by same. Any work undertaken prior to submission of the
certification shall be at the permit holder’s risk. (The Floodplain
Administrator shall review the lowest floor and floodproofing elevation
survey data submitted.) The permit holder shall correct deficiencies detected
by such review before any further work is allowed to proceed. Failure to
submit the survey or failure to make the corrections required hereby shall be
cause to issue a stop-work order for the project.



(Ord. 11-15, passed 11-14-11)



§ 157.27  DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.



   (A)   The Floodplain Administrator and/or designated staff is hereby
authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this chapter. The
Administrator is further authorized to render interpretations of this chapter
which are consistent with its spirit and purpose.



   (B)   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator
shall include, but not be limited to:



      (1)   Review all floodplain development permits to assure that
the permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied;



      (2)   Inspect and inventory damaged structures in the SFHA and
complete substantial damage determinations;



      (3)   Ensure that construction authorization has been granted
by the Indiana Department of Natural Resources for all development projects
subject to §§ 157.39 and 157.41(A), and maintain a record of such
authorization (either copy of actual permit or floodplain analysis/regulatory
assessment);



      (4)   Ensure that all necessary federal or state permits have
been received prior to issuance of the local floodplain development permit.
Copies of such permits are to be maintained on file with the floodplain
development permit;



      (5)   Notify adjacent communities and the State Floodplain
Coordinator prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and
submit copies of such notifications to FEMA;



      (6)   Maintain for public inspection and furnish upon request
local permit documents, damaged structure inventories, substantial damage
determinations, regulatory flood data, SFHA maps, Letters of Map Amendment
(LOMA), Letters of Map Revision (LOMR), copies of DNR permits and floodplain
analysis and regulatory assessments (letters of recommendation), federal
permit documents, and “as-built” elevation and floodproofing data for all
buildings constructed subject to this chapter;



      (7)   Utilize and enforce all Letters of Map Revision (LOMR)
or Physical Map Revisions (PMR) issued by FEMA for the currently effective
SFHA maps of the community;



      (8)   Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered
or relocated portion of the watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity
is not diminished;



      (9)   Verify and record the actual elevation of the lowest
floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures,
in accordance with § 157.26;



      (10)   Verify and record the actual elevation to which any new
or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed, in accordance
with § 157.26;



      (11)   Review certified plans and specifications for
compliance;



      (12)   Stop work orders.



         (a)   Upon notice from the Floodplain Administrator,
work on any building, structure or premises that is being done contrary to
the provisions of this chapter shall immediately cease.



         (b)   Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given
to the owner of the property, or to his or her agent, or to the person doing
the work, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed.



      (13)   Revocation of permits.



         (a)   The Floodplain Administrator may revoke a permit
or approval, issued under the provisions of this chapter, in cases where
there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to the material
fact in the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based.



         (b)   The Floodplain Administrator may revoke a permit
upon determination by the Floodplain Administrator that the construction,
erection, alteration, repair, moving, demolition, installation, or
replacement of the structure for which the permit was issued is in violation
of, or not in conformity with, the provisions of this chapter.



      (14)   Inspect sites for compliance. For all new and/or
substantially improved buildings constructed in the SFHA, inspect before,
during and after construction. Authorized city officials shall have the right
to enter and inspect properties located in the SFHA.



(Ord. 11-15, passed 11-14-11)



PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION



§ 157.35  GENERAL STANDARDS.



   In all SFHAs and known floodprone areas the following provisions are
required:



   (A)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure;



   (B)   Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, or lateral movement.  Methods of anchoring may include, but are
not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This
standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state
requirements for resisting wind forces;



   (C)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage
below the FPG;



   (D)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage;



   (E)   Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning
equipment, utility meters, and other service facilities shall be located
at/above the FPG or designed so as to prevent water from entering or
accumulating within the components below the FPG. Water and sewer pipes,
electrical and telephone lines, submersible pumps, and other waterproofed
service facilities may be located below the FPG;



   (F)   New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;



   (G)   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;



   (H)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and
constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during
flooding;



   (I)   Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a
structure that is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall
meet the requirements of new construction as contained in this chapter; and



   (J)   Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a
structure that is not in compliance with the provisions of this chapter,
shall be undertaken only if the non-conformity is not further, extended, or
replaced;



   (K)   Whenever any portion of the SFHA is authorized for use, the
volume of space which will be occupied by the authorized fill or structure
below the BFE shall be compensated for and balanced by an equivalent volume
of excavation taken below the BFE. The excavation volume shall be at least
equal to the volume of storage lost (replacement ratio of 1 to 1) due to the
fill or structure;



      (1)   The excavation shall take place in the floodplain and in
the same property in which the authorized fill or structure is located;



      (2)   Under certain circumstances, the excavation may be
allowed to take place outside of but adjacent to the floodplain provided that
the excavated volume will be below the regulatory flood elevation, will be in
the same property in which the authorized fill or structure is located, will
be accessible to the regulatory floodwater, will not be subject to ponding
when not inundated by floodwater, and that it shall not be refilled;



      (3)   The excavation shall provide for true storage of
floodwater but shall not be subject to ponding when not inundated by
floodwater;



      (4)   The fill or structure shall not obstruct a drainage way
leading to the floodplain;



      (5)   The grading around the excavation shall be such that the
excavated area is accessible to the regulatory floodwater;



      (6)   The fill or structure shall be of a material deemed
stable enough to remain firm and in place during periods of flooding and
shall include provisions to protect adjacent property owners against any
increased runoff or drainage resulting from its placement; and



      (7)   Plans depicting the areas to be excavated and filled
shall be submitted prior to the actual start of construction or any site
work; once site work is complete, but before the actual start of
construction, the applicant shall provide to the Floodplain Administrator a
certified survey of the excavation and fill sites demonstrating the fill and
excavation comply with this section.



(Ord. 11-15, passed 11-14-11)



§ 157.36  SPECIFIC STANDARDS.



   In all SFHAs, the following provisions are required:



   (A)   In addition to the requirements of § 157.35, all structures
to be located in the SFHA shall be protected from flood damage below the FPG.
This building protection requirement applies to the following situations:



      (1)   Construction or placement of any new structure having a
floor area greater than 400 square feet;



      (2)   Addition or improvement made to any existing structure:



         (a)   Where the cost of the addition or improvement
equals or exceeds 50% of the value of the existing structure (excluding the
value of the land);



         (b)   With a previous addition or improvement
constructed since the community’s first floodplain ordinance;



      (3)   Reconstruction or repairs made to a damaged structure
where the costs of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition
equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure (excluding the
value of the land) before damage occurred;



      (4)   Installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a
site for more than 180 days;



      (5)   Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new
manufactured home on an existing site. This section does not apply to
returning the existing manufactured home to the same site it lawfully
occupied before it was removed to avoid flood damage; and



      (6)   Reconstruction or repairs made to a repetitive loss
structure.



   (B)   Residential construction. New construction or substantial
improvement of any residential structure (or manufactured home) shall have
the lowest floor, including basement, at or above the FPG (two feet above the
base flood elevation). Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to
elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded
movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with the standards
of division (D) below.



   (C)   Non-residential construction. New construction or substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial, or non-residential structure (or
manufactured home) shall either have the lowest floor, including basement,
elevated to or above the FPG (two feet above the base flood elevation) or be
floodproofed to or above the FPG. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be
used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded
movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with the standards
of division (D) below. Structures located in all A Zones may be floodproofed
in lieu of being elevated if done in accordance with the following:



      (1)   A registered professional engineer or architect shall
certify that the structure has been designed so that below the FPG, the
structure and attendant utility facilities are watertight and capable of
resisting the effects of the regulatory flood. The structure design shall
take into account flood velocities, duration, rate of rise, hydrostatic
pressures, and impacts from debris or ice. Such certification shall be
provided to the official as set forth in § 157.27(B)(10).



      (2)   Floodproofing measures shall be operable without human
intervention and without an outside source of electricity.



   (D)   Elevated structures. New construction or substantial
improvements of elevated structures shall have the lowest floor at or above
the FPG. Elevated structures with fully enclosed areas formed by foundation
and other exterior walls below the flood protection grade shall be designed
to preclude finished living space and designed to allow for the entry and
exit of floodwaters to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on
exterior walls. Designs must meet the following minimum criteria:



      (1)   Provide a minimum of two openings located in a minimum
of two exterior walls (having a total net area of not less than one square
inch for every one square foot of enclosed area).



      (2)   The bottom of all openings shall be no more than one
foot above the exterior grade or the interior grade immediately beneath each
opening, whichever is higher.



      (3)   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves
or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of
floodwaters in both directions.



      (4)   Openings are to be not less than three inches in any
direction in the plane of the wall. This requirement applies to the hole in
the wall, excluding any device that may be inserted such as typical
foundation air vent device.



      (5)   Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum
necessary to allow for parking for vehicles (garage door) or limited storage
of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises (standard
exterior door) or entry to the living area (stairway or elevator).



      (6)   The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be
partitioned or finished into separate rooms.



      (7)   The interior grade of such enclosed area shall be at an
elevation at or higher than the exterior grade.



      (8)   Where elevation requirements exceed six feet above the
highest adjacent grade, a copy of the legally recorded deed restriction
prohibiting the conversion of the area below the lowest floor to a use or
dimension contrary to the structure’s originally approved design, shall be
presented as a condition of issuance of the final certificate of occupancy.



   (E)   Structures constructed on fill. A residential or
nonresidential structure may be constructed on a permanent land fill in
accordance with the following:



      (1)   The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than one
foot deep before compacting to 95% of the maximum density obtainable with
either the Standard or Modified Proctor Test method.



      (2)   The fill should extend at least ten feet beyond the
foundation of the structure before sloping below the FPG.



      (3)   The fill shall be protected against erosion and scour
during flooding by vegetative cover, riprap, or bulkheading. If vegetative
cover is used, the slopes shall be no steeper than three horizontal to one
vertical.



      (4)   The fill shall not adversely affect the flow of surface
drainage from or onto neighboring properties.



      (5)   The top of the lowest floor including basements shall be
at or above the FPG.



   (F)   Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles.
Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles to be installed or substantially
improved on a site for more than 180 days must meet one of the following
requirements:



      (1)   The manufactured home shall be elevated on a permanent
foundation such that the lowest floor shall be at or above the FPG and
securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. This requirement applies to all
manufactured homes to be placed on a site:



         (a)   Outside a manufactured home park or subdivision;



         (b)   In a new manufactured home park or subdivision;



         (c)   In an expansion to an existing manufactured home
park or subdivision; or



         (d)   In an existing manufactured home park or
subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as a
result of a flood.



      (2)   The manufactured home shall be elevated so that the
lowest floor of the manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced
piers or other foundation elevations that are no less than 36 inches in
height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored
foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. This
requirement applies to all manufactured homes to be placed on a site in an
existing manufactured home park or subdivision that has not been
substantially damaged by a flood.



      (3)   Manufactured homes with fully enclosed areas formed by
foundation and other exterior walls below the flood protection grade shall be
designed to preclude finished living space and designed to allow for the
entry and exit of floodwaters to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood
forces on exterior walls as required for elevated structures in division (D)
above.



      (4)   Flexible skirting and rigid skirting not attached to the
frame or foundation of a manufactured home are not required to have openings.



      (5)   Recreational vehicles placed on a site shall either:



         (a)   Be on site for less than 180 days; and



         (b)   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use
(defined as being on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site
only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no
permanently attached additions); or



         (c)   Meet the requirements for manufactured homes as
stated earlier in this section.



(Ord. 11-15, passed 11-14-11)



§ 157.37  STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISION PROPOSALS.



   (A)   All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage.



   (B)   All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and
constructed to minimize flood damage.



   (C)   All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage
provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.



   (D)   Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision
proposals and other proposed development (including manufactured home parks
and subdivisions), which is greater than the lesser of 50 lots or five acres.



   (E)   All subdivision proposals shall minimize development in the
SFHA and/or limit density of development permitted in the SFHA.



   (F)   All subdivision proposals shall ensure safe access into/out of
SFHA for pedestrians and vehicles (especially emergency responders).



(Ord. 15-11, passed 11-14-11)



§ 157.38  CRITICAL FACILITY.



   Construction of new critical facilities shall be, to the extent
possible, located outside the limits of the SFHA. Construction of new
critical facilities shall be permissible within the SFHA if no feasible
alternative site is available. Critical facilities constructed within the
SFHA shall have the lowest floor elevated to or above the FPG at the site.
Floodproofing and sealing measures must be taken to ensure that toxic
substances will not be displaced by or released into floodwaters. Access
routes elevated to or above the FPG shall be provided to all critical
facilities to the extent possible.



(Ord. 15-11, passed 11-14-11)



§ 157.39  STANDARDS FOR IDENTIFIED FLOODWAYS.



   (A)   Located within SFHAs, established in § 157.26, are areas
designated as floodways. The floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to
the velocity of floodwaters, which carry debris, potential projectiles, and
has erosion potential. If the site is in an identified floodway, the
Floodplain Administrator shall require the applicant to forward the
application, along with all pertinent plans and specifications, to the
Indiana Department of Natural Resources and apply for a permit for
construction in a floodway. Under the provisions of I.C. 14-28-1 a permit for
construction in a floodway from the Indiana Department of Natural Resources
is required prior to the issuance of a local building permit for any
excavation, deposit, construction, or obstruction activity located in the
floodway. This includes land preparation activities such as filling, grading,
clearing and paving, and the like, undertaken before the actual start of
construction of the structure. However, it does exclude non-substantial
additions/improvements to existing (lawful) residences in a non-boundary
river floodway. (I.C. 14-28-1-26 allows construction of non-substantial
additions/improvements to residences in a non-boundary river floodway without
obtaining a permit for construction in the floodway from the Indiana
Department of Natural Resources. Please note that if fill is needed to
elevate an addition above the existing grade, prior approval (construction in
a floodway permit) for the fill is required from the Indiana Department of
Natural Resources.)



   (B)   No action shall be taken by the Floodplain Administrator until
a permit (when applicable) has been issued by the Indiana Department of
Natural Resources granting approval for construction in the floodway. Once a
permit for construction in a floodway has been issued by the Indiana
Department of Natural Resources, the Floodplain Administrator may issue the
local floodplain development permit, provided the provisions contained in
this subchapter have been met. The floodplain development permit cannot be
less restrictive than the permit for construction in a floodway issued by the
Indiana Department of Natural Resources. However, a community’s more
restrictive regulations (if any) shall take precedence.



   (C)   No development shall be allowed which acting alone or in
combination with existing or future development, will increase the regulatory
flood more than 0.14 of one foot; and



   (D)   For all projects involving channel modifications or fill
(including levees) the city shall submit the data and request that the
Federal Emergency Management Agency revise the regulatory flood data.



(Ord. 15-11, passed 11-14-11)



§ 157.40  STANDARDS FOR IDENTIFIED FRINGE.



   If the site is located in an identified fringe, then the Floodplain
Administrator may issue the local floodplain development permit provided the
provisions contained in this subchapter have been met. The key provision is
that the top of the lowest floor of any new or substantially improved
structure shall be at or above the FPG.



(Ord. 15-11, passed 11-14-11)



§ 157.41  STANDARDS FOR SFHAS WITHOUT ESTABLISHED BASE FLOOD ELEVATION
AND/OR FLOODWAYS/FRINGES.



   (A)   Drainage area upstream of the site is greater than one square
mile.



      (1)   If the site is in an identified floodplain where the
limits of the floodway and fringe have not yet been determined, and the
drainage area upstream of the site is greater than one square mile, the
Floodplain Administrator shall require the applicant to forward the
application, along with all pertinent plans and specifications, to the
Indiana Department of Natural Resources for review and comment.



      (2)   No action shall be taken by the Floodplain Administrator
until either a permit for construction in a floodway or a floodplain
analysis/regulatory assessment citing the 1% annual chance flood elevation
and the recommended flood protection grade has been received from the Indiana
Department of Natural Resources.



      (3)   Once the Floodplain Administrator has received the
proper permit for construction in a floodway or floodplain
analysis/regulatory assessment approving the proposed development, a
floodplain development permit may be issued provided the conditions of the
floodplain development permit are not less restrictive than the conditions
received from the Indiana Department of Natural Resources and the provisions
contained in this subchapter have been met.



   (B)   Drainage area upstream of the site is less than one square
mile.



      (1)   If the site is in an identified floodplain where the
limits of the floodway and fringe have not yet been determined and the
drainage area upstream of the site is less than one square mile, the
Floodplain Administrator shall require the applicant to provide an
engineering analysis showing the limits of the floodplain and 1% annual
chance flood elevation for the site.



      (2)   Upon receipt, the Floodplain Administrator may issue the
local floodplain development permit, provided the provisions contained in
this subchapter have been met.



   (C)   The total cumulative effect of the proposed development, when
combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not
increase the regulatory flood more than 0.14 of one foot and will not
increase flood damages or potential flood damages.



(Ord. 11-15, passed 11-14-11)



§ 157.42  STANDARDS FOR FLOODPRONE AREAS.



   All development in known floodprone areas not identified on FEMA maps,
or where no FEMA published map is available, shall meet general standards as
required per this subchapter.



(Ord. 11-15, passed 11-14-11)



VARIANCE PROCEDURES



§ 157.55  DESIGNATION OF VARIANCE AND APPEALS BOARD.



   The Board of Zoning Appeals of the City of Frankfort shall hear and
decide appeals and requests for variances from requirements of this chapter.



(Ord. 11-15, passed 11-14-11)



§ 157.56  DUTIES OF VARIANCE AND APPEALS BOARD.



   The Board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in
any requirement, decision, or determination is made by the Floodplain
Administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. Any
person aggrieved by the decision of the Board may appeal such decision to the
Clinton County Circuit or Superior Courts.



(Ord. 11-15, passed 11-14-11)



§ 157.57  VARIANCE PROCEDURES.



   In passing upon such applications, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall
consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards
specified in other sections of this chapter, and:



   (A)   The danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;



   (B)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents
to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;



   (C)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community;



   (D)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;



   (E)   The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;



   (F)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;



   (G)   The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive Plan
and floodplain management program for that area;



   (H)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;



   (I)   The expected height, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment of transport of the floodwaters at the site; and



   (J)   The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and
bridges.



(Ord. 11-15, passed 11-14-11)



§ 157.58  CONDITIONS FOR VARIANCES.



   (A)   Variances shall only be issued when there is:



      (1)   A showing of good and sufficient cause;



      (2)   A determination that failure to grant the variance would
result in exceptional hardship; and



      (3)   A determination that the granting of a variance will not
result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud or victimization
of the public, or conflict with existing laws or ordinances.



   (B)   No variance for a residential use within a floodway subject to
§ 157.39 or § 157.41(A) may be granted.



   (C)   Any variance granted in a floodway subject to § 157.39 or §
157.41(A) will require a permit from the Indiana Department of Natural
Resources.



   (D)   Variances to the provisions for flood hazard reduction of §
157.36 may be granted only when a new structure is to be located on a lot of
one-half acre or less in size, contiguous to and surrounded by lots with
existing structures constructed below the flood protection grade.



   (E)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.



   (F)   Variances may be granted for the reconstruction or restoration
of any structure individually listed on the National Register of Historic
Places or the Indiana State Register of Historic Sites and Structures.



   (G)   Any application to whom a variance is granted shall be given
written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and
the elevation to which the lowest floor is to be built and stating that the
cost of the flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk
resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation (see § 157.59).



   (H)   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain the records of
appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management
Agency or the Indiana Department of Natural Resources upon request (see §
157.59).



(Ord. 11-15, passed 11-14-11)



§ 157.59  VARIANCE NOTIFICATION.



   (A)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given
written notice over the signature of a community official that:



      (1)   The issuance of a variance to construct a structure
below the base flood elevation will result in increased premium rates for
flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage;
and



      (2)   Such construction below the base flood level increases
risks to life and property. A copy of the notice shall be recorded by the
Floodplain Administrator in the Office of the County Recorder and shall be
recorded in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected
parcel of land.



   (B)   The Floodplain Administrator will maintain a record of all
variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such
variances issued in the community’s biennial report submission to the
Federal Emergency Management Agency.



(Ord. 11-15, passed 11-14-11)



§ 157.60  HISTORIC STRUCTURE.



   Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation
will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as an historic
structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character
and design of the structure.



(Ord. 11-15, passed 11-14-11)



§ 157.61  SPECIAL CONDITIONS.



   Upon the consideration of the factors listed in this subchapter, and
the purposes of this chapter, the Board of Zoning Appeals may attach such
conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the
purposes of this chapter.



(Ord. 11-15, passed 11-14-11)



§ 157.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Failure to obtain a floodplain development permit in the SFHA
or failure to comply with the requirements of a floodplain development permit
or conditions of a variance shall be deemed to be a violation of this
chapter. All violations shall be considered a common nuisance and be treated
as such in accordance with the provisions of the Zoning Code for the City of
Frankfort. All violations shall be punishable by a fine as provided in §
155.999 of the Municipal Code.



   (B)   The City of Frankfort Engineer/Building Inspector shall inform
the owner that any such violation is considered a willful act to increase
flood damages and therefore may cause coverage by a standard flood insurance
policy to be suspended.



   (C)   Nothing herein shall prevent the city from taking such other
lawful action to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs connected
therewith shall accrue to the person or persons responsible.



(Ord. 11-15, passed 11-14-11)



TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES



   Table



      I.   ANNEXATIONS



      II.   DEDICATIONS



      III.   THOROUGHFARE PLAN CHANGES



      IV.   VACATIONS



      V.   ZONING MAP CHANGES



TABLE I:  ANNEXATIONS



 

ORD. NO.
 
DATE PASSED
 
DESCRIPTION




CO-75-1
 
3-5-75
 
Annexing a part of the southwest quarter of the northeast quarter of Section
3, Township 21 north, Range l west of the second principal meridian,
beginning in the middle line of the Frankfort and Moran Gravel Road,
containing 0.21 acres, and a part of the southwest quarter of the northeast
quarter of Section 3, Township 21 north, Range 1 west of the second principal
meridian, containing 0.33 acres


CO-79-3
 
2-21-79
 
Annexing part of the west half of the northwest quarter of Section 15,
Township 21 north, Range 1 west, situated partially in Center Township and
partially inside the corporation of Frankfort, containing 11.9403 acres, more
or less, subject to easements on and along the entire northern and eastern
boundaries for road thoroughfares


CO-79-6
 
3-7-79
 
Annexing a part of the west half of the northwest quarter of Section 15,
Township 21 north, Range 1 west of the second principal meridian


CO-79-12
 
6-27-79
 
Annexing real estate owned by the city, being operated as the municipal
airport


CO-83-13
 
9-26-83
 
Annexing a part of the northwest quarter and a part of the northeast quarter
of Section 3, Township 2l north, Range 1 west of the second principal
meridian.


84-1
 
4-9-84
 
Annexing part of the northeast quarter of Section 4 and part of the northwest
quarter of Section 3, in Township 21 north, Range 1 west of the second
principal meridian.


84-4
 
6-11-84
 
All of that part of the west half of the east half of the southwest quarter
of Section 12, Township 21 north, Range 1 west of the second principal
meridian lying east of the present city corporation line.


86-3
 
3-24-86
 
Annexing the following parcels:


 
 
 
 
(1)  Approximately 1.894 acres in the southeast quarter of Section 7,
Township 21 north, Range 1 west of the second principal meridian, Washington
Township, Clinton County.  (Disannexed 5-15-86)


 
 
 
 
(2)  Approximately 7.74 acres in the southeast quarter of Section 7,
Township 21 north, Range 1 west of the second principal meridian, Washington
Township, Clinton County.


 
 
 
 
(3)  Approximately 3.6 acres in the southwest quarter, Section 8, Township
21 north, Range 1 west of the second principal meridian, Center Township,
Clinton County.


 
 
 
 
(4)  Six hundred feet in uniform width off the entire south end of the east
half of the southwest quarter, Section 8, Township 21 north, Range l west of
the second principal meridian, Center Township, Clinton County.


 
 
 
 
(5)  Approximately 14.9 acres in the southeast quarter of Section 8,
Township 21 north, Range 1 west of the second principal meridian, Center
Township, Clinton County.


86-19
 
10-14-86
 
Annexing the following parcels:


 
 
 
 
(1) A part of the west half of the northwest quarter of Section 12, Township
21 north, Range 1 west of the second principal meridian.


 
 
 
 
(2) A part of the west half and a part of the east half of the northwest
quarter of Section 12, Township 2l north, Range 1 west of the second
principal meridian.


88-1l
 
5-23-88
 
Annexing a part of the east half of the northwest quarter of Section 24,
Township 12 north, Range 4 east of the second principal meridian.


CO-88-17
 
10-24-88
 
Annexing a part of the southwest quarter of the northwest quarter of Section
14, Township 21 north, Range 1 west of the second principal meridian.


89-15
 
11-11-89
 
Annexing a part of the west half of Section 14, Township 21 north, Range 1
west of the second principal meridian; and a part of the east half of Section
15, Township 21 north, Range 1 west of the second principal meridian.


89-16
 
1-22-90
 
Annexing a part of the southwest quarter of Section 2, Township 21 north,
Range 1 west of the second principal meridian; and a part of the southwest
quarter of Section 1, Township 21 north, Range 1 west of the second principal
meridian.


93-8
 
1-10-94
 
Annexing a part of the east half of the northwest quarter of Section 14,
Township 21 north, Range 1 west in Center Township.


94-1
 
1-24-94
 
Annexing a part of the east half of the northeast quarter of Section 14,
Township 21 north, Range 1 west in Center Township.


94-6
 
4-11-94
 
Annexing a part of the east half of the southwest quarter of Section 14,
Township 21 north, Range 1 west, of the second principal meridian.


CO-94-7
 
6-27-94
 
Annexing a part of the NE quarter, Section 14, T21N, R1W, 2nd P.M., Center
Township.


94-9
 
6-13-94
 
Annexing a part of the southwest quarter of Section 1, Township 21 north,
Range 1 west of the second principal meridian, in Center Township.


CO-96-4
 
7-22-96
 
Annexation of property on Rossville Avenue.


CO-97-1
 
3-10-97
 
Annexing a part of the northwest quarter of the northeast quarter of Section
23, Township 21 north, Range 1 west of the 2nd principal meridian.


CO-97-2
 
6-9-97
 
Annexing a part of the southwest quarter, Section 14, Township 21 north,
Range 1 west, 2nd principal meridian, Center Township.


CO-98-11
 
7-13-98
 
Annexing a part of the southeast quarter of Section 14, Township 2 north,
Range 1 West, Center Township containing 0.39 acres more or less.


CO-99-7
 
7-26-99
 
Annexing part of the frac. E ½, NW 1/4, and a part of the SW 1/4 of Sec. 2,
T21N, R1W, 2nd P.M., Center Township containing 1.0000 acres and being
subject to the right-of-way of Burlington Avenue.


CO-99-8
 
5-10-99
 
Annexing three tracts part of the NE 1/4, Sec. 14, T21N, R1W, 2nd P.M.,
Center Township.


CO-01-8
 
8-27-01
 
Annexing approximately 72 acres assigned to Council District No. 3.


CO-02-02
 
3-11-02
 
Annexing the territory comprising the State Road 28 right-of-way from the
western corporate boundary of the city to a point 1000 feet west of County
Road 350 W.


02-09
 
11-1-02
 
Annexing territory comprised of approximately 250 acres assigned to District
No. 4.


02-10
 
7-28-03
 
Annexing certain territory petitioned by the Frankfort Airport Authority.


CO-02-12
 
11-1-02
 
Annexing a part of the East Half of the Southwest quarter of the Northwest
Quarter of Section 9, Township 21 North, Range 1 West of the Second Principal
Meridian.


CO-02-13
 
11-1-02
 
Annexing a part of the NW NE S 9, T21, R1W, approximately 4.49 acres on Blinn
Road.


CO-02-14
 
11-1-02
 
Annexing a part of the N NW S 9, T21, R1W, approximately 6.06 acres on Blinn
Road.


CO-02-16
 
9-8-03
 
Annexing a part of the northeast quarter of Section 18, Township 21 North,
Range 1 West, the north half of the north half of the quarter, containing 40
acres more or less.


02-23
 
6-23-03
 
Annexing certain territory on Kelley Road/CR 150 South assigned to Council
District No. 4.


02-24
 
6-23-03
 
Annexing certain territory on CR 100 East and CR 150 South assigned to
Council District No. 4.


02-25
 
6-23-03
 
Annexing certain territory on Maish Road/CR 100 East assigned to Council
District No. 4.


CO-04-06
 
7-28-04
 
Annexing a part of the Southwest quarter, in Section 1, Township 21 North,
Range 1 West of the Second Principal Meridian containing 5.7 acres, more or
less.


04-01
 
8-9-04
 
Annexing certain territory on East State Road 28 assigned to Council District
No. 5.


CO-06-14
 
6-28-06
 
Annexing a part of Sec. 15, T21N, R1W, 2nd P.M., Center Township.


00-06-18
 
7-10-06
 
Annexing a part of Sec. 15, T21N, R1W, 2nd P.M., Center Township.


09-09
 
12-28-09
 
Annexing approximately 605 acres as described in Exhibit A.


14-05
 
5-27-14
 
Annexing approximately 297 acres being a part of Sec. 6, T21N, R1W, 2nd P.M.,
Washington Township.


14-17
 
2-23-14
 
Annexing approximately 16.5 acres being a part of the SW 1/4 of Sec.9, T21N,
2nd P.M.


16-05
 
6-13-16
 
Annexing the west half of the NW 1/4 of Sec. 2, T21N, R1W, 2nd P.M.


 
 
 
 
 




 



TABLE II:  DEDICATIONS



 

ORD. NO.
 
DATE PASSED
 
DESCRIPTION


CO-74-7
 
7-1-74
 
Dedication of a public street and thoroughfare to be known as Hot Dog Avenue


CO-99-15
 
11-22-99
 
Dedication of public residential street known as Hannah Drive.


 
 
 
 
 



 



TABLE III:  THOROUGHFARE PLAN CHANGES



 

ORD. NO.
 
DATE PASSED
 
DESCRIPTION




CO-72-10
 
10-18-72
 
Deleting proposed Armstrong Street between Williams Road and the proposed
extension of Hoke Avenue; deleting the short northeasterly connecting street
between the proposed Armstrong Street and the proposed extension of Hoke
Avenue; changing the proposed extension of Hoke Avenue south of Wabash Street


CO-74-7
 
7-1-74
 
Dedication of a public street and thoroughfare to be known as Hot Dog Avenue


CO-74-20
 
12-4-74
 
Deleting the proposed belt thoroughfare known as the Clinton Trafficway,
which extends entirely around the city


CO-76-7
 
4-21-76
 
Eliminating the proposed secondary arterial highway and the proposed park or
parkway located on a part of the southwest quarter of the northwest quarter
of Section 35, Township 22 north, Range 1 west and also a part of the east
half of the northeast quarter of Section 34, Township 22 north, Range 1 west,
of the second principal meridian in Union Township


CO-77-23
 
10-19-77
 
Deleting Kelley Avenue


CO-84-6
 
6-11-84
 
Deleting the proposed extension of Kelley Avenue from State Road 28


 
 
 
 
 




 



TABLE IV:  VACATIONS



 

ORD. NO.
 
DATE PASSED
 
DESCRIPTION




CO-82-9
 
8-9-82
 
Vacating 46 feet in uniform width off the entire north end of the alley lying
between lots 9 and 10 in the Additional Original Plat  to the city


CO-83-2
 
2-28-83
 
Vacating an alley located between lot 28 in Brookie Addition East and lot 25
in Brookie Addition on the west, bordered on the south by lot 27 in Brookie
Addition and an alley on the north


86-26
 
1-26-87
 
Vacating an alley located at the northeast corner of lot 106 in the
Additional Original Plat to the city


CO-87-3
 
3-23-87
 
Vacating an alley located at a point on the north line of Clinton Street,
135.5 feet west of the southwest corner of lot 105 in the Additional Original
Plat to the city


88-12
 
5-23-88
 
Vacating an alley located at a point on the south line of lots 3 and 4 of
Franklin Addition No. 3 east of Home Avenue


CO-89-8
 
7-10-89
 
Vacating an alley located at the southeast corner of Lot 16 in J.E. Hillis'
Addition to the city


CO-92-15
 
8-24-92
 
Vacating an alley platted in the Kelley Addition to the city which is 16.5
feet in uniform width and which commences at the northeast corner of Lot 386
and running thence west 116.5 feet, more particularly described as beginning
at the northeast corner of Lot 386 of the Kelley Addition running thence
north 16.5 feet; thence west a distance of 116.5 feet; thence south 16.5
feet; thence east 1126.5 feet


CO-92-18
 
11-9-92
 
Vacating the following alleys:


 
 
(1)  An alley 13 feet in width between lots numbered one and two in
McKinsey's Addition to the city;


 
 
(2)  An alley 13 feet in width between lots numbered two and three in
McKinsey's Addition to the city


93-1
 
8-13-93
 
Vacating an alley that is part of the NW 1/4, Sec. 11, T21N, R1W, 2nd P.M.,
Center Township


93-4
 
8-9-93
 
Vacating an alley beginning at the southeast corner of Lot Number 23 in the
Hillis and Avery Addition to the city, as the same is recorded in Plat Record
2 Page 8, and running thence east 16.5 feet, thence north 132 feet, thence
west 16.5 feet, thence south 132 feet


94-2
 
2-28-94
 
Vacating Lot 1 in Moses Addition


CO-94-8
 
7-11-94
 
Vacating an alley that lies between Jackson Street and Prairie Streets
running north and south in the McClamroch Addition runs between Lots 1, 2, 3,
4, 5, 6, and 7 on the west side of the alley and Lots 1A, 13, 12, 11, 10, 9,
and 8 on the east side of the alley


CO-94-15
 
8-22-94
 
Vacating an alley located in H.1. Fetters Addition, 16 feet in uniform with
commencing at the northeast corner of Lot #34; thence east 16 feet to the
northwest corner of Lot #33; thence south 64.25 feet; thence west 16 feet;
thence north to the place of beginning


CO-94-18
 
1-9-95
 
Vacating an alley laid out between properties of the city and Tranex Realty


CO-95-3
 
4-3-95
 
Vacating alleys located in J.E. Hillis Addition to the city


CO-95-4
 
3-27-95
 
Vacating any alley running east and west located between Lots 15 and 22 in
the Armantrout's Addition to the city, as the same are recorded in Plat
Record 1, pages 8 and 9


CO-95-11
 
10-23-95
 
Vacating an alley that is all of that part of the 50 foot right-of-way of Oak
Street (now known as Gard Street) lying between Lots Numbered 12 and 13 of
Block 1 and Lots Numbered 1 and 22 of Block M in the Woodside Addition to the
city, as same is recorded in Plat Record 2, pages 68 and 69


96-14
 
10-28-96
 
Vacating part of an alley in the Kelley Addition, that part of the alley
which separates Lots Numbered 126 and 127 on the south from Lots Numbered 185
and 184 on the north and runs the entire width of the said lots, from the
west boundary of Hoke Avenue west to the west line extended of said Lots
Numbered 185 and 126, such distance being 93 1/3 feet, more or less


96-15
 
12-9-96
 
Vacating part of an alley in the Additional Plat of the city, 4½ feet in
uniform width off the entire north side of that part of the east-west alley
which separates the entire south side of the Lot Number 82 from the entire
north side of Lot Number 83; such alley, prior to the within vacation, having
been 16.5 feet wide by 132 feet in length, more or less


CO-97-4
 
5-12-97
 
Vacating an alley lying between lots numbered 42, 44, 45 and 47 in the
Pence's North Additional to the city as same is recorded in Plat Book 1, said
alley running from West Jefferson Street to West Morrison Street


CO-98-3
 
4-13-98
 
Vacating an alley between McKinley Avenue and State Road 28 that lies to the
East of Lot 240 and Tract 78 in the Cloverleaf Park Addition to the city and
the West Lot 204 and 241 in the Cloverleaf Park Addition.


98-17
 
5-10-99
 
Vacating a public right-of-way beginning at the southwest corner of Lot
Number 15 in the First Riley Addition, running thence East to the West line
of an alley at the south east corner of Lot Number 15, then South along the
west line of the alley to the northeast corner of Lot Number 19.


99-2
 
4-12-99
 
Vacating an alley running north from the alley running between Fudge Avenue
and Kelley Avenue.


CO-99-11
 
8-9-99
 
Vacating an alley beginning at a point in the south line of Clinton Street,
316 feet east of where the south line intersects the east line of Young
Street.


CO-00-1A
 
- -
 
Vacating part of Richard Street in First Kentwood Addition.


CO-01-7
 
8-27-01
 
Vacating a portion of an alley in Morris and Laymon’s Addition.


CO-01-16
 
8-27-01
 
Vacating a portion of an alley in Morris and Laymon’s Addition.


CO-02-26
 
1-13-03
 
Vacating a portion of alley 350 W beginning at Norfolk Southern Railroad
Right-of-Way (300 N), North, to its intersection with East/West alley 350 N a
distance of 143 feet, more or less.


CO-04-05
 
3-22-04
 
Vacating an alley beginning at the northeast corner of Lot No. 91 of the
Additional Original Plat of the town.


CO-04-21
 
9-20-04
 
Vacating an alley in Pence’s 2nd North Addition described as that part of
the east-west alley that lies between and abuts Lots Numbered 54 and 55.


 
 




 



TABLE V:  ZONING MAP CHANGES



 

ORD. NO.
 
DATE PASSED
 
DESCRIPTION




CO-68-3
 
8-7-68
 
Rezoning certain real estate, 230 feet in uniform width off the entire south
end of the west half of the northeast quarter of Section 7, Township 2l
north, Range 1 east of the second principal meridian,from RB Roadside
Business to S Suburban


CO-69-5
 
3-19-69
 
Rezoning a part of the northwest quarter of the northwest quarter of Section
11, Township 21 north, Range 1 west of the second principal meridian; and a
part of the southwest quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 2, Township
21 north, Range l west of the second principal meridian; and a part of the
northwest quarter of the northwest quarter of Section 11, Township 21 north,
Range 1 west, beginning in the west line of Sims Street, from B Residential
to D Residential


CO-69-13
 
9-3-69
 
Rezoning lots 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 9, and 10, and parts of lots 7 and 8 in East
Meadows First Addition from RB Roadside Business to S Suburban Residence


CO-71-12
 
10-20-71
 
Rezoning the following parcels of real estate, heretofore zoned in part as S
Suburban Residence, part as B Residence, and part LB Local Business:


 
 
 
 
(1)  A part of the southeast quarter of Section 2 and a part of the
northeast quarter of Section 11, Township 2l north, Range 1 west of the
second principal meridian beginning at a point that is 1128.32 feet south of
the point of intersection of the east line of Section 2 and the original
centerline of the Michigantown Road containing 9.68 acres, to B Residence


 
 
10-20-71
 
(2)  A part of the southeast quarter of Section 2, Township 21 north, Range
l west of the second principal meridian, beginning at a point 553.32 feet
south of the point of intersection of the east line of Section 2 and the
original centerline of the Michigantown Road, containing 7.13 acres, to D
Residence


 
 
 
 
(3)  A part of the southeast quarter of Section 2, Township 21 north, Range
l west of the second principal meridian beginning at the point of
intersection of the original centerline of the Michigantown Road and the east
line of Section 2, containing 5.12 acres, to LB Local Business


 
 
 
 
(4)  A part of the southeast quarter of Section 2, Township 21 north, Range
l west of the second principal meridian, beginning at a point in the original
centerline of the Michigantown Road containing 1.06 acres, to RB Roadside
Business


CO-74-3
 
5-1-74
 
Rezoning four tracts, all part of the east half of the southwest quarter of
Section 11, Township 21 north, Range 1 west of the second principal meridian
beginning at a point in the south line of the Boyleston Road (now East Wabash
Street) that would be intersected by the centerline of Hoke Avenue, from RB
Roadside Business and B Residence to LB Local Business


CO-74-17
 
11-6-74
 
Rezoning a part of the southwest quarter of the northeast quarter of Section
3, Township 21 north, Range l west of the second principal meridian,
beginning in the middle line of the Frankfort and Moran Gravel Road,
containing .54 of an acre from S Suburban Residence to C Residence


CO-74-19
 
12-4-74
 
Rezoning a triangular plot in the southeast corner of the east half of the
northeast quarter of Section 17, Township 21 north, Range 1 west of the
second principal meridian containing 8.8 acres, from RB Roadside Business to
S Suburban


CO-76-8
 
5-5-76
 
Rezoning a part of the west half of the southeast quarter of Section 13,
Township 21 north, Range 1 west of the second principal meridian in Center
Township containing 9.65 acres, from Park to Suburban


CO-76-23
 
11-3-76
 
Rezoning a part of the southwest quarter of Section 2, Township 2l north,
Range 1 west of the second principal meridian in Center Township, beginning
16.5 feet east of the northeast corner of lot 1 in the Gem City Park Addition
to the city containing 1.45 acres from B Residential to D Residential


CO-77-1
 
1-19-77
 
Rezoning lots 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, and 13 in Maple Grove Addition from B
Residential to I-l Open Industrial


CO-77-10
 
7-20-77
 
Rezoning certain real estate beginning at the northwest corner of block
number 5 in the additional plat of the city from D Residential to GB General
Business


CO-78-5
 
3-1-78
 
Rezoning a part of the northeast quarter of the southeast quarter of Section
7 and a part of the northwest quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 8,
all in Township 21 north, Range 1 east of the second principal meridian in
Center Township containing 6.54 acres from RB Roadside Business to C
Residential


84-20
 
1-14-85
 
Rezoning a part of the northwest quarter of the southwest quarter of Section
3, Township 21 north, Range l West of the second principal meridian in the
City of Frankfort, containing approximately 6.722 acres, from B Residential
to LB Local Business


87-9
 
7-27-87
 
Rezoning lot 17 in John Pence's Addition, commonly referred to as 300 West
Morrison Street, from C Residential to LB Local Business


CO-88-16
 
10-24-88
 
Updating the 1967 Zoning Map with respect to the Southeast Section, South
Side Section, Woodside Section, North Side Section, Central or General
Business Section, Northeast Section, and the south side of West Armstrong.


CO-89-10
 
8-14-89
 
Rezoning a part of the southeast corner of Section 11, Township 21 north,
Range 1 west of the second principal meridian in Center Township from A
Residential to D Residential


CO-90-5
 
3-26-90
 
(1)  All of the property described as Area 1 on the attachment to Ord.
CO-90-5 (which is hereby incorporated by reference in this description) shall
be zoned A Residential, except that portion of the described area which is
between Kelley Road and the Monon Railroad right-of-way in Section 15 which
shall be zoned I-1 Open Industrial and that portion which is platted as
Williams Creek Addition which shall be zoned C Residential


 
 
 
 
(2)  All of the property described as Area 2 on the attachment to Ord.
CO-90-5 (which is hereby incorporated by reference in this description) shall
be zoned A Residential


94-12
 
7-11-94
 
Zoning a part of the southwest quarter, Section 1, Township 21 north, Range 1
west, 2nd principal meridian, Center Township as B-Residential


CO-94-13
 
8-22-94
 
Zoning as A Residential:


 
 
 
 
(1)  A part of the east half of the southwest quarter of Section 14,
Township 21 north, Range 1 west, of the second principal meridian


 
 
 
 
(2)  A part of the east half of the northeast quarter of Section 14,
Township 21 north, Range 1 west in Center Township


 
 
 
 
(3)  A part of the NE quarter, Section 14, T21N, R1W, 2nd P.M., Center
Township


95-12
 
11-13-95
 
Zoning certain annexed real estate located in the city as B-Residential and
D-Residential


CO-96-13
 
8-26-96
 
Zoning Lots # 90 and 91 in the Oak Park Addition LB Local Business


CO-97-5
 
5-12-97
 
Zoning Lots 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, and 42 of the J.H. Paris and Company
Addition C Residential


98-2A
 
4-13-98
 
Zoning part of the Southwest Quarter of Section 1, Township 21 North, Range 1
West approximately 16.536 acres, more or less of Tract I from B-Residential
to D-Residential and 7.65 acres, more or less of Tract II to D-Residential.


CO-01-12
 
8-13-01
 
Rezoning part of the Southeast quarter of the Southwest quarter of Section 3,
Township 21 North, Range 1 West, after two exceptions, of 2.66 acres from I-1
Open Industrial to D-Residential.


CO-04-10
 
4-26-04
 
Rezoning 43 feet off of Lot No. 91 to GB-General Business.


CO-04-20
 
8-23-04
 
Rezoning part of the SW 1/4 , Sec.1, T21N, R1W, 2nd P.M. containing 4.2115
acres from B-Residential to LB-Local Business.


CO-04-30
 
1-10-05
 
Rezoning part of the SW 1/4, Sec. 1, T21N, R1W, 2nd P.M. from B-Residential
to C-Residential.


05-01
 
3-14-05
 
Rezoning lot numbered 27 in Brookie's Addition and the east half of all that
portion of a certain vacated alley lying between and adjacent to Lots 26 and
27 from C-Residential to  Public Buildings and Land Usage.


05-04
 
8-8-05
 
Rezoning real estate located at 515 North Young Street from I-1 Open
Industrial to GB General Business.


06-23
 
10-23-06
 
Rezoning real estate located at 1400 to 1456 Magnolia Lane from LB  Local
Business to RE Roadside Business.


CO-07-05
 
11-12-07
 
Rezoning real estate located at 1100 Rowe Street from B Residential to LB
Local Business.


CO-07-15
 
11-12-07
 
Rezoning real estate as set forth in Ord. CO-07-15) from D Residential to C
Residential.


CO-08-01
 
3-26-08
 
Rezoning real estate as set forth in Ord. CO-08-01 from D Residential to B
Residential.


13-06
 
4-8-13
 
Rezoning real estate as set forth in Ord. 13-06 from C-Residential to General
Business.


CO-13-10
 
9-23-13
 
Rezoning real estate as set forth in Ord. CO-13-10 from Institutional to
D-Residential.


15-06
 
8-10-15
 
Rezoning real estate as set forth in Ord. 15-06 from Institutional District
to D-Residential.


 
 
 
 
 




 



PARALLEL REFERENCES



REFERENCES TO INDIANA CODE



REFERENCES TO 1975 CODE



REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES



REFERENCES TO INDIANA CODE



 

IC Section
 
Code Section




3
 
35.41


3-5-2-40.1
 
35.41


4-21.5-3
 
93.087, 93.091


4-21.5-3-7
 
156.35


5-4-1-18
 
35.02


5-4-1-18(a)(7)
 
35.02


5-10.1-2-1 et seq.
 
35.07


5-11-1-27
 
36.07


5-11-1-27(e)
 
36.07


5-11-1-27(g)
 
36.07


5-11-1-27(j)
 
36.07


5-11-1-27(l)
 
36.07


5-11-10
 
36.05


5-11-13-1
 
35.41, 35.42


5-22
 
35.42, 36.26, 36.32


5-22 et seq.
 
36.32


6-1.1-12.1
 
36.41


6-1.1-12.1-7
 
36.40, 36.41


6-1.1-12.1-25(c)
 
36.41


6-7-1-30.1
 
36.10


6-7-1-31.1
 
36.10


8-1-26-19
 
97.10


8-1.5 et seq.
 
30.06


8-1.5-3
 
30.08, 34.03


8-1.5-3-7
 
35.10


8-1.5-3-12
 
36.01


8-21-10
 
155.002, 155.056


8-21-10-7
 
155.243


8-22-3
 
34.04


8-23-20
 
155.132


9-1-4-26
 
111.15


9-1-4-29
 
111.15


9-13-2-1
 
100.21


9-13-2-18
 
70.01


9-13-2-47
 
70.01


9-13-2-69.7
 
79.01


9-13-2-164
 
70.01


9-13-2-180
 
70.01


9-13-2-188
 
70.01


9-13-2-196(a), (b)(1), (2)
 
70.01


9-17-2-12
 
36.13


9-20-1-3
 
71.01


9-21-4
 
70.02, 71.03


9-21-4-6
 
155.132


9-21-16-5
 
Ch. 72, Ch. 74


9-22-1
 
96.15


9-30-11-3
 
73.24


10-4-1-1 et seq.
 
35.36


10-4-1-10
 
35.36


12-8
 
93.120


13-11-2-96
 
99.02


13-11-2-99
 
99.02


13-18-1-1 et seq.
 
155.051, 155.074


14-3-3.4-10
 
155.401


14-28-1
 
157.39


14-28-1-26
 
157.39


14-28-4
 
157.01


14-32
 
54.01


14-34
 
54.02


22-9-1-1 et seq.
 
Ch. 92


22-9-1-4 et seq.
 
92.16


22-9.5-1 et seq.
 
92.15


22-9.5-2-2
 
92.16


22-9.5-2-3
 
92.16


22-9.5-2-4
 
92.16


22-9.5-2-8
 
92.16


22-9.5-2-9
 
92.16


22-9.5-2-10
 
92.16


22-9.5-2-10(b)
 
92.16


22-9.5-2-10(c)
 
92.16


22-9.5-2-11
 
92.16


22-9.5-2-13
 
92.16


22-9.5-3
 
92.17


22-9.5-3 et seq.
 
92.24


22-9.5-4-8
 
92.25


22-9.5-5
 
92.16


22-9.5-5-1
 
92.17


22-9.5-6
 
92.16, 92.25


22-11-14
 
93.045, 93.181


22-11-14-1
 
93.180


22-11-14-10.5
 
93.184


22-11-17-1
 
100.21


22-11-18
 
100.74


22-11-18-3.5
 
93.120


22-12
 
156.35


22-12-1-4
 
100.21, 156.03


22-12-1-5
 
100.21, 156.03


22-12-1-7
 
156.03


22-12-1-14
 
156.03


22-12-1-16
 
156.03


22-12-1-17
 
100.21, 156.03


22-12-1-18
 
156.03


22-12-1-22(b)(12)
 
156.41


22-12-1-24
 
156.03


22-12-1-26
 
156.03


22-12-2
 
93.002


22-12-7
 
156.05


22-13
 
156.35


22-13-2-2
 
93.010


22-13-2-3(b)
 
156.40


22-13-2-6
 
156.04


22-13-2-7
 
100.10, 156.35


22-13-2-7(b)
 
156.40


22-13-2-9
 
156.04


22-13-2-11
 
93.090, 156.05


22-14
 
93.088, 156.35


22-15
 
156.35


22-15-3
 
156.11


22-15-4
 
156.04


25-25-2-1
 
110.07


32-10-9
 
155.013


32-31-7-5
 
93.120


33-35-1
 
33.01


33-36-2-1
 
34.06


33-37-8-3
 
36.14, 36.15


33-37-8-4
 
36.14, 36.15


35-25-2-9
 
156.03


36-1-5-4
 
156.40, 156.41


36-1-6-4
 
156.33


36-1-8-3
 
36.06


36-1-12
 
35.42


36-1-20.2
 
35.41


36-1-21
 
35.42


36-1-21-5
 
35.42


36-4-5-1 et seq.
 
30.01, 30.02


36-4-6-1 et seq.
 
30.01


36-4-6-4
 
31.31


36-4-6-5
 
31.31


36-4-6-9
 
31.03


36-4-6-14
 
10.11


36-4-6-17
 
10.11


36-4-8
 
36.05


36-4-9 et seq.
 
30.07


36-4-9-2
 
30.07


36-4-9-12
 
30.04


36-4-10-1 et seq.
 
30.01, 32.01


36-4-11-4
 
32.02


36-7 et seq.
 
30.05


36-7-4
 
157.01


36-7-4-500 - 36-7-4-509
 
151.09


36-7-4-500 et seq.
 
153.01, 155.002


36-7-4-507
 
155.010


36-7-4-507 - 36-7-4-509
 
153.03


36-7-4-509
 
155.010


36-7-4-511
 
151.09, 153.03


36-7-4-600 et seq.
 
155.170


36-7-4-608
 
155.010


36-7-4-609
 
155.010


36-7-4-611
 
155.010


36-7-4-901 - 36-7-4-907
 
155.126


36-7-4-919
 
152.04


36-7-4-1400 et seq.
 
155.170


36-7-9-1 - 36-7-9-28
 
150.03


36-7-9-4
 
150.04


36-7-9-27
 
150.99


36-7-9-28
 
150.99


36-7-11-1 - 36-7-11-21
 
155.402


36-7-14
 
34.05


36-7-14-3
 
34.05


36-7-14-6.1
 
34.05


36-7-25
 
34.05


36-8-6 et seq.
 
34.01


36-8-7 et seq.
 
34.02


36-8-8 et seq.
 
34.01, 34.02


36-8-17
 
93.020, 93.060, 93.093, 156.21


36-8-17-8
 
93.061


36-8-17-9
 
93.085, 93.088, 93.092


36-9-6.1 et seq.
 
154.11, 154.12


36-9-15.5
 
36.16


36-9-15.5-6
 
36.16


36-9-15.5-8(a)
 
36.16


36-9-23
 
53.36


36-14-20.2
 
35.41


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO 1975 CODE



 

'75 Code
 
'82 Code




1.01
 
10.01


1.02
 
10.14, 10.15


1.04
 
10.03, 10.04


1.05
 
10.09


1.06
 
10.10


1.07
 
10.17


1.08
 
10.99, 75.99, 155.999


1.09
 
10.11


1.10
 
10.12


1.11
 
10.13(A)


1.12
 
10.13(B)


2.05
 
155.125


2.06
 
36.10(B)


2.07
 
36.10(A)


2.08
 
36.11


2.09
 
36.01


3.08
 
155.126


3.09
 
155.127(A)


3.10
 
155.127(C)


3.11
 
155.127(B)


3.12
 
155.128(A)


3.13
 
155.128(D)


4.01
 
35.02(A)


4.02
 
35.05


4.03
 
35.07


4.04
 
35.06


4.05
 
35.10


4.06
 
35.35


4.07
 
35.36


6.01
 
50.05


6.02
 
50.06


6.03
 
50.07


6.04
 
50.08


6.05
 
50.10


6.06
 
50.11


6.07
 
50.15


6.08
 
50.37(A), (B)


6.09
 
50.37(C)


6.10
 
50.20


6.11
 
50.25


6.12
 
50.21


6.13
 
50.23


6.14
 
50.24


6.15
 
50.26


6.16
 
50.27


6.17
 
50.16


6.18
 
50.18


6.19
 
50.38


6.20
 
50.17


6.21
 
50.19


6.22
 
50.32


6.23
 
50.28


6.24
 
50.29(B)


6.25
 
50.29(A)


6.26
 
50.33


6.27
 
50.30


6.28
 
50.36


6.29
 
50.34


6.30
 
50.35


6.31
 
50.31


6.32
 
50.22


6.33
 
50.01


7.01
 
51.017


7.02
 
51.017


7.03
 
51.025


7.04
 
51.002(B)


7.05
 
51.018


7.06
 
51.020


7.11
 
51.021


7.12
 
51.022


7.15
 
51.023


7.17
 
51.030


7.19
 
51.043(A)


7.20
 
51.040


7.21
 
51.041


7.24
 
51.042


7.25
 
51.052


7.26
 
51.054


7.27
 
51.055


7.29
 
51.050


7.30
 
51.051


7.32
 
51.057


7.33
 
51.058


7.34
 
51.057


7.35
 
51.059(B)


7.36
 
51.059(A)


7.37
 
51.088


7.38
 
51.096


7.40
 
51.086


7.41
 
51.071


7.42
 
51.066


7.44
 
51.105


7.46
 
51.004, 51.007


8.01
 
52.01


8.03
 
52.02(A)


8.04
 
52.02(B)


8.13
 
52.99


9.01
 
35.10


9.02
 
35.11(A)


9.03
 
35.12


9.04
 
35.13


9.05
 
35.14, 35.15


9.06
 
35.16


9.07
 
35.16


9.08
 
35.16


9.09
 
35.21


11.01
 
90.01


11.02
 
90.15(A), 90.16


11.03
 
90.17


11.04
 
90.18


11.05
 
90.02


11.06
 
90.15(B)


11.07
 
90.03


11.08
 
90.06


11.09
 
90.05


11.10
 
90.26


11.11
 
90.25


11.12
 
90.07


11.15
 
90.47


11.16
 
90.48, 90.50


15.01
 
97.25


15.02
 
97.26(A)


15.03
 
97.29


15.04
 
97.30


15.04
 
97.27(A)


15.05
 
97.27(B)


15.06
 
97.26(B)


15.07
 
97.28


15.08
 
97.99(C)


16.01
 
155.110


16.02
 
155.111(A)


16.03
 
155.111(A)


16.04
 
155.113(A)


16.05
 
155.113(B)


16.06
 
155.116


17.01
 
110.01


17.02
 
110.01


17.03
 
110.05(A)


17.04
 
110.06


17.05
 
110.07(A)


17.06
 
110.07(B)


17.07
 
110.08


17.08
 
110.09


17.09
 
110.05(B)


17.10
 
110.10


17.11
 
110.02


17.12
 
110.99


17.13
 
110.99


19.0l
 
111.01


19.02
 
111.01


19.03
 
111.20


19.04
 
111.21


19.05
 
111.05


19.06
 
111.06


19.07
 
111.07


19.08
 
111.08


19.09
 
111.09


19.10
 
111.02


19.11
 
111.15


19.13
 
111.16


19.14
 
111.99(A), (B)


19.15
 
111.99(C)


Ch. 26
 
70.01


27.02
 
71.01(A)


27.04
 
71.01(B)


27.03
 
72.11


27.05
 
72.15(A), (B)


27.06
 
72.15(C)


27.07
 
72.16


27.08
 
131.25


27.09
 
131.26


27.10
 
131.27


27.11
 
131.28


27.12
 
131.29


27.13
 
131.30


27.14
 
72.20


27.15
 
72.21


27.16
 
72.22


27.17
 
72.23


27.20
 
71.02


27.21
 
70.99


27.22
 
70.99


27.22
 
131.99


29.01
 
72.01


29.02
 
72.02(A)


29.03
 
72.02(B)


29.04
 
72.03


29.05
 
72.04


29.06
 
72.05(A)


29.07
 
72.05(B)


29.08
 
72.06(A)


29.09
 
72.07


29.12
 
72.08


29.14
 
72.09


29.19
 
72.10


29.17
 
70.02


29.18
 
71.03


29.99
 
70.99


31.01
 
130.01


31.02
 
130.99


31.03
 
130.02


31.04
 
130.99


32.01
 
131.01


32.02
 
131.99


34.01
 
91.01


34.02
 
91.01


34.03
 
91.02


34.04
 
91.03(A)


34.05
 
91.04


34.06
 
91.03(B)


34.07
 
91.99


39.02
 
51.043(B), (C)


39.03
 
51.045


39.04
 
51.043(D)


41.01
 
90.35


41.02
 
90.37(A)


41.03
 
90.37(B)


41.04
 
90.36(A)


42.02
 
90.04


42.01
 
96.01


42.03
 
96.02


42.04
 
96.03


42.05
 
96.04


42.06
 
96.05


42.07
 
96.06


42.12
 
96.25


42.15
 
96.99(B)


42.16
 
96.99(A)


42.17
 
96.07


44.02
 
131.11


44.03
 
131.15


44.04
 
131.16


44.05
 
131.17


44.06
 
131.02


44.07
 
131.99


45.01
 
75.10


45.03
 
75.11


45.04
 
75.99(E)


45.05
 
75.01


45.06
 
75.99


45.09
 
75.99(C)


45.10
 
75.02


45.11
 
75.03


45.12
 
75.99(D)


46.01
 
97.01


46.02
 
97.02


45.05
 
97.03


46.06
 
97.04


46.07
 
97.05


46.08
 
97.99(A)


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Code Section




11
 
2-16-1876
 
75.02, 75.03, 75.99(D)


27
 
6-7-1888
 
97.02, 97.99(A)


35
 
3-20-1891
 
52.99


42
 
4-7-1893
 
97.04


1-187
 
5-1-1896
 
Ch. 75, App. A, § l


53
 
7-17-1896
 
97.03


1-193
 
8-7-1896
 
97.05


28
 
1-4-1899
 
90.35, 90.37


56
 
4-22-04
 
131.11


2-260
 
4-19-07
 
97.25, 97.26, 97.28, 97.99(C)


69
 
3-9-10
 
130.01, 130.99


99
 
9-21-16
 
111.01 - 111.06, 111.10, 111.99(A), (B)


101
 
3-21-18
 
111.06


108
 
3-25-18
 
131.01


102
 
8-23-19
 
111.06, 111.99(A), (B)


3-135
 
12-3-25
 
Ch. 75, App. A, § l


66
 
6-4-26
 
Ch. 110


3-152
 
6-17-26
 
Ch. 75, App. A, § 2


79
 
6-24-26
 
75.11


118
 
9-16-26
 
111.01, 111.20, 111.21, 111.99(C)


121
 
5-8-28
 
97.26(A), 97.27 - 97.30, 97.99(C)


68
 
8-28-30
 
110.02


30324
 
4-25-35
 
35.06


125
 
4-23-36
 
97.10 - 97.19


3-395
 
9-26-40
 
35.05


3-397
 
4-24-41
 
111.05, 111.07 - 111.09, 111.15, 111.16, 111.99(A), (B)


146
 
10-14-43
 
75.02(A), 75.99(C)


148
 
1-4-44
 
131.11


3-
 
2-13-47
 
35.10, 35.16, 35.21


152
 
8-10-48
 
70.01


152
 
8-10-48
 
72.01


155
 
10-28-48
 
70.99


155
 
10-28-48
 
71.02, 71.03, 72.02 - 72.10, 72.15


155
 
10-28-48
 
Ch. 76, Sch. II, III; Ch. 77, Sch. I


158
 
2-18-52
 
75.01, 75.99(B)


161
 
3-3-52
 
72.01


159
 
3-3-52
 
72.15, 72.16


162
 
5-5-52
 
72.01


163
 
8-18-52
 
75.10, 75.99(E)


164
 
10-20-52
 
51.043


4-15
 
2-15-54
 
155.125


4-18
 
5-3-54
 
35.17, 35.19 - 35.24


4-227
 
5-17-54
 
52.02


4-78
 
7-18-55
 
Ch. 51


4-188
 
12-21-59
 
70.02


173
 
5-3-60
 
51.045


175
 
11-5-62
 
Ch. 77, Sch. I


4-270
 
11-20-62
 
35.36


177
 
9-1-64
 
96.25, 96.99(A)


177
 
9-1-64
 
97.01, 97.99(A)


177
 
9-1-64
 
130.02, 130.99


179
 
10-5-64
 
97.99(A)


4-332
 
11-2-65
 
36.10


184
 
2-1-66
 
96.99(B)


P0-67-1
 
2-21-67
 
155.110, 155.111, 155.113, 155.116, 155.999


CO-67-2
 
2-21-67
 
Ch. 155


CO-67-3
 
2-21-67
 
Ch. 151


CO-67-4
 
2-21-67
 
Ch. 154


CO-67-5
 
2-21-67
 
Ch. 153


PO-67-18
 
11-28-67
 
51.002, 51.017 - 51.023, 51.025


PO-68-1
 
6-19-68
 
90.15, 90.16


PO-68-2
 
8-7-68
 
70.01


PO-68-2
 
8-7-68
 
71.01


PO-68-2
 
8-7-68
 
72.11


PO-68-2
 
8-7-68
 
Ch. 76, Sch. I


CO-68-3
 
8-7-68
 
T.S.O. V


PO-68-3
 
11-13-68
 
131.25 - 131.30


PO-68-4
 
11-13-68
 
70.99


PO-68-4
 
11-13-68
 
72.20 - 72.23


Res. 69-7
 
11-13-69
 
52.02


CO-69-5
 
3-19-69
 
T.S.O. V


CO-69-13
 
9-3-69
 
T.S.O. V


PO-70-1
 
4-1-70
 
Ch. 91


PO-70-1
 
4-1-70
 
131.02, 131.11 - 131.17


PO-71-1
 
5-5-71
 
70.99


PO-71-1
 
5-5-71
 
Ch. 77, Sch. I


CO-71-12
 
10-20-71
 
T.S.O. V


PO-72-1
 
6-21-72
 
90.01 - 90.03, 90.05 - 90.18, 90.26, 90.47, 90.48, 90.50


CO-72-10
 
10-18-72
 
T.S.O. III


CO-72-13
 
12-20-72
 
50.05 - 50.08, 50.10


Res. 72-14
 
10-4-72
 
35.07


CO-74-3
 
5-1-74
 
T.S.O. V


CO-74-7
 
7-1-74
 
T.S.O. III


CO-74-7
 
7-1-74
 
T.S.O. II


CO-74-14
 
10-2-74
 
50.05 - 50.08, 50.10


CO-74-17
 
11-6-74
 
T.S.O. V


CO-74-19
 
12-4-74
 
T.S.O. V


CO-74-20
 
12-4-74
 
T.S.O. III


CO-75-1
 
3-5-75
 
T.S.O. I


CO-75-2
 
3-5-75
 
35.01


CO-75-17
 
12-17-75
 
36.12


CO-76-7
 
4-21-76
 
T.S.O. III


CO-76-8
 
5-5-76
 
T.S.O. V


CO-76-23
 
11-3-76
 
T.S.O. V


CO-76-24
 
11-17-76
 
50.05 - 50.08, 50.10


CO-76-27
 
12-1-76
 
35.02


CO-77-1
 
1-19-77
 
T.S.O. V


PO-77-1
 
8-3-77
 
155.112


PO-77-2
 
12-21-77
 
70.99


PO-77-2
 
12-21-77
 
75.99(D)


PO-77-2
 
12-21-77
 
91.99


PO-77-2
 
12-21-77
 
96.99, 97.99, 110.99, 111.99(A), (B), 130.99, 131.99


PO-77-2
 
12-21-77
 
155.999


CO-77-10
 
7-20-77
 
T.S.O. V


CO-77-20
 
10-19-77
 
153.42, 153.48, 153.49


CO-77-21
 
10-19-77
 
155.032, 155.034, 155.103


CO-77-21
 
10-19-77
 
Ch. 155, App. A, § 1, § 9


CO-77-22
 
10-19-77
 
155.007


CO-77-23
 
10-19-77
 
T.S.O. III


CO-77-25
 
12-7-77
 
150.01


CO-78-5
 
3-1-78
 
T.S.O. V


CO-78-9
 
5-3-78
 
50.05 - 50.08, 50.10 - 50.13


CO-78-16
 
7-5-78
 
51.018, 51.020


CO-78-19
 
8-16-78
 
50.13


CO-78-30
 
10-30-78
 
50.13


CO-79-02
 
1-3-79
 
Ch. 92


CO-79-3
 
2-21-79
 
T.S.O. I


CO-79-6
 
3-7-79
 
T.S.O. I


CO-79-12
 
6-27-79
 
T.S.O. I


PO-80-1
 
11-24-80
 
Ch. 51


CO-80-19
 
11-24-80
 
Ch. 51


PO-81-1
 
5-11-81
 
Ch. 95


CO-81-8
 
9-28-81
 
51.015, 51.018, 51.021, 51.022


CO-82-1
 
2-22-82
 
52.01, 52.02


CO-82-6
 
7-26-82
 
Ch. 152


CO-82-9
 
8-9-82
 
T.S.O. IV


CO-82-12
 
8-23-82
 
35.10, 35.16, 35.21


CO-82-14
 
8-30-82
 
Chs. 30 - 34


CO-82-19
 
11-22-82
 
30.07


CO-82-22
 
12-13-82
 
35.20


CO-82-23
 
12-29-82
 
31.30


CO-83-2
 
2-28-83
 
T.S.O. IV


  -  -
 
-  -83
 
36.02, 36.03


CO-83-3
 
4-25-83
 
50.05 - 50.08, 50.10 - 50.13


CO-83-4
 
4-25-83
 
51.001, 51.009, 51.010, 51.071, 51.089, 51.090, 51.091


CO-83-6
 
7-11-83
 
51.018, 51.023


83-9
 
8-8-83
 
150.01 - 150.07


CO-83-13
 
9-26-83
 
T.S.O. I


CO-83-15
 
1-9-84
 
Adopting Ord.


84-1
 
4-9-84
 
T.S.O. I


84-4
 
6-11-84
 
T.S.O. I


CO-84-6
 
6-11-84
 
T.S.O. III


84-20
 
1-14-85
 
T.S.O. V


85-1
 
3-25-85
 
110.03


85-2
 
4-8-85
 
155.002, 155.032


85-5
 
5-28-85
 
90.36, 151.03, 153.15, 153.28, 153.42 - 153.45, 153.47, 153.49, 155.002,
155.032


CO-85-6
 
6-10-85
 
50.39, 50.40


85-09
 
7-8-85
 
51.101


85-13
 
7-25-85
 
51.018, 51.020, 51.023


85-22
 
1-27-86
 
72.06, 150.07, 150.10, 150.99, 153.11, 153.42, 153.48, 153.49, 154.03, Ch.
154, App., 155.007, 155.032, 155.053, 155.111(A), Ch. 155, App. B, §§ 3, 5


86-2
 
3-24-86
 
155.007


86-3
 
3-24-86
 
T.S.O. I


86-6
 
5-12-86
 
155.115


CO-86-8
 
6-23-86
 
52.01, 52.02


CO-86-11
 
9-8-86
 
72.03


CO-86-12
 
8-11-86
 
78.01 - 78.37, 78.99


86-19
 
10-14-86
 
T.S.O. I


86-21
 
10-27-86
 
97.05


86-26
 
1-26-87
 
T.S.O. IV


87-3
 
3-23-87
 
T.S.O. IV


87-9
 
7-27-87
 
T.S.O. V


CO-88-2
 
2-22-88
 
31.18


88-11
 
5-23-88
 
T.S.O. I


88-12
 
5-23-88
 
T.S.O. IV


88-13
 
9-26-88
 
51.022


88-15
 
10-24-88
 
97.10, 97.12 - 97.18, 97.99


88-16
 
10-24-88
 
T.S.O. V


88-17
 
10-24-88
 
T.S.O. I


88-18
 
1-23-89
 
34.06


88-19
 
2-13-89
 
51.024


CO-89-6
 
6-26-89
 
35.22


CO-89-7
 
6-26-89
 
Adopting Ordinance


CO-89-8
 
7-10-89
 
T.S.O. IV


CO-89-10
 
8-14-89
 
T.S.O. V


CO-89-14
 
11-27-89
 
155.002, 155.012


89-15
 
11-11-89
 
T.S.O. I


89-16
 
1-22-90
 
T.S.O. I


CO-89-17
 
12-11-89
 
35.21


C0-90-2
 
3-26-90
 
155.130 - 155.138, 155.140 - 155.144


CO-90-4
 
3-26-90
 
155.002, 155.013


CO-90-10
 
6-25-90
 
50.08, 50.14


90-9
 
7-9-90
 
52.01, 52.02


CO-90-11
 
12-10-90
 
34.06, 154.11, 154.12


CO-91-3
 
5-13-91
 
Ch. 74


CO-92-5
 
2-10-92
 
96.15, 96.16, 96.17


CO-92-7
 
6-22-92
 
36.13


92-8
 
6-22-92
 
36.20


CO-92-9
 
7-20-92
 
110.07


CO-92-16
 
10-12-92
 
51.057, 51.060


CO-92-15
 
8-24-92
 
T.S.O. IV


CO-92-18
 
11-9-92
 
T.S.O. IV


92-20
 
12-14-92
 
31.31


93-1
 
8-13-93
 
T.S.O. IV


93-4
 
8-9-93
 
T.S.O. IV


93-8
 
1-10-94
 
T.S.O. I


94-1
 
1-24-94
 
T.S.O. I


94-2
 
2-28-94
 
T.S.O. IV


CO-94-5
 
4-25-94
 
75.02


CO-94-6
 
4-11-94
 
T.S.O. I


CO-94-7
 
6-27-94
 
T.S.O. I


CO-94-8
 
7-11-94
 
T.S.O. IV


94-12
 
7-11-94
 
T.S.O. V


CO-94-13
 
8-22-94
 
T.S.O. V


94-9
 
6-13-94
 
T.S.O. I


CO-94-15
 
8-22-94
 
T.S.O. IV


CO-94-18
 
1-9-95
 
T.S.O. IV


CO-95-1
 
4-3-95
 
31.04, 31.15, 31.21, 31.30, 31.31


CO-95-3
 
4-3-95
 
T.S.O. IV


CO-95-4
 
3-27-95
 
T.S.O. IV


CO-95-11
 
10-23-95
 
T.S.O. IV


95-12
 
11-13-95
 
T.S.O. V


CO-96-1
 
4-8-96
 
35.35, 35.37 - 35.40


96-2
 
2-12-96
 
36.04


CO-96-4
 
7-22-96
 
T.S.O. I


CO-96-08
 
9-23-96
 
100.01 - 100.10, 100.20, 100.21, 100.25 - 100.28, 100.35 - 100.39, 100.45 -
100.52, 100.60 - 100.64, 100.70 - 100.76


CO-96-13
 
8-26-96
 
T.S.O. V


96-14
 
10-28-96
 
T.S.O. IV


96-15
 
12-9-96
 
T.S.O. IV


CO-97-1
 
3-10-97
 
T.S.O. I


CO-97-2
 
6-9-97
 
T.S.O. I


CO-97-4
 
5-12-97
 
T.S.O. IV


CO-97-5
 
5-12-97
 
T.S.O. V


CO-97-6
 
6-23-97
 
50.13


PO-97-1
 
6-9-97
 
130.03


CO-97-12
 
10-27-97
 
50.05 - 50.08, 50.10 - 50.13


PO-98-4
 
6-8-98
 
51.001, 51.006, 51.007, 51.009, 51.010, 51.011, 51.020, 51.022, 51.024,
51.041, 51.042, 51.050, 51.052, 51.055, 51.057, 51.059, 51.060, 51.066,
51.068, 51.071, 51.078, 51.089, 51.090, 51.094, 51.095, 51.101, 51.108, 51.999


CO-00-1A
 
- -
 
T.S.O. IV


98-2A
 
4-13-98
 
T.S.O. V


CO-98-3
 
4-13-98
 
T.S.O. IV


CO-98-11
 
7-13-98
 
T.S.O. I


98-5
 
7-27-98
 
112.01 - 112.07, 112.20 - 112.39


CO-98-6
 
7-27-98
 
90.01, 90.02, 90.05,  90.08 - 90.11, 90.47, 90.48, 90.50, 90.99


98-15
 
8-24-98
 
90.07


CO-98-19
 
1-11-99
 
153.11, 153.13


CO-98-18
 
1-11-99
 
Ch. 153, App. A, § 5


CO-98-20
 
1-11-99
 
155.007


99-2
 
4-12-99
 
T.S.O. IV


98-17
 
5-10-99
 
T.S.O. IV


CO-99-8
 
5-10-99
 
T.S.O. I


CO-99-7
 
7-26-99
 
T.S.O. I


CO-99-11
 
8-9-99
 
T.S.O. IV


CO-99-15
 
11-22-99
 
T.S.O. III


CO-01-5
 
3-26-01
 
100.01 - 100.10, 100.20, 100.21, 100.25 - 100.28, 100.35 - 100.39, 100.45 -
100.52, 100.60 - 100.64, 100.70 - 100.76


CO-01-12
 
8-13-01
 
T.S.O. V


CO-01-8
 
8-27-01
 
T.S.O. I


CO-01-7
 
8-27-01
 
T.S.O. IV


CO-01-16
 
8-27-01
 
T.S.O. IV


CO-01-17
 
8-27-01
 
35.10 - 35.32


CO-01-10
 
11-12-01
 
Ch. 155 App. A


CO-01-18
 
12-10-01
 
52.01, 52.02


CO-02-02
 
3-11-02
 
T.S.O. I


02-15
 
7-22-02
 
31.30, 31.31


02-09
 
11-1-02
 
T.S.O. I


CO-02-12
 
11-1-02
 
T.S.O. I


CO-02-13
 
11-1-02
 
T.S.O. I


CO-02-14
 
11-1-02
 
T.S.O. I


CO-02-26
 
1-13-03
 
T.S.O. IV


CO-02-22
 
1-27-03
 
72.14


CO-03-01
 
2-10-03
 
71.04


02-20
 
6-23-03
 
155.013, 155.032


02-23
 
6-23-03
 
T.S.O. I


02-24
 
6-23-03
 
T.S.O. I


02-25
 
6-23-03
 
T.S.O. I


02-10
 
7-28-03
 
T.S.O. I


Res. 03-16
 
7-28-03
 
35.01


CO-03-05
 
8-25-03
 
93.001 - 93.004, 93.020, 93.021, 93.060, 93.061, 93.063 - 93.066, 93.075,
93.076, 93.078, 93.085 - 93.094, 93.100 - 93.102, 93.110, 93.113 - 93.126,
93.151 - 93.157, 93.170 - 93.173, 93.181


CO-02-16
 
9-8-03
 
T.S.O. I


Res. 04-01
 
3-8-04
 
36.25 - 36.31


CO-04-04
 
3-22-04
 
36.32


CO-04-05
 
3-22-04
 
T.S.O. IV


CO-04-10
 
4-26-04
 
T.S.O. V


CO-04-14
 
7-26-04
 
36.11


CO-04-06
 
7-28-04
 
T.S.O. I


04-01
 
8-9-04
 
T.S.O. I


CO-04-20
 
8-23-04
 
T.S.O. V


CO-04-21
 
9-20-04
 
T.S.O. IV


CO-05-08
 
10-24-04
 
54.15 - 54.20


CO-04-27
 
11-8-04
 
51.018, 51.020, 51.023


CO-04-24
 
11-22-04
 
53.01 - 53.21


CO-04-26
 
11-22-04
 
54.01 - 54.07


CO-04-30
 
1-10-05
 
T.S.O. V


04-29
 
1-24-05
 
98.01 - 98.10, 98.99


CO-04-31
 
1-10-05
 
36.40 - 36.42


05-01
 
3-14-05
 
T.S.O. V


CO-05-03
 
5-23-05
 
35.11


05-04
 
8-8-05
 
T.S.O. V


CO-05-06
 
10-11-05
 
156.01 - 156.07, 156.10 - 156.13, 156.20, 156.21, 156.30 - 156.35, 156.40,
156.41


CO-05-07
 
10-11-05
 
70.01, 72.05


CO-05-08
 
10-24-05
 
54.15 - 54.20


CO-05-10
 
10-24-05
 
34.03


CO-05-11
 
10-24-05
 
99.01 - 99.11


06-3
 
2-13-06
 
155.999


06-4
 
2-13-06
 
130.99, 131.99


06-5
 
2-13-06
 
110.99


06-6
 
2-13-06
 
97.99


06-7
 
2-13-06
 
96.99


06-8
 
2-13-06
 
152.99


06-9
 
2-13-06
 
96.40


CO-06-10
 
3-13-06
 
51.018, 51.020, 51.023


CO-06-11
 
3-13-06
 
99.01


CO-06-13
 
3-27-06
 
36.40 - 36.42


CO-06-15
 
6-26-06
 
96.25 -  96.30


CO-06-14
 
6-28-06
 
T.S.O. I


00-06-18
 
7-10-06
 
T.S.O. I


06-19
 
7-10-06
 
94.01


06-2
 
7-13-06
 
100.01 - 100.10, 100.20, 100.21, 100.25 - 100.28, 100.35 - 100.39, 100.45 -
100.52, 100.60 - 100.64, 100.70 - 100.76


2006-16
 
7-26-06
 
53.35 - 53.39


06-23
 
10-23-06
 
T.S.O. V


CO-06-25
 
1-8-07
 
156.14


CO-07-01
 
1-8-07
 
36.40 - 36.42


CO-07-04
 
5-29-07
 
155.032


CO-07-08
 
6-25-07
 
51.018, 51.020, 51.023


07-06
 
7-23-07
 
36.14


07-07
 
7-23-07
 
36.15


CO-07-11
 
8-20-07
 
93.180, 93.183 - 93.186, 93.999


CO-07-05
 
11-12-07
 
T.S.O. V


CO-07-15
 
11-12-07
 
T.S.O. V


CO-07-16
 
11-12-07
 
155.145


CO-07-17
 
11-26-07
 
98.02, 98.03


CO-07-19
 
12-10-07
 
155.130 - 155.138


08-03
 
4-28-08
 
35.01


2008-02
 
6-9-08
 
52.01, 52.02


CO-08-01
 
3-26-08
 
T.S.O. V


08-04
 
7-14-08
 
155.170 - 155.205


08-09
 
11-10-08
 
74.06


08-10
 
11-10-08
 
78.17


CO-08-11A
 
11-24-08
 
90.01, 90.03, 90.09, 90.25, 90.26, 90.99


08-14
 
12-22-08
 
36.06


CO-08-16C
 
3-9-09
 
34.06


09-03
 
3-9-09
 
36.21


09-04
 
3-23-09
 
52.03


09-05
 
3-23-09
 
52.01, 52.99


09-09
 
12-28-09
 
T.S.O. I


09-10A
 
6-8-09
 
52.02


09-11
 
6-22-09
 
54.21


09-12A
 
7-27-09
 
98.03, 98.04


09-14
 
8-10-09
 
36.20


09-15
 
7-27-09
 
36.16


10-01
 
1-25-10
 
155.002, 155.240 - 155.251


10-03
 
3-22-10
 
50.41


10-06
 
6-14-10
 
51.018, 51.020, 51.021, 51.023


10-08
 
8-23-10
 
52.02


10-09A
 
8-23-10
 
97.10


11-02A
 
4-11-11
 
34.06


11-03
 
4-25-11
 
155.133


11-06
 
5-23-11
 
155.002, 155.056, Ch. 155 App. A, § 9


11-07
 
5-23-11
 
34.06


11-08
 
5-23-11
 
156.14


11-15
 
11-14-11
 
157.01 - 157.14, 157.25 - 157.27, 157.35 - 157.42, 157.55 - 157.61, 157.99


11-16A
 
11-28-11
 
70.03


12-02
 
2-13-12
 
34.05


12-03A
 
3-12-12
 
34.03


12-04A
 
4-9-12
 
79.01 - 79.10, 79.99


12-06A
 
5-29-12
 
97.40 - 97.42


Res. 12-02
 
6-25-12
 
35.41


Res. 12-03
 
6-25-12
 
35.42


12-09
 
9-10-12
 
96.25 - 96.30


12-11
 
12-27-12
 
31.30


13-01
 
2-11-13
 
98.03


13-06
 
4-8-13
 
T.S.O. V


13-04
 
4-30-13
 
53.37


CO-13-10
 
9-23-13
 
T.S.O. V


13-15
 
10-28-13
 
31.30


13-16
 
12-2-13
 
36.05


CO-13-17
 
3-10-14
 
73.01 - 73.05, 73.10 - 73.13, 73.20 - 73.24


14-17
 
2-23-14
 
T.S.O. I


14-01
 
2-24-14
 
79.04


14-02
 
3-24-14
 
51.023


14-05
 
5-27-14
 
T.S.O. I


14-07
 
6-23-14
 
36.16


14-08
 
8-11-14
 
93.001 - 93.004, 93.010 - 93.013, 93.020, 93.021, 93.030 - 93.035, 93.045 -
93.051, 93.060 - 93.066, 93.075 - 93.078, 93.085 - 93.094, 93.100 - 93.102,
93.110 - 93.126, 93.135 - 93.139, 93.150 - 93.157, 93.170 - 93.173, 93.180 -
93.186, 93.195 - 93.198, 93.999


14-14
 
10-27-14
 
36.17


14-20
 
12-22-14
 
100.01 - 100.10, 100.20, 100.21, 100.25 - 100.28, 100.35 - 100.39, 100.45 -
100.52, 100.60 - 100.64, 100.70 - 100.76, 100.85


14-22
 
1-26-15
 
155.265 - 155.269


14-23
 
1-26-15
 
155.170 - 155.205


15-01
 
3-23-15
 
150.04


15-02
 
3-23-15
 
155.400 - 155.412, 155.414 - 155.416


15-04
 
8-10-15
 
36.22, 36.42


15-05
 
8-24-15
 
92.15 - 92.25


15-06
 
8-10-15
 
T.S.O. V


15-07
 
9-14-15
 
155.210 - 155.215


15-14
 
12-29-15
 
35.02


16-02
 
3-28-16
 
36.08


16-04
 
5-23-16
 
54.02


16-05
 
6-13-16
 
T.S.O. I


16-06
 
5-23-16
 
98.04


16-09
 
6-27-16
 
53.37


16-10
 
6-27-16
 
36.07


16-17
 
11-14-16
 
50.05 - 50.14, 50.15, 50.22, 50.37, 50.39, 50.40, 50.42, 50.43


16-22
 
1-23-17
 
155.230, 155.231


17-08
 
8-14-17
 
34.06


17-10
 
8-14-17
 
90.01, 90.02, 90.11


17-11
 
9-12-17
 
50.05 - 50.11, 50.14


17-15
 
11-13-17
 
156.14


17-16
 
12-5-17
 
100.65


17-18
 
12-5-17
 
51.018, 51.023, 51.101


17-20
 
10-23-17
 
30.07


 
 
 
 
 




 


