
Mount Vernon, IN Code of Ordinances


TITLE I:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



   Chapter



      10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



CHAPTER 10:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section




   10.01   Short titles





   10.02   Interpretation





   10.03   Application to future ordinances





   10.04   Definitions





   10.05   Rules of construction





   10.06   Revivor; effect of amendment or repeal





   10.07   Construction of section references





   10.08   Conflicting provisions





   10.09   Severability





   10.10   Reference to offices





   10.11   Errors and omissions





   10.12   Ordinances repealed





   10.13   Ordinances unaffected





   10.14   Altering code prohibited





   10.15   Offenses punishable under separate provisions





   10.16   Historical and statutory references










   10.99   General penalty




§ 10.01  SHORT TITLES.



   (A)   All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the
municipality as revised, codified, rearranged, renumbered, and consolidated
into component codes, titles, chapters, and sections shall be known and
designated as the Mt. Vernon Code of Ordinances for which designation
“codified ordinances” or “code” may be substituted. Code, title,
chapter, and section headings do not constitute any part of the law as
contained in the code.



   (B)   All references to codes, titles, chapters, and sections are to
such components of the code unless otherwise specified.  Any component code
may be referred to and cited by its name, such as the “traffic code.” 
Sections may be referred to and cited by the designation “§” followed by
the number, such as “§ 10.01.”  Headings and captions used in this code
other than the title, chapter, and section numbers, are employed for
reference purposes only and shall not be deemed a part of the text of any
section.



§ 10.02  INTERPRETATION.



   (A)   Unless otherwise provided herein or by law or implication
required, the same rules of construction, definition, and application shall
govern the interpretation of this code of ordinances as those governing the
interpretation of the Indiana Code.



   (B)   Footnotes, cross-references, and other comments are by way of
explanation only and should not be deemed a part of the text of any section.



   (C)   All provisions of this code are limited in application to the
territorial boundaries of the municipal corporation unless otherwise
specifically provided. 



§ 10.03  APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.



   All provisions of Title I not incompatible with future legislation
shall apply to ordinances hereafter adopted which amend or supplement this
code unless otherwise specifically provided.



§ 10.04  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this code, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AND.  May be read OR, and OR may be read AND, if the sense requires it.



   CITY, MUNICIPAL CORPORATION, or MUNICIPALITY.  The municipality of Mt.
Vernon, Indiana.



   CORPORATE LIMITS or CITY LIMITS.  Legal boundaries of the city, except
as otherwise provided by law.



   COUNCIL.  The Common Council of Mt. Vernon, Indiana.



   COUNTY.  Posey County, Indiana.



   I.C.  Refers to the Indiana Code.



   MAY.  The act referred to is permissive.



   MAYOR.  The Mayor of the city.



   MONTH.  A calendar month.



   OATH.  Includes an affirmation.



   OWNER.  When applied to property, includes any part owner, joint
owner, or tenant in common of the whole or part of such property.



   PERSON.  Extends to and includes person, persons, firm, corporation,
copartnership, trustee, lessee, or receiver.  Whenever used in any clause
prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER as applied to
any unincorporated entity shall mean the partners or members thereof, and as
applied to corporations, the officers thereof.



   PERSONAL PROPERTY.  Includes all property except real property.



   PRECEDING or FOLLOWING.  Next before and next after, respectively.



   PREMISES.  As applied to property, includes land and buildings.



   PROPERTY.  Includes real, personal, and mixed estates and interests.



   PUBLIC AUTHORITY.  Includes boards of education; the municipal,
county, state, or federal government, its officers or an agency thereof; or
any duly authorized public official.



   PUBLIC PLACE.  Includes any street, sidewalk, park, cemetery, school
yard, body of water or watercourse, public conveyance, or any other place
open to the general public.



   REAL PROPERTY.  Includes lands, tenements, and hereditaments.



   REGISTERED MAIL.  Includes certified mail.



   SHALL.  The act referred to is mandatory.



   SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION.  The name of a person written or printed by
that person or a mark when the person cannot write.



   STATE.  The State of Indiana.



   SUBCHAPTER.  A division of a chapter, designated in this code by an
underlined heading in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the
body of the chapter, setting apart a group of sections related by the subject
matter of the heading.  Not all chapters have subchapters.



   TENANT or OCCUPANT.  As applied to premises, includes any person
holding a written or oral lease or who actually occupies the whole or any
part of such premises, alone or with others.



   WRITING.  Includes any representation of words, letters, or figures,
whether by printing or otherwise.



   YEAR.  A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed; equivalent to the
words YEAR OF OUR LORD.



§ 10.05  RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.



   The construction of all ordinances of this city shall be by the
following rules, unless such construction is plainly repugnant to the intent
of the legislative body or of the context of the same ordinance. 



   (A)   Words and phrases.  Words and phrases shall be taken in their
plain, ordinary, and usual sense.  However, technical words and phrases
having a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood
according to their technical import.



   (B)   Context.  As used in the code, unless the context otherwise
requires:



      (1)   The singular includes the plural, and the plural
includes the singular.



      (2)   Words of one gender include the other genders.



      (3)   Words in the present tense include the future.



   (C)   Computation of time.  In computing any period of time
prescribed or allowed this code, an order of a court, or by any applicable
statute, the day of the act, event, or default from which the designated
period of time begins to run shall not be included. The last day of the
period so computed is to be included unless it is:



      (1)   A Saturday;



      (2)   A Sunday;



      (3)   A legal holiday as defined by state statute; or



      (4)   A day the office in which the act is to be done is
closed during regular business hours.



      (5)   In any event, the period runs until the end of the next
day that is not a Saturday, a Sunday, a legal holiday, or a day on which the
office is closed.  When the period of time allowed is less than seven days,
intermediate Saturdays, Sundays, legal holidays, and days on which the office
is closed shall be excluded from the computations.  (Trial Rule 6(A))



   (D)   Act by assistants.  When a statute or ordinance requires an
act to be done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as the
principal, such requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of such act
by an authorized agent or deputy.



   (E)   General term.  A general term following specific enumeration
of terms is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so
limited.



   (F)   Joint authority.  Words importing joint authority to three or
more persons shall be construed as authority to a majority of such persons,
unless otherwise declared in the law giving such authority.



   (G)   Exceptions.  The rules of construction shall not apply to any
law which contains any express provision excluding such construction, or when
the subject matter or context of such law may be repugnant thereto.



§ 10.06  REVIVOR; EFFECT OF AMENDMENT OR REPEAL.



   (A)   The repeal of a repealing ordinance does not revive the
ordinance originally repealed.



   (B)   When a provision of the code is repealed or amended, the
repeal or amendment does not affect pending actions, prosecutions or
proceedings, civil or criminal.  When the repeal or amendment relates to the
remedy, it does not affect pending actions, prosecutions, or proceedings 
unless  so  expressed, nor  does  any repeal or amendment affect causes
of the action, prosecution, or proceeding existing at the time of the
amendment or repeal, unless otherwise expressly provided in the amending or
repealing law.



   (C)   When a provision of the code is repealed, the repeal does not:



      (1)   Affect any rights or liabilities which exist, have
accrued, or have been incurred by virtue of the repealed provision;



      (2)   Affect an action or proceeding for the enforcement of
any rights or liabilities existing or arising thereunder;



      (3)   Relieve any person from punishment for an act committed
in violation of the repealed provision; or



      (4)   Affect an indictment or prosecution for a violation of
the repealed provision.



   (D)   For the purposes of this section, the repealed provision shall
continue in full force and effect notwithstanding the repeal, provided this
does not affect the limitation of actions, prosecutions, or proceedings
imposed by any state statute.



§ 10.07  CONSTRUCTION OF SECTION REFERENCES.



   (A)   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section
hereof, such reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as
subsequently amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered unless the subject
matter is changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.



   (B)   Whenever in a penalty section reference is made to a violation
of a section or an inclusive group of sections, the reference shall be
construed to mean a violation of any provision of the section or sections
included in the reference.



   (C)   References in the code to action taken or authorized under
designated sections of the code include, in every case, action taken or
authorized under the applicable legislative provision which is superseded by
the code.



§ 10.08  CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.



   If the provisions of different codes, chapters, or sections of the
codified ordinances conflict with or contravene each other, the provisions
bearing the latest passage date shall prevail.  If the conflicting
provisions bear the same passage date, the conflict shall be construed so as
to be consistent with the meaning or legal effect of the subject matter taken
as a whole.



§ 10.09  SEVERABILITY.



   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its
application  to  any  person  or  circumstances  is  held invalid, the
invalidity does not affect other provisions that can be given effect without
the invalid provision or application.



§ 10.10  REFERENCE TO OFFICES.



   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer, or employee of the municipality exercising the powers,
duties, or functions contemplated in that provision, irrespective of any
transfer of functions or change in the official title of the functionary.



§ 10.11  ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.



   If a manifest error is discovered consisting of the misspelling of any
word or words, the omission of any word or words necessary to express the
intention of the provisions affected, the use of a word or words to which no
meaning can be attached, or the use of a word or words when another word or
words was clearly intended to express such intent, such spelling shall be
corrected, and such word or words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will
conform with the manifest intention, and the provision shall have the same
effect as though the correct words were contained in the text as originally
published.  No alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists
regarding the nature or extent of such error.



§ 10.12  ORDINANCES REPEALED.



   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated
and embraced.  All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by
this code shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this
code of ordinances.



§ 10.13  ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.



   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other
ordinances pertaining to subjects not enumerated and embraced in this code of
ordinances, shall remain in full force and effect unless herein repealed
expressly or by necessary implication.



§ 10.14  ALTERING CODE PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend, by
additions or deletions, any part or portion of this code, or to insert or
delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with this code in any
manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented
thereby.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 10.15  OFFENSES PUNISHABLE UNDER SEPARATE PROVISIONS.



   In all cases where the same offenses may be made punishable or may be
created by different clauses or sections of the ordinances of the city, the
prosecuting officer may elect under which to proceed, but not more than one
recovery shall be had against the same person for the same offense.



§ 10.16  HISTORICAL AND STATUTORY REFERENCES.



   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and
passage date of the original ordinance, and the most recent three amending
ordinances, if any, are listed following the text of the code section. 
Example:  (Ord. 10, passed 5-l3-60; Am. Ord. l5, passed 1-1-70; Am. Ord. 20,
passed 1-1-80; Am. Ord. 25, passed 1-1-85)



   (B)   If an I.C. cite is included in the history, this indicates
that the text of the section reads word- for-word the same as the statute. 
Example:  (I.C. 36-4-5-3) (Ord. 10, passed 1-17-80; Am. Ord. 20, passed
1-1-85).  If an I.C. cite is set forth as a “statutory reference”
following the text of the section, this indicates that the reader should
refer to that statute for further information.



Example:



§ 31.10  MAYOR.
   The executive authority of the city shall be vested in and exercised by
the Mayor.



(Ord. 10, passed l-l-80)



Statutory reference:



   For powers and duties of the Mayor, see I.C. 36-4-5-3



§ 10.99  GENERAL PENALTY.



   Where an act or omission is prohibited or declared unlawful in this
code of ordinances and no penalty is otherwise provided, the offender shall
be fined not more than $2,500 for each offense or violation.  A separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day that a violation occurs or
continues.



TITLE III:  ADMINISTRATION



   Chapter



      30.   ESTABLISHMENT OF EXECUTIVE AND LEGISLATIVE BRANCHES



      31.   CITY OFFICIALS



      32.   COMMON COUNCIL



      33.   DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS, AND COMMISSIONS



      34.   EMPLOYEE REGULATIONS



      35.   CITY FUNDS



      36.   CITY POLICIES



CHAPTER 30:  ESTABLISHMENT OF EXECUTIVE AND LEGISLATIVE BRANCHES



Section



   30.01   Organization



   30.02   Executive branch



   30.03   Legislative branch



§ 30.01  ORGANIZATION.



   (A)   Pursuant to I.C. 36-4-4-2, the government of the city shall
consist of two branches, those being:



      (1)   Executive branch (I.C. 36-4-5).



      (2)   Legislative branch (I.C. 36-4-6).



   (B)   Duties and powers that are legislative in nature shall be
performed and exercised by the Common Council pursuant to I.C. 36-4-6 and
other applicable statutes and ordinances.



   (C)   Powers and duties that are administrative or executive in
nature shall be exercised or performed by the Mayor, or a board, department,
or commission of the city.



(Ord. 83-23, passed 8-22-83)



§ 30.02  EXECUTIVE BRANCH.



   (A)   The Mayor is the city executive and head of the executive
branch.  The Mayor shall perform the duties and responsibilities prescribed
by I.C. 36-4-5, other statutes of the state, and ordinances of the city.



   (B)   The following boards, commissions, and departments are hereby
established within the executive branch:



      (1)   Board of Public Works and Safety.  The Board of Public
Works and Safety shall be the chief administrative body of the city and shall
have control of the day-to-day operations of the following executive
departments which are hereby established:  the Police Department, the Fire
Department, the Wastewater Treatment Department, and the Street and
Sanitation Department.



         (a)   The Board may, by resolution, delegate to the
Mayor the authority to manage the day- to-day operations and supervise the
personnel of the above-named departments.



         (b)   The Board shall consist of the Mayor, and if state
law permits, two members of the Common Council appointed by the Mayor. If
members of the Common Council are prohibited from serving on the Board, the
remaining two members shall be appointed by the Mayor as permitted by law. 
Members of the Board shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor.



         (c)   The Board shall regularly meet not less than twice
per month at those times and places as the Board may set.  The Mayor or the
other two members may call special meetings of the Board.



      (2)   Park and Recreation Department.  A Park and Recreation
Department controlled and operated by a Park and Recreation Board is hereby
established according to I.C. 36-10-3, which shall be operated as an extended
Park and Recreation Department in the unincorporated areas of Black Township
pursuant to I.C. 36-10-3-36.



      (3)   Fiscal Department.  The Clerk-Treasurer shall be the
head of the Fiscal Department and the chief fiscal officer of the city, and
shall have the powers and duties prescribed for a Clerk-Treasurer of a
third-class city by I.C. 36-4-10 and other statutes.  The Clerk-Treasurer
shall have the authority to designate the number and classification of
employees of the Fiscal Department and the Clerk-Treasurer’s office and to
determine the compensation for those employees, subject to the appropriations
for that compensation.



      (4)   Department of Law.  A Department of Law is hereby
established pursuant to I.C. 36-4-9-12.  The head of the Department of Law
shall be the City Attorney who shall be appointed by and serve at the
pleasure of the Mayor.



      (5)   Department of Economic Development.  Sections 33.045
through 33.052 establishing an Economic Development Commission are
incorporated herein and adopted by reference.



      (6)   Commission on Human Relations.  A Commission on Human
Relations is hereby created.  The purpose of the Commission shall be to hear
and investigate grievances against city government when those grievances are
based on age, sex, race, ethnic, or religious discrimination and to advise
the Mayor, Board of Public Works and Safety, or Common Council as to the
resolution of those grievances. The number of members of the Commission shall
be determined by the Mayor and the members shall be appointed by the Mayor
and serve at his pleasure.  The members of the Commission shall elect from
their number a president and secretary.



      (7)   Mayor’s Youth Advisory Council.  A Youth Advisory
Council to consult with city officials concerning matters of mutual interest
to the city and its young people is hereby established as described in §§
33.090 and 33.091, and the Mayor is authorized to appoint members to the
Youth Advisory Council as he sees fit.  The members so appointed shall serve
at the pleasure of the Mayor and shall select from their number a chairperson
and a secretary.



      (8)   Water Utility Board.  The provisions of §§ 33.135 and
33.136 establishing the members of the Common Council as a Water Utility
Board for the purpose of managing the city-owned water utility are hereby
ratified and confirmed.



      (9)   Parking Meter Department.  A Parking Meter Department
is hereby established to administer and operate any parking meters in the
city as may be established by the traffic code.  The head of the Department
and the employees thereof shall be appointed by the Mayor and serve at his
pleasure.



      (10)   Statutory boards and commissions.  The city shall have:



         (a)   A Police Pension Board of Trustees to perform the
duties established by I.C. 36-8-6 and I.C. 36-8-8, which shall be constituted
and governed as prescribed by statute.



         (b)   A Firefighters’ Pension Board of Trustees to
perform the duties set forth in I.C. 36-8-7 and I.C. 36-8-8 is hereby
established.



         (c)   Any other boards and commissions required by
statute with those boards having the duties and being constituted as
prescribed by statute.



   (C)   The heads of the departments named in division (B) (1), (2),
and (4) of this section shall be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of
the Mayor, subject to the provisions of applicable statutes.  However, the
Mayor’s appointment of a department head shall be subject to the approval
of any statutory board or commission established within the department as set
forth in I.C. 36-4-9-2(a).



   (D)   The boards and commissions designated in this section to
control certain departments shall have the authority to:



      (1)   Designate the number, classifications, duties, and
compensation of employees within the designated departments provided that in
fixing compensation, such boards and commissions shall have no authority to
exceed amounts appropriated for compensation of employees of that department;



      (2)   Appoint and discharge employees except the heads of
those departments; and



      (3)   Delegate to the department head the authority to hire or
discharge employees.



   (E)   If no board or commission is assigned the responsibility by
this chapter or by statute for a department within the city, the department
shall be under the control and supervision of the Mayor.



(Ord. 83-23; passed 8-22-83; Am. Ord. 84-4, passed 3-26-84; Am. Ord. 85-8,
passed 2-25-85)



§ 30.03  LEGISLATIVE BRANCH.



   (A)   The legislative branch of the city is the Common Council. The
Council shall have exclusive authority to adopt ordinances and appropriate
tax moneys received by the city, and to perform other necessary and desirable
legislative functions (I.C. 36-4-6).



   (B)   The Clerk-Treasurer shall be the Clerk of the Council and
shall perform the duties prescribed by I.C. 36-4-6-9 and such others as the
Council may direct.



   (C)   The regular meeting date and time for the Common Council shall
be immediately following the Water Utility Board meeting alternating
Thursdays which coincide with the regularly scheduled meeting of the Board of
Public Works and Safety. A regular meeting may be re-scheduled due to
holidays or other conflicts, upon motion and approval of the Council and
proper notice under I.C. 5-14. However, at least one regular meeting shall be
held each month.  Special meetings are to be held on the call of the Mayor,
or on call of two or more members of the Council, or on any other call as may
be provided for by the rules. In the event a special meeting is called,
members of the Council and the Presiding Officer must be provided with actual
notice, written or personally, of the special meeting at least 48 hours prior
to the special meeting time.



   (D)   The Mayor shall be the Presiding Officer of the Council
pursuant to I.C. 36-4-6-8, and meetings shall be conducted pursuant to the
applicable statutes (I.C. 36-4-6-10 through 36-4-6-17) and in accordance with
the following rules which are hereby adopted as a part of this chapter.  At
Council’s first regular meeting of each calendar year held pursuant to I.C.
36-4-6-7, the Council shall choose from its members a President Pro Tempore
to preside whenever the Mayor is absent.



      (1)   Common Council agenda.  The order of business to be
followed at a meeting of the Common Council shall be as listed below.
However, the Council may by an affirmative vote of two-thirds of the members
suspend or change the order of business.  Failure to adhere to the order of
business or agenda shall not invalidate any action of the Council.



         (a)   Call to order.



         (b)   Presentation of minutes of previous meeting and
approval.



         (c)   Reports and comments:



            1.   Superintendents or department heads.



            2.   Committee reports and discussion.



            3.   Financial report (first meeting of month).



            4.   Communications.



         (d)   Legal (ordinances, resolutions, contracts, and the
like).



         (e)   Presentations from audience and discussion.



         (f)   Old business.



         (g)   New business.



         (h)   District reports and comments.



         (i)   Mayor’s announcements.



         (j)   Adjournment.



      (2)   Contempt and disorder in the Councilroom.  No person
shall use violent or contemptuous language, behave in a disorderly manner, or
refuse to obey the orders of the Mayor or Presiding Officer in the Council
room while Council is in session.  The Mayor or Presiding Officer shall have
the authority to order the removal of any disruptive person.



      (3)   Introduction and adoption of ordinances and resolutions.



         (a)   Any ordinance/resolution to be considered by
Council shall be filed with the Clerk- Treasurer by noon two business days
prior to the day of the Council meeting (i.e. Thursday at noon for a Monday
Council meeting).  No ordinance/resolution will be entertained for first
reading if not timely filed with the Clerk-Treasurer unless the Council
determines that an emergency exists requiring immediate action.  The
Clerk-Treasurer shall provide a copy of any ordinance/resolution filed with
him or her to each Council member, the Mayor, and the head of the city
department affected by the ordinance/resolution, if any.  A proposed
ordinance/resolution shall also note on its face the “anticipated fiscal
impact” of the ordinance/resolution, if adopted.



         (b)   All ordinances shall also be available to those
members of Council in attendance and shall be read or announced by title or
subject matter before submission to Council for a vote.



         (c)   Each ordinance shall be submitted to vote  of the
Council at three meetings.  However, this rule may be suspended to permit
final passage with less than three meetings if Council complies with the
provisions of I.C. 36-4-6-13.



         (d)   Resolutions shall be subject to the same rules and
method of introduction as ordinances, except that resolutions may be adopted
upon affirmative vote of a majority of the members of Council at the first
meeting at which the resolution is presented for a vote.



         (e)   On the passage or adoption of any ordinance or
resolution the yeas and nays shall be taken and entered in the record, and
the ordinance shall be processed in accordance with I.C. 36-4-6-14 through
36-4-6-17.



         (f)   A Councilmember abstaining shall be counted as
present for determining a quorum but for all other purposes an abstention
shall be treated as if the Councilmember abstaining had not been present for
the vote.



         (g)   An ordinance, order, or resolution passed by the
Council is considered adopted when it is signed by the Presiding Officer and
either approved by the Mayor or passed over the Mayor’s veto by the
Council, under I.C. 36-4-6-16.  If required by statute, an adopted
ordinance, order, or resolution must be promulgated or published before it
takes effect.



            1.   An ordinance prescribing a penalty or
forfeiture for a violation must, before it takes effect, be published in the
manner prescribed by I.C. 5-3-1 unless:



               a.   It is published under division 2.
below; or



               b.   There is an urgent necessity requiring
its immediate effectiveness, the Mayor proclaims the urgent necessity, and
copies of the ordinance are posted in three public places in each of the
districts from which members are elected to the legislative body.



            2.   If the city publishes any of its ordinances
in book or pamphlet form, no other publication is required.  If an ordinance
prescribing a penalty or forfeiture for a violation is published under this
division, it takes effect two weeks after the publication of the book or
pamphlet.  Publication under this division, if authorized by the Council,
constitutes presumptive evidence:



               a.   Of the ordinances in the book or
pamphlet;



               b.   Of the date of adoption of the
ordinances; and



               c.   That the ordinances have been properly
signed, attested, recorded and approved.



            3.   This publication procedure does not apply to
a zoning ordinance or amendment to a zoning ordinance or a resolution
approving a comprehensive plan that is adopted under I.C. 36-7.



            4.   An ordinance increasing a building permit fee
on new development must:



               a.   Be published:



                  (i)   One time in accordance with I.C.
5-3-1; and



                  (ii)   Not later than 30 days after
the ordinance is adopted by the legislative body in accordance with I.C.
5-3-1.



               b.   Delay the implementation of the fee
increase for 90 days after the date the ordinance is published under division
4.a.



         (h)   Within a reasonable time after an ordinance of the
Council is adopted, the Clerk- Treasurer shall record it in a book kept for
that purpose.  The record must include the following.  The record or a
certified copy of it constitutes presumptive evidence of the adoption of the
ordinance.



            1.   The signature of the Presiding Officer.



            2.   The attestation of the Clerk.



            3.   The Mayor’s approval or veto of the
ordinance.



            4.   If applicable, a memorandum of the passage of
the ordinance over the veto.



            5.   The date of each recorded item.



      (4)   Questions of order.  The Mayor or Presiding Officer
shall decide all questions of order.  He shall decide whether any question
submitted to Council for adoption or rejection is decided in the affirmative
or negative.



      (5)   Parliamentary procedure.  For procedural matters not
otherwise controlled by terms of this chapter, Council shall conduct its
business in accordance with Robert’s Rules of Order.



   (E)   Council shall be composed of five members, four of whom are
elected from districts and one of whom is elected at large.  The provisions
of Chapter 32 with respect to Councilmanic districts is hereby ratified and
confirmed.  Redistricting shall hereafter be done in accordance with I.C.
36-4-6-4 and 36-4-6-5, or other applicable statute.



(Ord. 83-23, passed 8-22-83; Am. Ord. 07-05, passed 2-26-07; Am. Ord. 12-12,
passed 6-25-12)



CHAPTER 31:  CITY OFFICIALS



Section



General Provisions



   31.01   Defense and indemnification of officials and employees



   31.02   Blanket bond or criminal insurance policy



   31.03   Nepotism and contracts with related persons and entities



City Officials



   31.25   Building Commissioner



   31.26   City Attorney



   31.27   Clerk-Treasurer



   31.28   Mayor



   31.29   Code Enforcement Officer



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 31.01  DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION OF OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES.



   (A)   For the purpose of this section the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      (1)   BOARD.  The Board of Public Works and Safety.



      (2)   CLAIM.  A demand for payment of money for injuries and
damages alleged to be the result of an act or omission of an official or
employee of the city, within the scope of duties and responsibilities of that
official or employee.



      (3)   EMPLOYEE.  A person who works for salary or wages for
the city, whose employment position is provided for by salary ordinance of
Council, including persons employed by city-owned water and sewer
utilities.  Both former and present employees are included in this
definition.  Independent contractors are specifically excluded from this
definition.



      (4)   OFFICIAL.  A person holding an elective office in the
city or a person duly appointed by Council, the Mayor, or the Board of Public
Works and Safety as a member of a board, committee, commission, authority, or
other instrumentality, to serve with or without compensation.  Former and
present officials are included in this definition.



      (5)   SCOPE OF DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.  The range of
duties and responsibilities of an official or employee imposed by law or
reasonably necessary to perform the duties and responsibilities imposed by
law or the employee’s supervisor.



   (B)   The city shall provide a defense of claims and lawsuits for
injuries and damages against officials or employees alleged to have arisen
out of acts or omissions within the scope of duties and responsibilities of
the officials or employees, provided those acts or omissions were not the
result of deliberate intention to contravene the scope of duties and
responsibilities of the officials or employees and further provided that the
acts or omissions do not constitute criminal acts or omissions.



      (1)   Such defense can be furnished by means of liability
insurance, by representation by the duly appointed City Attorney, by the city
retaining an attorney specifically for the purpose of the defense, or by any
combination of aforesaid means.



      (2)   There shall be no reimbursement of defense expenses
incurred by an official or employee without the prior written consent and
approval of the Board to incur those expenses.  Litigation expenses deemed
necessary by the City Attorney or other attorney retained by the city to
provide a defense shall be reimbursed only if incurred with the prior written
consent and approval of the Board.



   (C)   The city shall indemnify any official or employee for all sums
which the official or employee becomes legally obligated to pay by reason of
judgment, compromise, or settlement as a result of a claim and lawsuit for
injuries and damages provided the act or omission resulting in the judgment,
compromise, or settlement would be eligible for the furnishing of a defense
as provided in this section and provided the Board has approved any
compromise or settlement agreement.



   (D)   The provisions of this section for defense and indemnification
do not include legal services or expenses for maintaining a counterclaim,
maintaining a lawsuit for malicious prosecution, or for any other lawsuit on
behalf of an official or employee.



   (E)   The defense and indemnification provisions of this section
shall be applicable regardless of whether the city or any of its departments,
agencies, or utilities is a party to the claim or lawsuit and regardless of
whether the official or employee may be held liable as an individual for the
alleged act or omission which is the subject matter of the claim for lawsuit
for injuries and damages, except in those instances in which the claim arose
out of criminal acts or omissions of the official or employee.



   (F)   (1)   The provisions of this section for defense and
indemnification shall be applicable, in addition to claims and lawsuits for
injuries and damages alleging an act or omission of an official or employee,
to claims and lawsuits for injuries and damages against an official or
employee alleging an act or omission of another person, corporation, or other
entity.



      (2)   The Board shall have the sole and exclusive authority to
determine if any adverse judgment is to be appealed to a higher court.  In
the event of any appeal, either by the plaintiff or by the defendant, the
city shall provide attorney services and experience under the same terms as
provided in division (B) of this section concerning defense.



   (G)   Any official or employee against whom a claim for injuries and
damages is made or lawsuit for injuries and damages is filed shall notify the
Board of the details of the claim or lawsuit for injuries and damages in
writing within two business days after becoming aware of the making of the
claim or the filing of the lawsuit to be eligible for the defense and
indemnification provisions of this section unless the Board specifically
waives the notice requirement in writing.



   (H)   Any official or employee has the right to waive, in writing,
the provisions of this section in its entirety and to provide his own defense
at his own expense and to provide his own payment of judgments, compromises,
or settlements.



(Ord. 82-2, passed 2-8-82)



§ 31.02  BLANKET BOND OR CRIMINAL INSURANCE POLICY.



   The City of Mount Vernon, Indiana, Common Council, the fiscal body of
the city, authorizes the purchase of a blanket bond or crime insurance policy
endorsed to include faithful performance to cover the faithful performance of
all employees, commission members, and persons acting on behalf of the local
government unit, including those officers described in I.C. 5-4-1-18(a), in
lieu of the purchase of individual surety bonds for each officer, employees
and commission members.



(Ord. 12-20, passed 10-4-12)



§ 31.03  NEPOTISM AND CONTRACTS WITH RELATED PERSONS AND ENTITIES.



   (A)   Applicability.



      (1)   The City of Mt. Vernon, Indiana hereby adopts a policy
concerning nepotism and contracts with related individuals and entities. This
policy shall apply to the city, its boards, departments and utilities (city
or unit).



      (2)   The minimum standards set forth in I.C. 36-1-20.2 and
I.C. 36-1-21 are hereby adopted by reference.



      (3)   An individual who is employed by the city on July 1,
2012, is not subject to this policy unless the individual has a break in
employment with the city. The following are not considered a break in
employment with the city:



         (a)   The individual is absent from the workplace while
on paid or unpaid leave, including vacation, sick, or family medical leave,
or worker’s compensation.



         (b)   The individual’s employment with the city is
terminated followed by immediate reemployment by the city, without loss of
payroll time.



      (4)   For purposes of this policy, the performance of the
duties of:



         (a)   A precinct election officer (as defined in I.C.
3-5-2-40.1) that are imposed by I.C. 3; or



         (b)   A volunteer firefighter;



      is not considered employment by the city.



   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      DIRECT LINE OF SUPERVISION.  An elected officer or employee who
is in a position to affect the terms and conditions of another individual’s
employment, including making decisions about work assignments, compensation,
grievances, advancement, or performance evaluation. The term does not include
the responsibilities of the executive, legislative body, or fiscal body of a
unit, as provided by law, to make decisions regarding salary ordinances,
budgets, or personnel policies of the unit.



      ELECTED OFFICIAL.



         (a)   The executive or a member of the executive body of
the city;



         (b)   A member of the legislative body of the city; or



         (c)   A member of the fiscal body of the city.



      EMPLOYED.  An individual who is employed by the city on a
full-time, part-time, temporary, intermittent, or hourly basis. The term does
not include an individual who holds only an elected office. The term includes
an individual who is a party to an employment contract with the city.



      MEMBER OF THE FIRE DEPARTMENT.  The Fire Chief or a firefighter
appointed to the department.



      MEMBER OF THE POLICE DEPARTMENT.  The Police Chief or a police
officer appointed to the department.



      RELATIVE. 



         (a)   Any of the following:



            1.   A spouse.



            2.   A parent or stepparent.



            3.   A child or stepchild.



            4.   A brother, sister, stepbrother, or stepsister.



            5.   A niece or nephew.



            6.   An aunt or uncle.



            7.   A daughter-in-law or son-in-law.



         (b)   For purposes of this section, an adopted child of
an individual is treated as a natural child of the individual.



         (c)   For purposes of this section, the terms
“brother” and “sister” include a brother or sister by the half blood.



   (C)   Nepotism policy.



      (1)   Individuals who are relatives may not be employed by the
city in a position that results in one relative being in the direct line of
supervision of the other relative.



      (2)   (a)   This section applies to an individual who:



            1.   Is employed by the city on the date the
individual’s relative begins serving a term of an elected office of the
unit; and



            2.   Is not exempt from the application of this
chapter under the applicability section of this policy.



         (b)   An individual may remain employed by the city and
maintain the individual’s position or rank even if the individual’s
employment would violate division (C)(1) of this section.



         (c)   An individual described in division (C)(2)(b) of
this section may not:



            1.   Be promoted to a position; or



            2.   Be promoted to a position that is not within
the merit ranks, in the case of an individual who is a member of a merit
police department or merit fire department;



            if the new position would violate division (C)(1) of
this section.



      (3)   This policy does not abrogate or affect an employment
contract with the city that:



         (a)   An individual is a party to; and



         (b)   Is in effect on the date the individual’s
relative begins serving a term of an elected office of the city.



   (D)   Policy for municipal contracts with related individuals or
entities.



      (1)   The city may enter into a contract or renew a contract
for the procurement of goods and services or a contract for public works with:



         (a)   An individual who is a relative of an elected
official; or



         (b)   A business entity that is wholly or partially
owned by a relative of an elected official;



         only if the requirements of this section are satisfied and
the elected official does not violate I.C. 35-44-1-3.



      (2)   The city may enter into a contract or renew a contract
with an individual or business entity described in division (D)(1) of this
section if:



         (a)   The elected official files with the unit a full
disclosure, which must:



            1.   Be in writing;



            2.   Describe the contract or purchase to be made
by the unit;



            3.   Describe the relationship that the elected
official has to the individual or business entity that contracts or purchases;



            4.   Be affirmed under penalty of perjury;



            5.   Be submitted to the legislative body of the
unit and be accepted by the legislative body in a public meeting of the unit
prior to final action on the contract or purchase; and



            6.   Be filed, not later than 15 days after final
action on the contract or purchase, with:



               (i)   The State Board of Accounts; and



               (ii)   The Clerk of the Posey Circuit Court;



         (b)   The appropriate agency of the unit;



            1.   Makes a certified statement that the contract
amount or purchase price was the lowest amount or price bid or offered; or



            2.   Makes a certified statement of the reasons
why the vendor or contractor was selected; and



         (c)   The city satisfies any other requirements under
I.C. 5-22 or I.C. 36-1-12.



      (3)   An elected official shall also comply with the
disclosure provisions of I.C. 35-44-1-3, if applicable.



      (4)   This section does not affect the initial term of a
contract in existence at the time the term of office of the elected official
of the unit begins.



   (E)   Compliance with policy.



      (1)   Each elected officer of the city shall annually certify
in writing, subject to the penalties for perjury, that the officer is in
compliance with this chapter. An officer shall submit the certification to
the executive of the city not later than December 31 of each year.



      (2)   The annual report filed by the city with the State Board
of Accounts under I.C. 5-11-13-1 must include a statement by the executive of
the unit stating that the city has adopted a policy under I.C. 36-1-20.2 and
I.C. 36-1-21.



(Res. 12-11, passed 6-11-2012)



CITY OFFICIALS



§ 31.25  BUILDING COMMISSIONER.



   For provisions concerning the Building Commissioner, see § 150.03.



§ 31.26  CITY ATTORNEY.



   For provisions concerning the City Attorney, see § 30.02(B)(4).



§ 31.27  CLERK-TREASURER.



   For provisions concerning the Clerk-Treasurer, see §§ 30.02(B)(3) and
30.03(B).



§ 31.28  MAYOR.



   For provisions concerning the Mayor, see §§ 30.02(A) and 30.03(D).



§ 31.29  CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.



   (A)   The Board of Public Works and Safety now provides for the
appointment of an individual as a special police officer to perform the
duties of Code Enforcement Officer within the city. Hereinafter this officer
shall be referred to as the Code Enforcement Officer.



   (B)   The Code Enforcement Officer shall serve at the pleasure of
the Board and may be removed by the Board at any time without notice and
without assigning any cause.



   (C)   The Code Enforcement Officer shall serve under the supervision
of the Police Chief. The Code Enforcement Officer shall obey all laws of the
State of Indiana and all ordinances and resolutions of the city, and all
rules, regulations and SOPs of the Mt. Vernon Police Department as they apply
to the duties authorized herein.



   (D)   The Code Enforcement Officer may be provided and wear a
uniform and be assigned identification so long as it is easily
distinguishable from the uniform of City of Mt. Vernon, Posey County and
State of Indiana regular police officers.



   (E)   The Code Enforcement Officer shall have the authority to
investigate and take all actions necessary to enforce all provisions of the
city ordinances, and duly adopted ordinances and resolutions. These powers
and duties shall not be exclusive to the Code Enforcement Officer. The Code
Enforcement Officer shall also have the power to run vehicle verification,
title and registrations, identification, and driver's license verifications
through agencies holding and records containing said information, including,
but not limited to the Indiana Bureau of Motor Vehicles and IDACS, during and
in the course of performing the Officer's duties. The Code Enforcement
Officer shall have all powers, privileges, and duties established by the job
description adopted by the Board for the Code Enforcement Officer position.



   (F)   The compensation of the Code Enforcement Officer shall be set
by the city's annual salary ordinance.



(Res. 2018-13, passed 5-10-18)



CHAPTER 32: COMMON COUNCIL



Section



Councilmanic Seats and Districts



   32.01   Composition



   32.02   Boundaries



Public Purchases



   32.20   Designation of purchasing agencies and purchasing agents



   32.21   Rules and policies regulating public purchases



   32.22   Purchase of services



   32.23   Competitive bidding



   32.24   Small purchases



   32.25   Request for proposals and special purchasing methods



   32.26   Evidence of financial responsibility



   32.27   Promotion of purchase of supplies manufactured in the United
States



   32.28   Modification and termination of contracts



Cross-reference:



   Common Council as the legislative branch of the city, see § 30.03



   Purchase and identification of city vehicles, see §§ 36.60 et seq.



COUNCILMANIC SEATS AND DISTRICTS



§ 32.01  COMPOSITION.



   The legislative body of the city shall be composed of five members,
four of whom shall be elected from districts as established by § 32.02 and
one of whom shall be elected at large.



(Ord. 82-5, passed 2-22-82)



§ 32.02  BOUNDARIES.



   The boundaries of the Councilmanic districts in the city shall be as
follows:



   (A)   District 1 shall be described as an area consisting generally
of the south part of the city and shall be bounded by the Ohio River to the
south; beginning at a point where Parke Street, if extended, would intersect
with the Ohio River; thence in a northerly direction along Parke Street;
thence east along the center line of Fourth Street to Venice Avenue; thence
in a northeasterly direction to West Fifth Street; thence along the center
line of West Fifth Street, to Vine Street; thence along the center line of
Vine Street in a northerly direction to Seventh Street; thence along the
center line of Seventh Street to Main Street; thence in a southerly direction
along the center line of Main Street to Fifth Street; thence in an easterly
direction along the center line of Fifth Street to Tile Factory Road; thence
along Tile Factory Road to Fourth Street; thence in an easterly direction
along Fourth Street to Old Highway 62; thence along the city limits to
McFadden Creek between Old Highway 61 and State Highway 62; thence south
along said creek to State Highway 62; thence west along the city limits to
State Street; thence south along State Street and State Street extended and
Elm Street to Bluff Road being the city limits; thence west along the city
limit/Ohio River to the point of beginning being Parke Street extended. 
District 1 shall include precincts 5, 9 and 13 in the City of Mt. Vernon,
Indiana.



   (B)   District 2 shall be described as an area consisting generally
of the northeast part of the city beginning at the northeast corner of Fifth
Street and North Main Street; thence north along the center line of Main
Street to the north city limit; thence east and south along the north
boundary of the city limits to Tile Factory Road; thence north along Tile
Factory Road to the city limit; thence east and continuing along the north
and east city limit encompassing all sections of this Country Terrace
Subdivision and outlots returning to Tile Factory Road; thence south along
Tile Factory Road to Fifth Street; thence in a westerly direction along the
center line of Fifth Street to Main Street being the point of beginning. 
District 2 shall include precincts 6 and 8 in the City of Mt. Vernon, Indiana.



   (C)   District 3 shall be described as an area consisting generally
of the west part of the city beginning at the intersection of Parke Street
and Highway 62; thence west along the city limit which lies south of Highway
62, to the west boundary of the city limit being the western boundary of
Lakeview Place Subdivision, all sections, and extending north along the city
limits; thence east across Western Hills Drive; thence Southeast to Country
Club Road; thence along the city limits and the outer boundary of Park Ridge
Subdivision, all sections, and Country Club Estates, all sections, to Smith
Road; thence east and South along the city limits to O'Donnell Road; thence
east to Wolflin Street; thence south along the center line of Wolflin Street
to West Eighth Street; thence along the center line of West Eighth Street to
Pearl Street if it was extended; thence south along the center line of Pearl
Street as if extended to West Seventh Street thence east to Vine Street;
thence south along the center tine of Vine Street to Fifth Street; thence
west along the center line of Fifth Street to Venice Avenue; thence south
along the center line of Venice Avenue to Fourth Street/Highway 62; thence
west to the intersection of Parke Street and Highway 62, the point of
beginning.  District 3 shall include precincts 7 and 11 in the City of Mt.
Vernon, Indiana.



   (D)   District 4 shall be described as an area consisting generally
of the northwest part of the city beginning at the intersection of Seventh
Street and Main Street; thence west along the center line of Seventh Street
to Pearl Street, as if extended; thence running in a northerly direction
along the center line of Pearl Street, as if extended, to Eighth Street;
thence west along the center line of Eighth Street to Wolflin Street, then
north along the center line of Woflin Street to O'Donnell Road; thence east
along the city limits to  Lower New Harmony Road; thence north and northwest
along Lower New Harmony Road including real estate within the city limits
south and north of Lower New Harmony Road representing the city limit; thence
north along the city limit near Westwood Drive; thence east along the city
limits near Melody Lane; thence south along the city limits near Grenada
Street; thence east along the city limits near Roosevelt Drive to North Main
Street; thence south along the center line of Main Street to Seventh Street,
the point of beginning.  District 4 shall include precincts 10 and 12 in the
City of Mt. Vernon, Indiana.



(Ord. 82-5, passed 2-22-82; Am. Ord. 83-4, passed l-24-83; Am. Ord. 90-30,
passed 9-24-90; Am. Ord. 92-47, passed 11-23-92; Am. Ord. 02-26, passed
10-14-02)



PUBLIC PURCHASES



§ 32.20  DESIGNATION OF PURCHASING AGENCIES AND PURCHASING AGENTS.



   (A)   Governing Body.  The Common Council is designated as the
governing body for purposes of the purchasing statute.



   (B)   Purchasing Agencies.



      (1)   The Board of Public Works and Safety is hereby
designated as the Purchasing Agency for the City of Mt. Vernon, with all of
the powers and duties authorized under I.C. 5-22.  This designation does not
apply to the City of Mt. Vernon Water Department, the Mt. Vernon Water
Department, the Mt. Vernon Housing Authority and the municipal wastewater
treatment plant for treatment expenditures, which are not subject to the
public purchasing statutes.



      (2)   The Mt. Vernon-Black Township Park and Recreation Board
is the Purchasing Agency for the Park and Recreation Department.



   (C)   Purchasing Agents.



      (1)   The purchasing agents shall include the Mayor,
Clerk-Treasurer, and department head for which the purchase is being made.



      (2)   The purchasing agencies may also designated, from time
to time, in writing, additional purchasing agents as necessary.



(Ord. 98-06, passed 6-22-98)



§ 32.21  RULES AND REGULATIONS REGULATING PUBLIC PURCHASES.



   (A)   Adoption of Rules.  The Common Council may adopt written
rules concerning public purchases, which:



      (1)   Supplement I.C. 5-22;



      (2)   Are not inconsistent with I.C. 5-22.



   (B)   Adoption of Policies.  The Board of Public Works and Safety
and the Mt. Vernon-Black Township Park and Recreation Board may adopt written
policies concerning public purchases, which:



      (1)   Supplement I.C. 5-22 and the rules adopted by the Common
Council;



      (2)   Are not inconsistent with I.C. 5-22 and the rules
adopted by the Common Council.



(Ord. 98-06, passed 6-22-98)



§ 32.22  PURCHASE OF SERVICES.



   (A)   Definition.  For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



   SERVICE has the definition set forth in I.C. 5-22-2-30, as may be
amended from time to time.



   (B)   Manner of Purchase.  A purchasing agent or the purchasing
agency may purchase services using any procedure the purchaser considers
appropriate and reasonable.



(Ord. 98-06, passed 6-22-98)



§ 32.23  COMPETITIVE BIDDING.



   Compliance with I.C. 5-22-7; Rules and Policies.



   (A)   When competitive bidding is required, the purchasing agent
shall comply with I.C. 5-22-7.



   (B)   The purchasing agency may adopt written policies concerning
the following:



      (1)   Correction or withdrawal of inadvertently erroneous bids
before or after award; or



      (2)   Cancellation of awards or contracts based on
inadvertently erroneous bid.



(Ord. 98-06, passed 6-22-98)



§ 32.24  SMALL PURCHASES.



   (A)   Purchases less than $50,000. The purchasing agent may purchase
supplies with an estimated cost of less than $50,000 on the open market
without inviting quotes or receiving quotes or bids.



   (B)   Purchases of at least $50,000 and less than $150,000.



      (1)   A purchasing agent may purchase supplies with an
estimated cost of at least $50,000 and less than $150,000 by inviting quotes
from at least three persons or entities known to deal in the lines or classes
of supplies to be purchased. This process shall be referred to as requesting
“quotes”.



      (2)   The purchasing agent shall mail or deliver an invitation
to quote to the perspective offeror at least seven days before the time fixed
for receiving quotes. The quotes shall be opened publicly.



      (3)   If the purchasing agent receives a satisfactory quote,
the purchasing agent shall award a contract to the lowest responsible and
responsive offeror for each line or class of supplies required.



      (4)   The purchasing agent may reject all quotes.



      (5)   If the purchasing agent does not receive a quote from a
responsible and responsive offeror, the purchasing agent may purchase the
supplies on the open market.



(Ord. 98-06, passed 6-22-98; Am. Ord. 14-10, passed 5-15-14)



§ 32.25  REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS AND SPECIAL PURCHASING METHODS.



   (A)   Availability of request for proposal method.



      (1)   A purchasing agent or purchasing agency may determine
that it is not practicable or not advantageous to the city, agency or
department to purchase specified types of supplies by competitive sealed
bidding; and



      (2)   That receiving proposals in a manner outlined in I.C.
5-22-9 (request for proposals), as amended from time to time, is the
preferred method for purchase of that type of supply.



   (B)   Availability of special purchasing methods by purchasing
agent.  A purchasing may make a purchase under the special purchasing
methods found at I.C. 5-22-10.



(Ord. 98-06, passed 6-22-98)



§ 32.26  EVIDENCE OF FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY.



   (A)   Purchases Less Than $25,000.  The purchasing agent may not
require evidence of financial responsibility when the estimated cost of a
purchase is less than $25,000.



   (B)   Purchases Between $25,000 and $150,000.  The solicitation may
include a requirement that an offeror provide evidence of financial
responsibility is required, the solicitation must indicate the kind of
evidence that will be acceptable.  If a bond or certified check is required,
it may not exceed 10% of the estimated cost of the purchase.



   (C)   Purchase over $150,000.  The solicitation shall include a
requirement that an offeror provide evidence of the financial responsibility
that will be acceptable.  If a bond or certified check is required, it may
not exceed 10% of the estimated cost of the purchase.



(Ord. 98-06, passed 6-22-98; Am. Ord. 14-10, passed 5-15-14)



§ 32.27  PROMOTION OF PURCHASE OR SUPPLIES MANUFACTURED IN THE UNITED
STATES.



   Supplies manufactured in the United States of America shall be
specified for all purchases and shall be purchased unless the city determines:



   (A)   The supplies are not manufactured in the United States in
reasonably available quantities;



   (B)   The price of the supplies manufactured in the United States
exceeds by an unreasonable amount the price of available and comparable
supplies manufactured outside the United States;



   (C)   The quality of the supplies is substantially less than the
quality of comparably priced available supplies manufactured outside the
United States; or



   (D)   The purchase of supplies manufactured in the United States is
not in the public interest.



(Ord. 98-06, passed 6-22-98)



§ 32.28  MODIFICATION AND TERMINATION OF CONTRACTS.



   A purchasing agent may include provisions in its solicitation that
permit or require any of the following:



   (A)   The inclusion of clauses providing for adjustments in prices
or time of performance;



   (B)   The inclusion of contract provisions dealing with either of
the following:



      (1)   The unilateral right of provisions dealing with either
of the following:



         (a)   Changes in the work within the scope of the
contract; and/or



         (b)   Temporary stopping of the work or delaying
performance.



   (C)   Variations occurring between estimated quantities of work in a
contract and actual quantities.



(Ord. 98-06, passed 6-22-98)



CHAPTER 33:  DEPARTMENT, BOARDS, AND COMMISSIONS   



Section



General Provisions



   33.001   Departments, boards, and commissions in general



Board of Public Works and Safety



   33.015   Authority to issue warrants for payment of money by city



Commission on Human Relations



   33.030   Established



Department of Economic Development



   33.045   Created



   33.046   Membership



   33.047   Terms



   33.048   Vacancies



   33.049   Compensation



   33.050   Appointments



   33.051   Officers; meetings



   33.052   Disclosure of financial interest



   33.053   Authority to conduct hearings concerning proposed issuance
of bonds



Department of Law



   33.065  Establishment



Fiscal Department



   33.070  Establishment



Fire Department



   33.075   Firefighters’ Pension Board of Trustees



   33.076   Workers’ Compensation



   33.077   Costs of physical and mental examinations



   33.078   Death benefits



   33.079   Volunteer fire squad and volunteer runner squad



   33.080   Members to live within county



Joint City-Black Township Park Board



   33.085   Established



Mayor’s Youth Advisory Council



   33.090   Established



   33.091   Cooperation of Council and city administration



Area Plan Commission



   33.105   Abolishment of City Plan Commission; transference of
authority



Police Department



   33.120   Police Pension Board of Trustees



   33.121   Workers’ Compensation



   33.122   Death benefits



   33.123   Costs of physical and mental examinations



   33.124   Law Enforcement Firearms Training Fund



   33.125   Local Law Enforcement Continuing Education Fund



   33.126   Benefits for police reserve unit



   33.127   Members to live within county



Water Utility Board



   33.135   Management and operation of utility by Board



   33.136   Powers and responsibilities



Alert (Advisory Liaison Emergency Readiness Team) Commission



   33.145   Definitions



   33.146   Establishment of Commission



   33.147   Duties of Commission



   33.148   Appointment of members; terms



   33.149   Officers



   33.150   Coordinator appointed; duties



   33.151   Authority during emergency or disaster



   33.152   Emergency Warning System Fund



Department of Redevelopment



   33.165   Established



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 33.001  DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS IN GENERAL.



   For provisions concerning departments, boards, and commissions in
general, see § 30.02.



BOARD OF PUBLIC WORKS AND SAFETY



§ 33.015  AUTHORITY TO ISSUE WARRANTS FOR PAYMENT OF MONEY BY CITY.



   The Board of Public Works and safety shall have the power and authority
to approve claims and authorize the issuance of warrants for payment of money
by the city.



(Ord. 83-16, passed 5-9-83)



Cross-reference:



   Establishment of Board, see § 30.02(B)(1)



Statutory reference:



   Authority of city boards to order issuance of warrants for payment of
moneys, see I.C. 36-4-8-3



COMMISSION ON HUMAN RELATIONS



§ 33.030  ESTABLISHED.



   For provisions concerning the Commission on Human Relations, see §
30.02 (B)(6).



DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT



§ 33.045  CREATED.



   There is hereby created the Department of Economic Development, which
Department shall be controlled by a commission to be known as the Economic
Development Commission.



(Ord. 1397, passed 11-12-73)



Statutory reference:



   Establishment of Economic Development Department, see I.C. 36-7-12-1 et
seq.



§ 33.046 MEMBERSHIP.



   In accordance with I.C. 36-7-12-5, the Economic Development Commission
shall consist of three members to be appointed as follows:



   (A)   One member shall be appointed by the Mayor.



   (B)   One member shall be appointed by the Common Council.



   (C)   One member shall be appointed by the County Council.



(Ord. 1397, passed 11-12-73)



§ 33.047  TERMS.



   In accordance with I.C. 36-7-12-9(b) and upon completion of the
original terms of office, subsequent appointees shall serve terms of four
years with each term to expire on February l of the appropriate year.



(Ord. 1397, passed 11-12-73)



§ 33.048  VACANCIES.



   In accordance with I.C. 36-7-12-10, any vacancies occurring on the
Economic Development Commission shall be filled by appointment of the
authority having made the appointment in which the vacancy occurs and the
appointment shall be made for the completion of any unexpired term.



(Ord. 1397, passed 11-12-73)



§ 33.049  COMPENSATION.



   Commissioners shall serve without compensation but the Common Council
may  provide in the Economic Development Department  budget for
reimbursement of travel, telephone, and other expenses incurred by the
Commissioners in the performance of their duties.



(Ord. 1397, passed 11-12-73)



Statutory reference:



   Compensation, see I.C. 36-7-12-15



§ 33.050  APPOINTMENTS.



   The appointing authorities shall make their appointments in the manner
prescribed by I.C. 36-7-12-5 and shall furnish certificates of appointment
for each person appointed.  The appointees shall qualify as required by I.C.
36-7-12-l et seq.



(Ord. 1397, passed 11-12-73)



§ 33.051  OFFICERS; MEETINGS.



   In accordance with I.C. 36-7-12-12, the Economic Development Commission
shall meet within 30 days after its creation and at that first meeting elect
a president, vice-president, and secretary.  It shall then immediately
undertake the duties imposed by law.  The Commission shall hold
reorganization meetings during February of each year.  The Commission and
the members shall have all the powers and duties imposed by I.C. 36-7-12-l et
seq. and this chapter and by amendments to either that statute or this
chapter.  The Commission may adopt such bylaws and rules as are not
prohibited by law and as are found desirable to facilitate the conduct of its
business and the accomplishment of its purpose.



(Ord. 1397, passed 11-12-73)



§ 33.052  DISCLOSURE OF FINANCIAL INTEREST.



   In accordance with I.C. 36-7-12-16, any Commissioner having a financial
interest in, or having been employed by, any firm or corporation contracting
or negotiating with the Commission shall disclose his interest to the
Commission and the disclosures shall be made a part of the records of the
Commission.  Any contract or agreement in which a Commissioner has a
financial interest or any contract or agreement with any firm or corporation
in which a Commissioner has direct financial interest shall be void from its
inception unless the nature of that financial interest has been made a part
of the record of the Commission.  No Commissioner shall vote on any matter
in which he has a pecuniary interest.



(Ord. 1397, passed 11-12-73)



§ 33.053  AUTHORITY TO CONDUCT HEARINGS CONCERNING PROPOSED ISSUANCE OF
BONDS.



   The Economic Development Commission is authorized and directed to
conduct, on behalf of the city and its Common Council, all Tax Equity and
Fiscal Responsibility Act (TEFRA) hearings and other hearings which are
required by law in connection with the proposed issuance of bonds, pursuant
to I.C. 36-7-12.



(Res. 85-38, passed 9-25-85)



DEPARTMENT OF LAW



§ 33.065  ESTABLISHMENT.



   For provisions concerning the Department of Law, see § 30.02 (B)(4).



FISCAL DEPARTMENT



§ 33.070  ESTABLISHMENT.



   For provisions concerning the Fiscal Department, see § 30.02 (B)(3).



FIRE DEPARTMENT



§ 33.075  FIREFIGHTERS’ PENSION BOARD OF TRUSTEES.



   A Firefighters’ Pension Board of Trustees is established to perform
the duties set forth in I.C. 36-8-7-1 et seq. and 36-8-8-1 et seq.



§ 33.076  WORKERS’ COMPENSATION.



   (A)   The payment of premiums for Workers’ Compensation coverage
for full-time active members of the Fire Department is hereby approved.



   (B)   The city shall maintain the type of Workers’ Compensation
coverage required by law for members of the Fire Department.



(Res. 80-2, passed 2-13-80)



§ 33.077  COSTS OF PHYSICAL AND MENTAL EXAMINATIONS.



   The city will pay 50% of the cost of any physical and mental
examinations required by the city or by statute for applicants for positions
as firefighters in the city.  The city will pay 75% of the cost of those
examinations for a successful applicant for such a position.



(Ord. 85-2, passed l-14-85)



§ 33.078  DEATH BENEFITS.



   In accordance with I.C. 36-8-8-16, the Firefighters’ Pension Fund of
the city shall provide a death benefit in the amount set forth in that
statute per member for each respective member, whether that member is a
member of the 1977 Fund or the pre-1977 Fund.  The death benefit shall be
payable after the death of a member to the deceased member’s spouse or
estate, but if there is no surviving spouse and no estate, then to the heirs
of the deceased member pursuant to the provisions of I.C. 29-1-8-1.



(Ord. 84-24, passed 9-10-84)



§ 33.079  VOLUNTEER FIRE SQUAD AND VOLUNTEER RUNNER SQUAD.



   (A)   Definitions.



      (1)   VOLUNTEER FIREFIGHTER.  A person who has volunteered to
assist, for nominal compensation, in fighting all fires occurring within the
corporate boundaries of the city, who has made a written application for
membership, has been approved and appointed by the Board of Public Works and
Safety to membership in the volunteer fire squad, and who has taken and
signed a pledge to comply with all orders that are given by the Chief,
Assistant Chief, or other officer in charge of the volunteer fire squad
relative to any matter pertaining to the work of the volunteer fire squad.



      (2)   VOLUNTEER RUNNER.  A person who has volunteered to
assist, for no compensation, in fighting all fires occurring within the
corporate boundaries of the city, who has made a written application for
membership, has been approved and appointed by the Board of Public Works and
Safety to membership in the volunteer runner squad, and who has taken and
signed a pledge to comply with all orders that are given by the Chief,
Assistant Chief, or other officer in charge of the volunteer runner squad
relative to any matter pertaining to the work of the volunteer runner squad.



   (B)   Membership, rules, appointment, training and termination.



      (1)   The volunteer fire squad shall consist of up to six
members.



      (2)   To the extent his or her budget allows per year, the
Fire Chief shall have discretion as to the number of members in the volunteer
runner squad.



      (3)   Applications shall be made for acceptance into the
volunteer fire squad or volunteer runner squad and the Fire Chief of the Fire
Department shall prepare an application and criteria for consideration, said
application and criteria subject to approval by the city Board of Public
Works and Safety.



      (4)   If space and budget appropriations permit, the Chief of
the Fire Department shall submit an individual’s name to the city Board of
Public Works and Safety for approval and appointment to the volunteer fire
squad or volunteer runner squad.



      (5)   Members of the volunteer fire squad or volunteer runner
squad may be taken off of the roster of the volunteer fire squad or volunteer
runner squad at any time, with or without cause.  The Chief of the Fire
Department shall immediately notify a volunteer firefighter or volunteer
runner if his or her name has been taken off of the roster and the Fire Chief
shall also obtain from the individual any equipment furnished by the city to
the volunteer firefighter or volunteer runner.



      (6)   The Chief of the Fire Department shall prepare rules and
regulations and/or standard operating procedures for the volunteer fire squad
and the volunteer runner squad subject to the approval of the city Board of
Public Works and Safety.



      (7)   A volunteer firefighter or volunteer runner is not an
employee of the city or its Fire Department for purposes of fringe 
benefits.  Nothing in this section shall render a volunteer firefighter or
volunteer runner as an employee of the city or its Fire Department entitled
to fringe benefits.



   (C)   Compensation and benefits.



      (1)   Members of the volunteer fire squad shall be paid
pursuant to the annual salary ordinance adopted by the Common Council of the
city.



      (2)   Members of the volunteer runner squad shall receive no
compensation unless the runner pulls a shift for a regular member of the Fire
Department for which the runner will be paid an hourly rate as a part-time
employee.



      (3)   A volunteer firefighter and a volunteer runner shall be
furnished with the following equipment at no cost to the volunteer
firefighter or volunteer runner:



         (a)   Pager;



         (b)   Charger; and



         (c)   Two batteries.



      (4)   A volunteer firefighter and a volunteer runner may be
furnished with the following equipment at no cost to the volunteer
firefighter or volunteer runner:



         (a)   Hat;



         (b)   Coat;



         (c)   Bunker;



         (d)   Boots; and



         (e)   Gloves.



      (5)   The city shall procure insurance in the name of and for
the benefit of each member of the volunteer fire squad and the volunteer
runner squad as required by I.C. 36-8-12-1 et seq. under a group plan.  All
expenses incurred for premiums on the insurance required by statute shall be
paid out of the general fund.



      (6)   A volunteer firefighter or volunteer runner is covered
by the medical treatment or burial expense provisions of the worker’s
compensation law (I.C. 22-3-2 through 22-3-6).



   (D)   Other provisions for the volunteer fire Squad or volunteer
runner squad shall be made by rules, regulations, and standard operating
procedures, as adopted, and provisions for said squads in the Indiana Code
and Indiana Administrative Code.



(Ord. 93-23, passed 12-13-93; Am. Ord. 93-30, passed 12-27-93; Am. Ord.
04-20, passed 7-12-04))



§ 33.080  MEMBERS TO LIVE WITHIN COUNTY.



   (A)   All members, including probationary members, of the City of
Mt. Vernon Police and Fire Departments shall:



      (1)   Reside in Posey County, Indiana;



      (2)   Have adequate means of transportation into the City of
Mt. Vernon, Indiana;



      (3)   Maintain in the member’s residence, telephone service
with the City of Mt. Vernon, Indiana.



   (B)   This section shall govern all members of the Mt. Vernon Police
and Fire Departments except any current member of the Police or Fire
Department who lives outside Posey County, Indiana on the date this section
is adopted.



(Ord. 97-38, passed 9-29-97)



JOINT CITY-BLACK TOWNSHIP PARK BOARD



§ 33.085  ESTABLISHED.



   There is established a Joint City-Black Township Park Board which shall
consist of five members, four to be appointed by the Mayor and one by the
Circuit Court Judge.



MAYOR’S YOUTH ADVISORY COUNCIL



§ 33.090  ESTABLISHED.



   The Mayor’s Youth Advisory Council is hereby sanctioned as a
representative group of the youth of the city.



(Res. 1344, passed 10-9-72)



§ 33.09l  COOPERATION OF COUNCIL AND CITY ADMINISTRATION.



   The Common Council, the officials, and the heads of the various
departments, boards, and commissions which are a part of the city
administration shall cooperate fully with the Mayor’s Youth Advisory
Council.



(Res. 1344, passed 10-9-72)



AREA PLAN COMMISSION



§ 33.105  ABOLISHMENT OF CITY PLAN COMMISSION; TRANSFERENCE OF AUTHORITY.



   The authority granted to the City Plan Commission and the City Board of
Zoning Appeals by the city zoning code is hereby transferred to the Posey
County Area Plan Commission and Board of Zoning Appeals.



(Ord. 1444, passed 8-26-74)



POLICE DEPARTMENT



§ 33.120  POLICE PENSION BOARD OF TRUSTEES.



   A Police Pension Board of Trustees is established to perform the duties
set forth in I.C. 36-8-6-l et seq. and 36-8-8-l et seq.



§ 33.121  WORKERS’ COMPENSATION.



   (A)   The payment of premiums for Workers’ Compensation coverage
for full-time active members of the Police Department is hereby approved.



   (B)   The city shall maintain the type of Workers’ Compensation
coverage required by law for members of the Police Department.



(Res. 80-2, passed 2-13-80)



§ 33.122  DEATH BENEFITS.



   In accordance with I.C. 36-8-8-16, the Police Pension Fund of the city
shall provide a death benefit in the amount set forth in that statute per
member for each member, whether that member is a member of the 1977 Fund or
the pre-1977 Fund.  The death benefit shall be payable after the death of a
member to the deceased member’s spouse or estate, but if there is no
surviving spouse and no estate, then to the heirs of the deceased member
pursuant to the provisions of I.C. 29-1-8-1.



(Ord. 84-24, passed 9-10-84)



§ 33.123  COST OF PHYSICAL AND MENTAL EXAMINATIONS.



   The city will pay 50% of the cost of any physical and mental
examinations required by the city or by statute for applicants for positions
as police officers in the city.  The city will pay 75% of the cost of
examinations for a successful applicant for such a position.



(Ord. 85-2, passed l-14-85)



§ 33.124  LAW ENFORCEMENT FIREARMS TRAINING FUND.



   For provisions concerning the Law Enforcement Firearms Training Fund,
see § 35.01.



§ 33.125  LAW ENFORCEMENT CONTINUING EDUCATION FUND.



   (A)   Pursuant to I.C. 5-2-8-2, there is established in the city a
Law Enforcement Continuing Education Program for use by its law enforcement
agency.



   (B)   Pursuant to I.C. 5-2-8-2, there is established a Law
Enforcement Continuing Education (LECE) Fund and funds collected by the law
enforcement agency from the Local User Fee fund, established by I.C.
33-19-8-1 et seq., shall be deposited into the Local Law Enforcement
Continuing Education Fund to fund the Law Enforcement Continuing Education
Program.



   (C)   Distribution of money in a local Law Enforcement Continuing
Education Fund shall be made to a city law enforcement agency without the
necessity of first obtaining an appropriation.



(Ord. 89-19, passed 7-10-89)



§ 33.126  BENEFITS FOR POLICE RESERVE UNIT.



   (A)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



   FULL RESERVE OFFICER.  A reserve officer who has finished all initial
training requirements, finished the probationary period and has been
appointed to the Reserve Force as a “full reserve officer”.



   MT. VERNON POLICE DEPARTMENT RESERVE OFFICER FORCE.  The police
reserve unit shall be known as the “Mt. Vernon Police Department Reserve
Officer Force,” hereinafter referred to as the reserve force.



   REGULAR DEPARTMENT or REGULAR MEMBERS.  The Mt. Vernon Police
Department or officers of the Mt. Vernon Police Department.



   TRAINEE RESERVE OFFICER.  A reserve force applicant who has completed
the application process and has been recommended to the Board of Public Works
and Safety by the Chief of Police.  A TRAINEE RESERVE OFFICER is an officer
on probation and has not been appointed to the Mt. Vernon Police Department
Reserve Officer Force.  (See FULL RESERVE OFFICER above.)



   (B)   Selection and training.



      (1)   Each Reserve Officer applicant shall be required to
submit to physical testing as deemed necessary by the Chief, background
investigation, drug screen (at applicant’s own expense) and any other
appropriate tests as deemed necessary by the Chief of Police or Board of
Public Works and Safety.



      (2)   Reserve Officers shall be appointed by a majority vote
of the Board of Public Works and Safety.



      (3)   Reserve Officers may not be members of the regular
Police Department, but have all of the same police powers as regular members,
except as limited by the rules of the Reserve Force Department and state
law.  The Chief of Police may adopt rules, and regulations, subject to the
approval of the Board of Public Works and Safety, and standard operating
procedures to limit or explain the authority of the Reserve Force Officers.



      (4)   Upon the tentative approval of the applicant by the
Board of Public Works and Safety, the Reserve Officer will be on probation
for a period of six months.



         (a)   During the probationary period, the Reserve
Officer must complete all training as required.



         (b)   The training requirements may be waived in full or
in part by the Board of Public Works and Safety if the Reserve Officer
applicant has had comparable training or experience within ten years prior to
time of application.



      (5)   Six months from the tentative approval date
(probationary period) or immediately after the Reserve Officer’s successful
completion of all training requirements, or upon waiver, whichever occurs
later, the Chief of Police shall notify the Board of Public Works and Safety
of the eligibility of the Trainee Reserve Officer to become a “Full”
Reserve Officer and the Reserve Officer applicant may then be appointed as a
full Reserve Officer to the Reserve Force, by majority approval of the Board
of Public Works and Safety.



   (C)   [Reserved]



   (D)   Benefits and allowance of the City Police Department Reserve
Officer Force.



      (1)   The city shall provide a one-time only clothing
allowance to each Full Reserve Officer in an amount of $275.



      (2)   The city shall provide death and/or dismemberment
insurance (policy amount $25,000) for each Full Reserve Officer:



      (3)   Each Full Reserve Officer shall be provided the
following equipment for use during their terms as a Reserve Officer:



         (a)   PR-24 police baton.



         (b)   Ammunition as necessary.



         (c)   Handcuffs as necessary.



         (d)   Rules and regulations manual.



         (e)   One shirt badge.



         (f)   One hat badge.



         (g)   One set collar insignias.



         (h)   One set ID and case.



         (i)   Gun leather (at the discretion of the Chief of
Police; one-time issue only for original six reserve officers).



      (4)   The Reserve Officer shall furnish all other equipment
required by the rules and regulations.



      (5)   City Police Department Reserve Officers (full or
trainee) are not employees of the city and shall not be compensated for their
services.  Reserve Officers are not entitled to benefits or allowances
defined in other fringe benefit or employee ordinances unless specifically
noted.



   (E)   Duties, termination and miscellaneous provisions.



      (1)   A Full Reserve Officer shall perform all duties provided
for by state laws and local ordinances unless limited by rules and
regulations of the Reserve Force.



      (2)   The Chief of Police shall have the authority to
promulgate rules and regulations governing the Reserve Force subject to
approval by the Board of Public Works and Safety.



      (3)   The Chief of Police shall have authority to promulgate
standard operating procedures, policies, and the like, as he may deem
necessary for the daily efficient operation of the Reserve Force.



      (4)   Each Reserve Officer shall be required to serve a
minimum of 12 hours per month.  This time does not include time when
attending academy or other mandatory training periods as required by this
section.



      (5)   Reserve Officers shall serve at the discretion of the
Chief of the Police Department.



      (6)   A Reserve Officer may be dismissed from the Reserve
Force at will by the Chief of Police if he deems that it is in the best
interest of the Reserve Force.  Upon initiating a dismissal, the Chief of
Police shall then notify, in writing, the Board of Public Works and Safety of
said dismissal who shall either confirm the dismissal or overrule same by
re-appointing said Reserve Officer.  The Board of Public Works and Safety
may also initiate a dismissal.



      (7)   As the Reserve Officer is not an employee, the Reserve
Officer has no employment interest of any type.  Upon initiation of
dismissal procedures (written notification to the Board of Public Works and
Safety or the Chief of Police), a copy of the written notice shall also be
sent to the Reserve Officer.  This is the only notice of relief to which the
Reserve Officer shall be entitled.



      (8)   If any provision of this section is rendered contrary to
the laws of the United States or the state, such provision shall be deemed
repealed and all unaffected provisions shall remain in full force and effect.



      (9)   Reserve Officers shall be subordinate to any regular
force officer.



      (10)   The Chief of Police may establish and appoint reserve
officers to Reserve Force ranking positions as he deems necessary to assist
in the daily operation of said Reserve Force but those officers shall still
remain subordinate to any regular force officer.



(Ord. 91-36, passed 9-9-91; Am. Ord. 92-11, passed 4-27-92; Am. Ord. 96-7,
passed 4-8-96)



§ 33.127  MEMBERS TO LIVE WITHIN COUNTY.



   (A)   All members, including probationary members, of the City of
Mt. Vernon Police and Fire Departments shall:



      (1)   Reside in Posey County, Indiana;



      (2)   Have adequate means of transportation into the City of
Mt. Vernon, Indiana;



      (3)   Maintain in the member’s residence, telephone service
with the City of Mt. Vernon, Indiana.



   (B)   This section shall govern all members of the Mt. Vernon Police
and Fire Departments except any current member of the Police or Fire
Department who lives outside Posey County, Indiana on the date this section
is adopted.



(Ord. 97-38, passed 9-29-97)



WATER UTILITY BOARD



§ 33.135  MANAGEMENT AND OPERATION OF UTILITY BY BOARD.



   The water utility owned and operated by the city shall be managed and
operated by a Water Utility Board consisting of members of the Common Council
as the same may exist from time to time.



(Ord. 82-43, passed 11-22-82)



§ 33.136  POWERS AND RESPONSIBILITIES.



   The Water Utility Board shall have all the powers and responsibilities
specified by I.C. 8-l.5-3 and all other powers granted by law for the
operation of a municipally-operated water utility.



(Ord. 82-43, passed 11-22-82)



ALERT (ADVISORY LIAISON EMERGENCY READINESS TEAM) COMMISSION



§ 33.145  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CHIEF EXECUTIVE.  Includes the Mayor or any person who is designated
by § 33.151 to act as Chief Executive Officer of the city during the
unavailability of the Mayor.



   DISASTER.  Occurrence of widespread or severe damage, injury, or loss
of life or property resulting from any natural or manmade cause, including
but not limited to fire, flood, earthquake, wind, storm, oil or chemical
spill or release, contamination requiring immediate action to avert danger or
damage, explosion, riot, or hostile military or paramilitary action.



   EMERGENCY.  The occurrence or imminent threat of occurrence of a
disaster.



   MAYOR.  Includes  a  successor  Mayor  appointed pursuant to I.C.
36-4-5-9 as the same may be amended.



(Ord. 88-11, passed 5-9-88)



§ 33.146  ESTABLISHMENT OF COMMISSION.



   A commission to be known as the ALERT (Advisory Liaison Emergency
Readiness Team) Commission, consisting of five members, is hereby created.



(Ord. 88-11, passed 5-9-88)



§ 33.147  DUTIES OF COMMISSION.



   The ALERT Commission shall:



   (A)   Advise and assist the Mayor and other person designated by the
Mayor in:



      (1)   Development of plans for dealing with emergencies and
disasters within the city.



      (2)   Selection and coordination of equipment agencies and
personnel to be used in case of emergencies and disasters.



      (3)   Selection of an emergency reaction coordinator,
assistant coordinators, and other emergency personnel.



      (4)   Establishment of liaison with and between persons and
organizations expected to be involved in dealing with emergencies and
disasters.



      (5)   Development of plans and systems for:



         (a)   Warning persons in the city of emergencies and
threatened emergencies and disasters.



         (b)   Disaster avoidance and relief efforts in the city.



   (B)   Perform such other duties with respect to preparation for or
reaction to emergencies and disasters as the Mayor may request.



(Ord. 88-11, passed 5-9-88)



§ 33.148  APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS; TERMS.



   (A)   The Mayor shall appoint the five members of the ALERT
Commission.  The initial members of the Commission shall be appointed for
terms as follows:



      (1)   Two Commissioners shall have terms ending December 31,
l989.



      (2)   Two Commissioners shall have terms ending December 31,
l990.



      (3)   One Commissioner shall have a term ending December 31,
l99l.



   (B)   Commissioners appointed at the end of any such initial term
shall be appointed for terms of three years each.  The Mayor may remove
Commissioners at any time with or without cause.



(Ord. 88-11, passed 5-9-88)



§ 33.149  OFFICERS.



   The members of the ALERT Commission shall elect from their number a
President and a Secretary and such other officers as they deem appropriate
and shall keep the Mayor fully informed of their activities.



(Ord. 88-11, passed 5-9-88)



§ 33.150  COORDINATOR APPOINTED; DUTIES.



   (A)   The Mayor shall appoint an ALERT Coordinator and such
assistants as the Mayor may deem appropriate.  The Coordinator and any
assistant coordinators shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor.



   (B)   The Coordinator shall:



      (1)   Assist the Mayor in planning and preparing for and
dealing with emergencies and disasters.



      (2)   Act on the Mayor’s behalf and with the authority of
the Mayor upon instruction from the Mayor or pursuant to § 33.151.



(Ord. 88-11, passed 5-9-88)



§ 33.151  AUTHORITY DURING EMERGENCY OR DISASTER.



   If, in time of emergency or disaster, the Mayor is unavailable or
unable to act as Chief Executive Officer of the city, the following persons
shall have such authority in the following order:



   (A)   The member of the Common Council, if any, appointed by the
Mayor pursuant to I.C. 36-4-5-8 as the same may be amended.



   (B)   If the Mayor has not made such an appointment or if such
person is unavailable to serve for any reason, then:



      (1)   The member of the Board of Public Works and Safety who
has the longest service on that Board, including nonconsecutive terms, if
any, but if that person is unable to serve; then



      (2)   The remaining member of the Board of Public Works and
Safety, but if he is unable to serve; then



      (3)   The ALERT Coordinator.



(Ord. 88-11, passed 5-9-88)



§ 33.152  EMERGENCY WARNING SYSTEM FUND.



   There is hereby created a dedicated nonreverting fund to be known as
the Emergency Warning System Fund to be used for acquisition of equipment,
public education and operation of a system of warning or communicating with
the public about emergencies and disasters.  Any donations received by the
city for such purposes or for use of the ALERT Commission shall be deposited
in the Emergency Warning System Fund.  Funds so deposited may be expended
without appropriation for the purposes for which they were donated upon
receipt of a proper claim for the expenditure.



(Ord. 88-11, passed 5-9-88)



DEPARTMENT OF REDEVELOPMENT



§ 33.165  ESTABLISHED.



   (A)   The Common Council of the city now deems it to be in the best
interest of the city and its citizens to afford a maximum opportunity for
rehabilitation, redevelopment and/or economic development of areas by private
enterprise and the city by establishing a Department of Redevelopment.



   (B)   The Common Council hereby establishes a Department of
Redevelopment to be known as the "Mount Vernon Redevelopment Commission" to
be controlled by a board of five members ("Redevelopment Commission").



   (C)   Pursuant to the Act, all of the territory within the corporate
boundaries of the city will constitute a special taxing district to be known
as the City of Mount Vernon Redevelopment District ("Redevelopment District")
for the purpose of levying and collecting special benefit taxes for
redevelopment and economic development purposes as provided in the Act.  The
Common Council finds and determines that all of the taxable property within
the Redevelopment District will be considered to be benefited by the
redevelopment projects and economic development projects carried out under
the Act to the extent of the special taxes levied under the Act.



   (D)   The Mayor of the city shall appoint three of the five members
of the Redevelopment Commission.



   (E)   The Common Council shall appoint two initial members of the
Redevelopment Commission, each of whom shall satisfy the requirements in
division (F) hereof, as members of the Redevelopment Commission.



   (F)   Members of the Redevelopment Commission shall be at least 18
years of age and must be residents of the city.  Members shall take and
subscribe an oath of office before beginning the duties thereof and shall
execute a bond as set forth in I.C. 36-7-14-7.



   (G)   The term of office of the members of the Redevelopment
Commission shall commence from the date of their appointment and expire on
January 1, 2008.



(Ord. 06-09, passed 3-20-06)



CHAPTER 34:  EMPLOYEE REGULATIONS



Section



General Provisions



   34.01   Definitions



   34.02   Physical examinations; exceptions



   34.03   Exemption from Fair Labor Standards Act



   34.04   Employee violations



   34.05   Drug-free workplace policy



Working Hours



   34.15   Time cards or forms



   34.16   Total hours for time worked; payment



   34.17   Overtime



   34.18   Part-time employees



Leaves of Absence



   34.30   Sick leave



   34.31   Bereavement leave



   34.32   Personal leave



   34.33   Military leave



   34.34   Jury duty



Benefits



   34.45   Vacation with pay



   34.46   Holiday pay



   34.47   Insurance



   34.48   Travel expenses



   34.49   Clothing allowance



Infraction of Rules



   34.60   Definitions



   34.61   Procedure for violation



   34.62   Records to be kept on oral and written warnings



Termination of Employment



   34.70   Notice required



   34.71   Police officer’s departure from department within three
years from date of hire



   34.72   Firefighter’s departure from Department within three years
from date of hire




Substance Abuse Policy




   34.90   Protection of employees’ health and safety



   34.91   Purpose



   34.92   Applicability



   34.93   Prohibited conduct



   34.94   Prescription medication and/or other medication use



   34.95   Refusal to test



   34.96   Types of tests



   34.97   Controlled substance testing protocol



   34.98   Split specimen testing protocol



   34.99   Alcohol testing



   34.100   Educational materials



   34.101   Disciplinary procedures for policy violations



   34.102   Voluntary disclosure



   34.103   Confidentiality and release of information



   34.104   Responsibility



   34.105   Abbreviations and terms



   34.106   Definitions   



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 34.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   FULL-TIME EMPLOYEE.  An employee who has been on active duty
regularly, working in excess of 32 hours per week for more than 26
consecutive weeks.



   HE or HIS.  Shall apply to both male and female employees.



   MEMBER.  A member of the Pension Fund of either of the Police or Fire
Departments, when used in conjunction with an employee of those Departments.



   PART-TIME OR TEMPORARY EMPLOYEE.  An employee who has not been on
active duty regularly, working in excess of 32 hours per week for more than
26 consecutive weeks, or an employee who works seasonally.



(Ord. 86-11, passed 5-27-86; Am. Ord. 90-7, passed 5-14-90)



§ 34.02  PHYSICAL EXAMINATIONS; EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   The city shall have the right to require examination of any
city employee at city expense by a physician chosen by the city for the
purpose of determining mental, emotional, or physical fitness to perform the
duties of his employment with the city or his entitlement to any benefits
which he may claim are due him from the city.



   (B)   The following are exceptions to division (A) above:



      (1)   When a firefighter or police officer applies for a
disability pension, the Police or Fire Pension Board of Trustees shall have
sole authority to make decisions concerning this matter.



      (2)   A department head is permitted to require a doctor’s
certification, at the employee’s expense, in cases of absence from duty for
more than three working days.



      (3)   The respective pension board will pay 50% of the cost of
any physical and mental examinations required by the city, by the pension
board, or by statute for applicants for positions as police officers or
firefighters in the city, and the respective pension board will pay 100% of
the cost of such examinations for a successful applicant for such a position.



      (4)   Any city employee believed to have a drug or alcohol
dependency or emotional problem causing tardiness, absenteeism, or
deterioration of job performance, may be required to visit the South-western
Indiana Mental Health Center, Inc., (Employee Assistance Program).  The
initial visit is at city’s expense.  The cost of additional visits, as
directed by the Employee Assistance Program, will be the financial
responsibility of the employee.



         (a)   An employee is subject to discharge for failure to
comply after receiving written notification to visit the Employee Assistance
Program.



         (b)   All visits to Employee Assistance Program are
strictly confidential.  The city is notified of visits only (not individuals
by name).



(Ord. 86-11, passed 5-27-86; Am. Ord. 96-6, passed 3-25-96)



§ 34.03  EXEMPTION FROM FAIR LABOR STANDARDS ACT.



   The following salaried positions (working a minimum of 40 hours per
week) are exempt from Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA):



   Fire Chief



   Police Chief



   Assistant Police Chief



   Street Commissioner/Sanitation Supervisor



   Assistant Street Commissioner



   Water Plant Superintendent



   Water Field Operations Superintendent



   Water/sewer bookkeeper



   Wastewater Superintendent



   Wastewater Operations Superintendent



   Park and Recreation Superintendent



   Park and Recreation Supervisor



   Park Manager/Youth Center Director



   Parking Meter Supervisor



(Ord. 86-11, passed 5-27-86; Am. Ord. 90-7, passed 5-14-90; Am. Ord. 92-40,
passed 10-26-92; Am. Ord. 93-10, passed 7-26-93; Am. Ord. 96-9, passed 4-8-96)



§ 34.04  EMPLOYEE VIOLATIONS.



   Any employee violating the provisions of this chapter which are not in
conflict with applicable Indiana Code, shall be subject to such disciplinary
action specified in §§ 34.60 through 34.62 or as prescribed by provisions
of the Indiana Code as the board having jurisdiction over that employee may
find appropriate.



(Ord. 86-11, passed 5-27-86; Am. Ord. 90-7, passed 5-14-90)



§ 34.05  DRUG-FREE WORKPLACE POLICY.



   (A)   The unlawful manufacture, distribution, dispensing, possession
or use of a controlled substance is prohibited in any city department or
workplace.



   (B)   That any employee of the city violating division (A) above or
any employee convicted of a violation of any criminal drug statute as a
result of a violation occurring in the workplace shall be subject to the
disciplinary procedures set forth in this chapter, or 36-8-3-4, or department
rules and regulations as applicable, including termination.  The employee
shall notify his or her department head of any said conviction no later than
five days after such conviction.



   (C)   This section confirms the city Employee Assistance Program
available to employees of the city which may be available for education of
the dangers of drug abuse in the workplace, as well as drug counseling and
rehabilitation.  Information concerning the Employee Assistance Program can
be located in this chapter.



   (D)   Within 30 days after receiving notice of a conviction
described in division (B), the city shall take appropriate disciplinary
and/or counseling action toward the convicted employee.



   (E)   Upon passage of this section, a copy of this section shall be
posted at the City Hall Annex and in each department of the city and each
department head shall make their employees aware of said posting and shall
maintain copies of this section for distribution to any employee requesting a
copy of this section.



(Res. 92-31, passed 8-24-92)



WORKING HOURS



§ 34.15  TIME CARDS OR FORMS.



   To comply with the Fair Labor Standards Act requirements, a time card
or a city form #99A shall be kept for each employee, both salaried and
hourly, with said time card or form presented to the Clerk-Treasurer with
each payroll by 12:00 noon on the Wednesday after the bi-weekly period
ends.  All payroll records shall be preserved for at least three years.



(Ord. 86-11, passed 5-27-86; Am. Ord. 90-7, passed 5-14-90)



§ 34.16  TOTAL HOURS FOR TIME WORKED; PAYMENT.



   Regular pay and overtime pay shall be calculated according to
requirements of the Fair Labor Standards Act except that for purposes of
determining hours worked, paid holidays shall be counted as if the employee
had worked eight hours.  Vacation, sick leave, and other forms of paid leave
shall not be treated as hours worked for purposes of calculating overtime.



(Ord. 86-11, passed 5-27-86; Am. Ord. 86-14, passed 6-9-86; Am. Ord. 90-7,
passed 5-14-90)



§ 34.17  OVERTIME.



   (A)   Police Department.



      (1)   No member of the City Police Department shall be
required to work more than 160 hours during a 28-day work period (unless
compensated at 1½ times his regular rate of pay or given compensatory
time-off at 1½ time rate).



      (2)   Overtime pay for hours worked over 160 hours shall be
paid in conformity with requirements of the Fair Labor Standards Act.



      (3)   Compensatory time should be mutually agreed upon by the
employee and the city.  In the absence of an agreement, the Police Chief
will make the final determination.



      (4)   In cases of public emergency, to be determined by the
Board of Public Works and Safety, members of the Police Department may be
assigned to such duty hours as the Board of Public Works and Safety may deem
necessary.



      (5)   No member of the Department shall leave his post of duty
until properly relieved or until excused by his superior officer.



      (6)   Police officers are expected to work a reasonable amount
of overtime when requested except for good and sufficient cause.  The Police
Chief will maintain a record of overtime worked by each police officer and
will be responsible for equalizing overtime among the police officers in the
Department to the maximum extent possible.



      (7)   A civilian radio dispatcher shall not be required to
work more than 40 hours in any seven- day work week (unless compensated at
1½ times his regular rate of pay or given compensatory time off at 1½ time
rate).



         (a)   A civilian radio dispatcher is considered an
hourly employee and is entitled to all benefits spelled out in this chapter
for all hourly employees.



         (b)   Overtime pay of hours worked over 40 hours shall
be paid bi-weekly.  Compensatory time must be taken within the seven-day
work cycle (12:01 a.m. Monday to 12:00 midnight Sunday).



   (B)   Fire Department.



      (1)   No member of the City Fire Department shall be required
to work more that 212 hours during a 28-day work period (unless compensated
at 1½ times his regular rate of pay or given compensatory time off at 1½
time rate).



         (a)   Volunteer firemen that work a regular shift for a
full-time fireman due to illness, vacation or other reason, are considered
temporary labor and paid hourly according to the annual salary ordinance. 
Should a volunteer fireman who has been classified as temporary labor be
required to work more than 212 hours during a 28-day cycle, he will be
compensated for the overtime at 1½ times his temporary hourly rate of pay. 
A volunteer fireman’s per annum salary established by the annual salary
ordinance shall be adjusted by hourly pay received.



      (2)   Overtime pay for hours worked over 212 hours shall be
paid in conformity with requirements of the Fair Labor Standards Act.



      (3)   The Fire Department work day will be 24 hours.  This
24-hour day will be used to figure pay for work day, vacation, and excused
sick or personal days.  Firefighters shall work 24 hours and are off 48
hours.  If fire personnel are called to work anytime during their 48 hour
off-time, they must be paid according to division (B)(1) of this section.



      (4)   Compensatory time should be mutually agreed upon by the
employee and the city.  In the absence of an agreement, the Fire Chief will
make the final determination.



      (5)   In cases of public emergency, to be determined by the
Board of Public Works and Safety, members of the Fire Department may be
assigned to such duty hours as the Board of Public Works and Safety may deem
necessary.



      (6)   No member of the Department shall leave his post of duty
until properly relieved or until excused by his superior officer.



      (7)   Firefighters are expected to work a reasonable amount of
overtime when requested except for good and sufficient cause.  The Fire
Chief will maintain a record of overtime worked by each firefighter and will
be responsible for equalizing overtime among the firefighters in the
Department to the maximum extent possible.



   (C)   Full-time employees.



      (1)   No full-time or part-time employee of the city, its
departments or utilities shall be required to work more than eight hours in
any 24-hour period, except in cases of emergency to be determined by the
appropriate governing body, or the department head.  All hourly employees
will work 40-hour week schedule (12:01 a.m. Monday to 12:00 midnight Sunday),
unless stated otherwise by the annual salary or other city ordinances.  This
section applies to all personnel not considered salaried, except for Police
and Fire Department members.



      (2)   Overtime pay of hours worked over 40 hours shall be paid
bi-weekly.  Compensatory time must be taken within the seven-day work cycle
(12:01 a.m. Monday to 12:00 midnight Sunday).



      (3)   Compensatory time should be mutually agreed by the
employee and the city.  In the absence of an agreement, the department head
will make the final determination.



      (4)   All employees of the city are expected to work a
reasonable amount of overtime except for good and sufficient cause.  Each
department head shall maintain a record of overtime worked by each employee
and shall be responsible for equalizing overtime among the employees in his
department to the maximum extent possible.



      (5)   No hourly employee shall leave his post of duty after
eight hours of duty until properly relieved or until excused by the
department head or his representative.



(Ord. 86-11, passed 5-27-86; Am. Ord. 90-7, passed 5-14-90; Am. Ord. 94-3,
passed 2-28-94; Am. Ord. 94-16, passed 8-22-94)



§ 34.18  PART-TIME EMPLOYEES.



   This section applies to janitors, meter maids, patrol moms, or any
employee working less than 32 hours per week.  Persons working more than 32
hours per week, but on a temporary basis or for less than 26 consecutive
weeks are classified as part-time employees.  All references to part-time
employees in this section shall include employees described in this section.



   (A)   No part-time employee, as defined above, shall receive any
vacation or personal leave days.



   (B)   The Board of Public Works and Safety may approve four paid
sick leave days for part-time employees with no more than one sick day
allowed per quarter.  No paid sick leave days will be granted during the
first calendar year of employment.



   (C)   No part-time employee shall receive the city’s share of
hospital insurance payments.  Such employee may obtain coverage under the
city’s policies if approved by the insurance carrier, by paying the full
amount of each monthly premium.



(Ord. 86-11, passed 5-27-86; Am. Ord. 90-7, passed 5-14-90)



LEAVES OF ABSENCE



§ 34.30  SICK LEAVE.



   (A)   Police Department and Fire Department.



      (1)   Any member of the Police or Fire Pension Plan who is
unable to perform the duties of his employment due to an accident, sickness
or injury as the result of actions taken in the line of duty, may receive
paid leave at his regular rate of pay.  Said paid leave shall be from 1 to
90 consecutive calendar days per accident,  sickness or injury.  The Board
of Public Works and Safety may consider and approve a request for additional
days.  Such paid leave is subject to the following conditions and
regulations:



         (a)   Paid leave shall not be granted to an employee if
the Board of Public Works and Safety determines the accident, sickness or
injury is a result of the employee’s violation of the established rules and
regulations of either the Police or Fire Department.



         (b)   Paid leave under this section shall require a
licensed doctor’s certification at the employee’s expense.  Said
doctor’s certification shall come from the doctor treating the employee. 
In the case of emotional illness, the certification shall come from a
licensed psychiatrist or psychologist treating the employee.



         (c)   An employee seeking paid leave under this section
shall present the attending doctor’s certification to the Chief of his
respective department.  The employee’s payroll records shall reflect such
paid leave request and said request shall be addressed at the next regular
meeting of the Board of Public Works and Safety.



         (d)   The Board of Public Works and Safety may request
an update and/or review of the employee’s medical status within each 30-day
period the employee remains on paid leave.  The Board of Public Works and
Safety shall require an employee granted paid leave due to emotional illness
(including stress) to seek therapy and/or counseling from a licensed
psychiatrist or psychologist and the doctor shall provide the employee a
written release before the employee will be allowed to return to active duty
in his/her respective department.



         (e)   In addition to the established rules and
regulations of the Police and Fire Departments, the Board of Public Works and
Safety may investigate and discipline any employee believed to be
intentionally violating the paid leave benefit of this section.



      (2)   Other sick leave.  Any member of the Police or Fire
Department who is unable to perform his or her duties by reason of sickness,
accident, or injury not caused by or resulting from actions performed in the
line of duty shall be entitled to not more than five working days sick leave
in one calendar year at his or her regular rate of pay.



         (a)   Sick leave is to be utilized solely for the
purpose of:



            1.   Illness or injury of the employee.



            2.   Illness or injury within the immediate family
requiring the assistance of the employee.



         (b)   In order to qualify for sick leave pay the
employee must:



            1.   Notify his or her department head if at all
possible prior to the beginning of his or her shift.



            2.   Keep his or her department head or supervisor
notified of the extent of the illness.



            3.   Provide a doctor’s slip, at the
employee’s expense, upon request by the department head. At the sole option
of the city, the city may also require the employee to be seen by a physician
chosen by the city at the city’s expense. The employee shall execute a
release allowing the physician to report to the city.



         (c)   In the event a member of the Fire Department or
Police Department does not use all available sick days during a year, the
member may carry over up to five unused sick days resulting in not more than
30 working days sick leave (five for the current year and up to 25 carry-over
days) in one calendar year at his or her regular rate of pay.



      (3)   Should an illness or injury require more than five
working days, and if an employee uses all the current year’s sick days
(five days), then the employee must use carry over sick days, unused personal
or vacation days.  An employee may be granted leave without pay only after
exhausting all sick, vacation, and personal days.



      (4)   (a)   Any member of the Fire Department or Police
Department not requiring sick leave during any calendar year shall receive
three additional work days of paid vacation in the succeeding calendar year.



         (b)   Any member of the Fire Department or Police
Department using only one sick day during any calendar year shall receive two
additional work days of paid vacation in the succeeding calendar year.



         (c)   Any member of the Fire Department or Police
Department using not more than two sick days during any calendar year shall
receive one additional work day of paid vacation in the succeeding calendar
year.



      (5)   At the time a member of the Fire Department or Police
Department leaves employment with the city either voluntarily or
involuntarily, no payment shall be made for any current or carry over unused
sick days.



   (B)   Full-time employees (other than police officers and
firefighters on active pension plans).



      (1)   Any full-time employee of the city or any of its
departments or utilities, who is unable to perform his or her duties by
reason of sickness, accident or injury, shall be entitled to not more than
five working days sick leave in one calendar year with full pay. In the event
a full-time employee does not use all available sick days during a year, the
employee may carry over and accumulate up to 25 unused sick days resulting in
not more than 30 working days sick leave (five for current year and up to 25
carry over days) in one calendar year at the employee’s regular rate of pay.



      (2)   Sick leave is to be utilized solely for the purpose of:



         (a)   Illness or injury to the employee.



         (b)   Illness or injury within the immediate family
requiring the assistance of the employee.



      (3)   In order to qualify for sick leave pay the employee must
notify the department head if at all possible prior to the beginning of his
or her work day and keep his or her department head posted on the extent of
the illness.



      (4)   Should an illness or injury require more than five
working days, and if an employee uses all the current year’s sick days
(five days), then the employee must use carry over sick days, unused personal
or vacation days.  An employee, only after  exhausting all sick, vacation,
and personal days, may be granted leave without pay.



      (5)   The employee shall provide a doctor’s slip, at the
employee’s expense, upon request by the department head. At the sole option
of the city, the city may also require the employee to be seen by a physician
chosen by the city at the city’s expense. The employee shall execute a
release allowing the physician to report to the city.



      (6)   At the time a full-time employee leaves employment with
the city, either voluntarily or involuntarily, no payment shall be made for
any current or carry over unused sick days.



(Ord. 86-11, passed 5-27-86; Am. Ord. 90-7, passed 5-14-90; Am. Ord. 91-4,
passed 2-11-91; Am. Ord. 94-6, passed 4-25-94; Am. Ord. 01-17, passed
11-13-01; Am. Ord. 08-42, passed 12-22-08)



§ 34.31  BEREAVEMENT LEAVE.



   Bereavement leave is a leave granted a salaried and full-time employee
upon the death of a family member without loss of pay.



   (A)   All salaried and full-time employees of the city, its
departments or utilities may receive up to three working days paid leave upon
the death of spouse, brother, sister, son, daughter, mother, father, or any
persons standing in position of parent to the employee.



   (B)   Additional bereavement leave, because of travel, may be
granted by the department head by allowing the salaried and full-time
employee to use the employee’s remaining personal leave or vacation days. 



   (C)   Extended bereavement leave may be granted to the salaried and
full-time employees, but without pay. Extended leave must be approved by the
department head or governing body.



   (D)   Salaried and full-time employees may be granted funeral leave
with pay to attend funeral services for the death of a grandmother,
grandfather, aunt, uncle, niece, nephew, mother-in-law, father-in-law,
brother-in-law, or sister-in-law.



   (E)   Part-time or temporary employees may be granted bereavement
leave or funeral leave, but without pay.  This should be arranged by the
department head and may be accomplished by appropriate scheduling.



(Ord. 86-11, passed 5-27-86; Am. Ord. 90-7, passed 5-14-90)



§ 34.32  PERSONAL LEAVE.



   Every salaried or full-time employee of the city, after serving one
full year may be paid for personal business absences of up to four days per
year, providing prior approval is obtained from the department head.



   (A)   Absences for personal business are to cover those affairs
which cannot be taken care of outside of regular working hours (such as
dental or doctor appointments, traffic court appearances, and unexpected
illness at home).  Employees are not automatically entitled to the four
days, nor can they be used to extend a vacation or holiday.



   (B)   Personal days may be used when all sick days are exhausted. 
Personal days also may be used for additional bereavement leave.



(Ord. 86-11, passed 5-27-86; Am. Ord. 90-7, passed 5-14-90)



§ 34.33  MILITARY LEAVE.



   Any full-time employee who is a member of the United States military or
Indiana National Guard will be granted leave, not to exceed 15 days, without
loss of time or pay.  The city shall pay the full-time employees regular
pay.  All part-time employees will be excused for military or national guard
leave, but without pay.



(Ord. 86-11, passed 5-27-86; Am. Ord. 90-7, passed 5-14-90)



§ 34.34  JURY DUTY.



   Any full-time employee of the city shall receive leave to serve on a
jury or as a witness in any state, federal, or local court without loss of
pay.



(Ord. 86-11, passed 5-27-86; Am. Ord. 90-7, passed 5-14-90)



BENEFITS



§ 34.45  VACATION WITH PAY.



   (A)   (1)   Salaried and full-time employees of the city, its
departments or utilities (except the Fire Department) shall be entitled to
paid vacation as follows:



         (a)   After serving a period of one year: ten working
days vacation per year.



         (b)   After five consecutive years: 15 working days
vacation per year.



         (c)   After ten consecutive years: 20 working days
vacation per year.



         (d)   After 15 consecutive years: 25 working days
vacation per year.



         (e)   The maximum allowable vacation days after 15
consecutive years shall be 25 working days vacation per year.



      (2)   Employees of the City Fire Department shall be entitled
to paid vacation as follows:



         (a)   After serving a period of one year: two weeks
vacation per year.



         (b)   After ten consecutive years: three weeks vacation
per year.



         (c)   After 15 consecutive years: four weeks vacation
per year.



   (B)   The wording CONSECUTIVE does not apply to police or fire
personnel, that may have a break-in-service in which time lost continued to
accrue toward years of service.



   (C)   Unused vacation time may not be carried over to the next
year.  All salaried and full-time employees may be paid for  unused
vacation time if the city is notified by November 1 and according to the
following guidelines.  Unused vacation payment will be made with the
employee’s regular, final pay that year.



      (1)   An employee with less than 15 years service with the
city may be paid a maximum of one week of unused vacation.



      (2)   An employee with a minimum of 15 years service with the
city may be paid a maximum of two weeks of unused vacation.



   (D)   It is recommended that at least a full week of vacation be
taken at a time.  Less than a full week of vacation may be taken, if prior
approval of the department head is obtained, subject to the department’s
work load, others on vacation, sick or personal leave, and manpower
availability.



   (E)   The vacation time indicated is earned in one year and is taken
in the following year.



   (F)   Upon the death, resignation, or termination of an employee,
payment for unused vacation will be made according to the months worked
(Example: six months working time in present year, an employee will be
entitled to one-half of his vacation time).  Approval will be made at the
next regular meeting of the board having jurisdiction over that employee.



   (G)   Vacation pay shall be calculated at an employee’s regular
week’s pay rate.



(Ord. 86-11, passed 5-27-86; Am. Ord. 87-l, passed l-12-87; Am. Ord. 90-7,
passed 5-14-90; Am. Ord. 04-51, passed 12-13-04)



§ 34.46  HOLIDAY PAY.



   (A)   Police Department and Fire Department.



      (1)   All active members of the Fire and Police Departments
shall receive ten holidays during each calendar year.  Pay for holidays
shall be paid for those holidays with payroll for pay period in which holiday
occurs.  Amount of payment for each holiday will be determined by the annual
salary ordinance.



      (2)   Holidays must be identified by the City Council’s
annual salary ordinance or by Board of Works resolution.



   (B)   Full-time and salaried employees.



      (1)   All full-time and salaried members of any department
(except police and firefighters on their respective pension plans) shall
receive all holidays prescribed by state statute, plus the primary and
general election days.  Holidays must be identified by the City Council’s
annual salary ordinance or by Board of Works resolution.



      (2)   When any of these holidays, other than Sunday, falls on
Sunday, the following Monday shall be observed as the holiday.  Any holiday
which comes on Saturday, the preceding Friday shall be observed as the legal
holiday.



      (3)   Due to the nature of the work required in some
departments, holidays may vary.  If any full-time employee is required to
work or render service on a holiday recognized by the city, he will be given
another day off in lieu of the holiday.  If allowing the employee another
day off causes a department hardship (workload, vacations or personal days),
the employee will be compensated at a rate of double time for the holiday
worked.



      (4)   Part-time and seasonal employees of the Street, Water,
Wastewater, Park, and Police Departments who have worked an average of 20
hours or more per week during each of the weeks of the two pay periods
immediately preceding a paid holiday for those Departments will be eligible
for partial holiday pay.  The rate of pay for such holidays shall be the
same as that employee’s normal pay rate.  The amount of pay shall be
determined by multiplying the average amount of time such employee worked per
workday during the two preceding pay periods, ending at 12:00 midnight on the
Sunday preceding the holiday, not to exceed eight hours, times that
employee’s rate of pay.



      (5)   Any employee absent without authorization on the day
preceding and/or following a holiday will not be compensated for the holiday.



(Ord. 86-11, passed 5-27-86; Am. Ord. 88-4, passed 2-8-88; Am. Ord. 90-7,
passed 5-14-90; Am. Ord. 94-3, passed 2-28-94; Am. Ord. 94-16, passed 8-22-94)



§ 34.47  INSURANCE.



   The city shall make available to all full-time employees
hospitalization insurance, with covered employees paying an amount to be
established by the city.  The employee shall not be required to carry
insurance made available to the city.  An employee (when he chooses to carry
insurance) is required to make application for said insurance within 30 days
of employment, or wait until anniversary date of policy, in keeping within
the guidelines of master policy.



(Ord. 86-11, passed 5-27-86; Am. Ord. 90-7, passed 5-14-90)



§ 34.48  TRAVEL EXPENSES.



   (A)   Prior approval for travel must be approved by the employee’s
governing body.



   (B)   (1)   Any employee obligated to travel on official
municipal business shall be reimbursed for the following expenses actually
incurred or paid by the employee:



         (a)   Vehicle mileage when employee’s personal vehicle
is used - $.34 per mile of city business mileage.



         (b)   Transportation expense other than automotive - the
employee shall secure the lowest available rate.



         (c)   Hotel expense - the employee shall secure the
lowest available rate.



         (d)   Meals - actual amount expended not to exceed $40
per day.



      (2)   Expenses must be itemized, supported by receipts, and
submitted to the Clerk-Treasurer for approval by the employee’s governing
body.



(Ord. 86-11, passed 5-27-86; Am. Ord. 90-7, passed 5-14-90; Am. Ord. 96-33,
passed 10-14-96; Am. Ord. 05-25, passed 8-22-05; Am. Ord. 2017-18, passed
10-26-17)



Cross-reference:



   Reimbursement of travel expenses, see § 36.02



§ 34.49  CLOTHING ALLOWANCE.



   A city employee receiving an annual clothing allowance will receive one
fourth of such annual allowance with the last salary payment of each quarter.



(Ord. 87-1, passed 1-12-87; Am. Ord. 90-7, passed 5-14-90)



INFRACTION OF RULES



§ 34.60  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DISCIPLINARY ACTION.  Those actions taken by the city in response to
an employee’s infraction of rules.



   MAJOR INFRACTION.  Those actions of an employee that can result in
immediate termination.  They include but are not limited to:



      (1)   Drinking on the job.



      (2)   Gross insubordination.



      (3)   Use of unlawful drugs.



      (4)   Fighting on the job.



      (5)   Stealing or destruction of municipal property.



      (6)   Falsification of employee application.



      (7)   Being intoxicated or under the influence of unlawful
drugs on the job.



   MINOR INFRACTIONS.  Those actions of an employee which if inexcusably
continued, will result in oral and written warnings and possible
termination.  They include but are not limited to:



      (1)   Unexcused tardiness.



      (2)   Unexcused absences.



      (3)   Insubordination.



      (4)   Poor employee appearance.



      (5)   Failure to follow instructions.



      (6)   Abuse of sick time.



      (7)   Others as defined by the City Council.



(Ord. 86-11, passed 5-27-86; Am. Ord. 90-7, passed 5-14-90)



§ 34.61  PROCEDURE FOR VIOLATION.



   (A)   The procedure for minor violations is a system of progressive
discipline which includes the following:



      (1)   Oral warning.



      (2)   Written warning.



      (3)   One-day suspension



      (4)   Three-day suspension.



      (5)   Termination/demotion.



   (B)   A record of each oral and written warning will be kept on file.



(Ord. 86-11, passed 5-27-86; Am. Ord. 90-7, passed 5-14-90; Am. Ord. 04-36,
passed 10-25-04)



§ 34.62  RECORDS TO BE KEPT ON ORAL AND WRITTEN WARNINGS.



   All oral and written warnings must be maintained in employee’s work
file for a minimum of one year from initial violation.  The department head
will make available an employee’s file to that employee upon request by the
employee.  An employee’s work file is confidential and must not be shown
to any other employee under any circumstances.  The governing body may
review an employee’s record if cause justifies.



(Ord. 86-11, passed 5-27-86; Am. Ord. 90-7, passed 5-14-90)



TERMINATION OF EMPLOYMENT



§ 34.70  NOTICE REQUIRED.



   (A)   When an employee is terminated, unless he has been terminated
for gross misconduct, COBRA requires the department head to notify the plan
administrator (the Mayor) within 30 days.  The 30-day period applies to
death, termination of employment, or reduction in hours or eligibility of a
covered employee.  If the employee becomes divorced, legally separated, or
one of his dependent children reaches the age of majority, the employee, or
other qualified beneficiary, must notify the plan administrator within 60
days after the event.  Regardless of the nature of the qualifying event,
within 14 days after being notified, the plan administrator must notify all
qualified beneficiaries of their rights to continued coverage.  This notice
will be sent by certified mail.  All provisions subject to change as
determined by COBRA.



   (B)   The period of continued coverage is 18 months, or as otherwise
established by COBRA, for an employee terminated for reasons other than gross
misconduct or for any employee whose hours of employment are reduced below
the amount required to retain benefits under the plan.  The continued
coverage is 36 months, or as otherwise established by COBRA, for non-coverage
due to death, medicare eligibility, divorce, legal separation, or when a
dependent child exceeds the maximum age for coverage.



(Ord. 90-7, passed 5-14-90)



§ 34.71  POLICE OFFICER’S DEPARTURE FROM DEPARTMENT WITHIN THREE YEARS
FROM DATE OF HIRE.



   (A)   In the event a person hired as a police officer with the
Police Department departs, either voluntarily or involuntarily, from
employment with the Department within one year of that person’s date of
hire (including probationary period), and after completing training at the
law enforcement academy, that person shall reimburse to the city the amount
of $8,000 for expenses incurred by the city in providing academy training for
the person.



   (B)   In the event a person hired as a police officer with the
Police Department departs, either voluntarily or involuntarily, from
employment with the Department within two years of that person’s date of
hire (including probationary period), and after completing training at the
law enforcement academy, that person shall reimburse to the city the amount
of $6,000 for expenses incurred by the city in providing academy training for
the person.



   (C)   In the event a person hired as a police officer with the
Police Department departs, either voluntarily or involuntarily, from
employment with the Department as follows:



      (1)   Within three years of that person’s date of hire
(including probationary period), and after completing training at the law
enforcement academy, that person shall reimburse to the city the amount of
$4,000 for expenses incurred by the city in providing academy training for
the person.



      (2)   Within four years of that person’s date of hire
(including probationary period), and after completing training at the law
enforcement academy, that person shall reimburse to the city the amount of
$2,000 for expenses incurred by the city in providing academy training for
the person.



   (D)   In addition to subdivisions (A)–(C) above, in the event a
person hired as a police officer with the Police Department departs, either
voluntarily or involuntarily, from employment with the Department within
three years of that person’s date of hire (including probationary period),
and after completing training at the law enforcement academy, that person
shall reimburse to the city the cost of any specialized schools or training
which the person attended at the city’s expense.  The amount to be
reimbursed to the city includes the costs of tuition for the schooling and
costs for books, materials or equipment purchased for the person by the city.



   (E)   Any amounts required to be reimbursed pursuant to subdivisions
(A)–(D) above shall be certified for the Clerk-Treasurer by the Chief of
Police, and a copy of the certification shall be sent to the person departing
from employment at his or her last known address. 



      (1)   Payment shall be made to the city by a deduction equal
to the amount to be reimbursed from the person’s last pay from the city. 
In the event the person’s last pay issued is insufficient to cover the
amount to be reimbursed, the person departing from employment shall pay the
balance within 30 days from the effective date of his or her departure. 



      (2)   In the event reimbursement is not made, the city may
collect the amount to be reimbursed by any means available under the laws of
the State of Indiana.



(Ord. 94-16, passed 8-22-94; Am. Ord. 09-11, passed 5-11-09)



Cross-reference:



   Police Department regulations, see §§ 33.120 et seq.



§ 34.72 FIREFIGHTER’S DEPARTURE FROM DEPARTMENT WITHIN THREE YEARS FROM
DATE OF HIRE.



   (A)   In the event a person hired as a firefighter with the Fire
Department departs, either voluntarily or involuntarily, from employment with
the Department within one year of that person’s date of hire (including
probationary period), and after completing any state-mandated training, that
person shall reimburse to the city the amount of $1,500 for expenses incurred
by the city in providing state-mandated training for the person.



   (B)   In the event a person hired as a firefighter with the Fire
Department departs, either voluntarily or involuntarily, from employment with
the Department within two years of that person’s date of hire (including
probationary period), and after completing any state-mandated training, that
person shall reimburse to the city the amount of $1,000 for expenses incurred
by the city in providing state-mandated training for the person.



   (C)   In the event a person hired as a firefighter with the Fire
Department departs, either voluntarily or involuntarily, from employment with
the Department within three years of that person’s date of hire (including
probationary period), and after completing state-mandated training, that
person shall reimburse to the city the amount of $500 for expenses incurred
by the city in providing state-mandated training for the person.



   (D)   In addition to subdivisions (A)–(C) above, in the event a
person hired as a firefighter with the Fire Department departs, either
voluntarily or involuntarily, from employment with the Department within
three years of that person’s date of hire (including probationary period),
and after completing state-mandated training, that person shall reimburse to
the city the cost of any specialized schools or training that the person
attended at the city’s expense.  The amount to be reimbursed to the city
includes the costs of tuition for the schooling and costs for books,
materials or equipment purchased for the person by the city.



   (E)   Any amounts required to be reimbursed pursuant to subdivisions
(A)–(D) above shall be certified for the Clerk-Treasurer by the Fire Chief,
and a copy of the certification shall be sent to the person departing from
employment at his or her last known address.



      (1)   Payment shall be made to the city by a deduction equal
to the amount to be reimbursed from the person’s last pay from the city. 
In the event the person’s last pay issued is insufficient to cover the
amount to be reimbursed, the person departing from employment shall pay the
balance within 30 days from the effective date of his or her departure. 



      (2)   In the event reimbursement is not made, the city may
collect the amount to be reimbursed by any means available under the laws of
the State of Indiana.



(Ord. 04-16, passed 5-24-04)



Cross-reference:



   Fire Department regulations, see §§33.075 et seq.



SUBSTANCE ABUSE POLICY



§ 34.90  PROTECTION OF EMPLOYEES’ HEALTH AND SAFETY.



   (A)   Employees are an extremely valuable resource for city’s
business. Their health and safety is a serious concern of the city. Drug or
alcohol use may pose a serious threat to employee health and safety. It is,
therefore, the policy of the City of Mt. Vernon (hereafter referred to as
city) to prevent substance use or abuse from having an adverse effect on our
employees. The city maintains that the work environment is safer and more
productive without the presence of alcohol, illegal, or inappropriate drugs
in the body or on city property. Furthermore, employees have a right to work
in an alcohol and drug-free environment and to work with employees free from
the effects of alcohol and drugs. Employees who abuse alcohol or use drugs
are a danger to themselves, their coworkers, and the city’s assets. This
policy is adopted to reduce the number of accidental injuries to person or
property, to reduce absenteeism, tardiness and improve productivity, to
provide rehabilitation information assistance for any employee who seeks such
help, and to comply with the United States Drug-Free Work Place Act.



   (B)   The adverse impact of substance abuse by employees has been
recognized by the federal government. The Federal Motor Carrier Safety
Administration (“FMCSA”) has issued regulations which require the city to
implement a controlled substance testing program. The city will comply and
require that a driver submit to alcohol and controlled substance tests
administered in accordance with these regulations and is committed to
maintaining a drug- free workplace. All employees are advised that remaining
drug-free and medically qualified to drive are conditions of continued
employment with the city.



   (C)   Specifically, it is the policy of the city that the use, sale,
purchase, transfer, possession, or presence in one’s system of any
controlled substance (except medically prescribed drugs) by any employee
while on city premises, engaged in city business, while operating city
equipment, or while under the authority of the City is strictly prohibited,
FMCSA states that mandatory testing procedures must apply to every person who
operates a commercial motor vehicle in interstate or intrastate commerce and
is subject to the CDL licensing requirement. The city also believes that it
is the best interest of the city, employees of the city, and those persons
served by the city that drug and alcohol testing apply to all employees of
the City of Mt. Vernon, Indiana due to the sensitive nature of information
gained in the course of employment, use of municipal assets, work performed
in an around safety sensitive areas or safety sensitive functions, or use of
public ways in the course of employment.



   (D)   The execution and enforcement of this policy will follow set
procedures to screen body fluids (urinalysis), conduct breath testing, and or
search all covered employees, including applicants, for alcohol and drug use.
These procedures are designed not only to detect violations of this policy,
but to ensure fairness to each employee. Every effort will be made to
maintain the dignity of employees or applicants involved. Disciplinary action
will, however, be taken as necessary.



   (E)   Neither this policy nor any of its terms are intended to
create a contract of employment or to contain the terms of any contract of
employment. The city retains the sole right to change, amend, or modify any
term or provision of this policy without notice. This policy is effective
November 14, 2013, and will supersede all prior policies and statements
relating to alcohol or drugs.



(Ord. 13-33, passed 11-14-13)



§ 34.91  PURPOSE.



   (A)   The purpose of this administrative guide is to set forth the
procedures for the implementation of controlled substance and alcohol use and
testing of employee applicants, current employees, and employees pursuant to
the city’s alcohol and drug abuse policy. These procedures are intended as
a guide only and are in no way intended to alter any existing relationship
between the city and any employee.



   (B)   The city’s alcohol and drug program administrator designated
to monitor, facilitate, and answer questions pertaining to these procedures
is the Mayor’s Secretary.



(Ord. 13-33, passed 11-14-13)



§ 34.92  APPLICABILITY.



   (A)   (1)   This policy applies to all city employees that
utilize a commercial driver’s license (CDL) in the course of their
employment. A valid CDL is required to operate the type of equipment listed
below:



         (a)   A vehicle having a gross vehicle weight rating
(GVWR) as assigned by the manufacturer of 26,001 pounds or more;



         (b)   A combination vehicle having a gross combination
weight rating of 26,001 pounds or more;



         (c)   A vehicle that is designed to transport 16 or more
passengers, including the driver; or



         (d)   A vehicle requiring a placard to transport
hazardous materials.



      (2)   And the testing of these employees must conform to the
requirements promulgated by the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration
(“FMCSA”) or the Indiana Department of Transportation (“INDOT”).



   (B)   This policy also applies to all non-CDL city employees,
including part-time or temporary employees.



(Ord. 13-33, passed 11-14-13)



§ 34.93  PROHIBITED CONDUCT.



   (A)   The following shall be considered “prohibited conduct” for
purposes of this policy for all employees covered in this policy. All
employees of the city are considered to be employed in safety sensitive areas
due to the nature of municipal employment, which may include, but may not be
limited to the following types of work:



      (1)   All time spent at a facility waiting to be dispatched or
dispatching employees;



      (2)   Inspecting, servicing, or conditioning any commercial
motor vehicle or city vehicle or implement at anytime;



      (3)   Driving, which includes all time spent at the driving
controls of a commercial vehicle in operation or a city vehicle, and all time
spent operating any vehicle or implement of any nature, whether owned by the
city or not, on a public way during the employee’s work time;



      (4)   Spending time, other than driving time, in or upon any
implement, commercial vehicle or city vehicle;



      (5)   Loading or unloading a vehicle, supervising, or
assisting in the loading or unloading, attending a vehicle being loaded or
unloaded, remaining in readiness to operate the vehicle, or in giving or
receiving receipts for shipments loaded or unloaded;



      (6)   Repairing, obtaining assistance, or remaining in
attendance upon a disabled vehicle;



      (7)   Performing accident-related duties, which includes
giving or taking statements, completing accident -related claim forms;



      (8)   Obtaining or having access to confidential personal
information for any person during the course of city employment, this may
include, but may not be limited to dates of birth, social security numbers,
bank account numbers, charge card information, health information, passwords,
or access codes;



      (9)   Responsibility for obtaining, monitoring, or submitting
information concerning municipal utilities;



      (10)   Access to the public water supply or to the sanitary
sewer treatment stream prior to final discharge;



      (11)   Supervision of persons under the age of 18;



      (12)   Providing, dispatching, supervising public safety
activities; and



      (13)   Handling cash, checks, credit/debit cards in the course
of employment.



   (B)   No employee shall report for duty or remain on duty requiring
the performance of their municipal duties while having an alcoholic
concentration of .02 or greater.



   (C)   No employee shall be on duty or operate a commercial vehicle
or city vehicle or implement while the employee possesses alcohol.



   (D)   No employee shall use or possess alcohol while on duty. No
employee shall use or possess a controlled substance while on duty, except as
provided below.



   (E)   No employee shall perform safety-sensitive functions within
four hours after using alcohol.



   (F)   No employee required to take a post- accident test shall use
alcohol for eight hours following the accident or until he or she undergoes a
post-accident test, whichever occurs first.



   (G)   No employee shall refuse to submit to a post-accident, random,
reasonable suspicion, baseline, return-to-duty, or follow-up alcohol or drug
test.



   (H)   No employee shall report for duty or remain on duty when the
employee uses any controlled substance, except when use is pursuant to the
written instructions of a licensed physician who has advised the employee and
the city that the substance does not adversely affect the employee’s
ability to operate a commercial motor vehicle or city vehicle/implement or
perform the essential functions of the employee’s job.



   (I)   Off-duty use of drugs and alcohol is prohibited to the extent
it affects an employee’s attendance or performance and his/her ability to
pass required alcohol and controlled substance tests.



(Ord. 13-33, passed 11-14-13)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 34.94  PRESCRIPTION MEDICATION AND/OR OTHER MEDICATION USE.



   (A)   An employee is prohibited from reporting for duty or remaining
on duty when the employee uses any controlled substance, except when the use
is pursuant to the written instruction of a licensed physician who has
advised the employee that the substance will not adversely affect their
ability to safely perform their duties. The employee must provide the city
with proof of such medical advice. The city can decide if the employee can
remain at work or on the city premises and what work restrictions, if any,
are deemed necessary. The medication must be in the original prescription
container with no more than the necessary dosage required for the work shift.
A pharmacist can provide an employee with proper containers for legal
transportation of the medication, if necessary.



   (B)   Any employee who is using a prescribed drug or other
medication, which is known or advertised as possibly affecting or impairing
judgment, coordination, or other senses, (including dizziness or drowsiness),
or which may adversely affect the employee’s ability to perform work in a
safe and productive manner, must notify his/her supervisor prior to starting
work or entering any city premises. The city will decide if the employee can
remain at work or on the city premises and what work restrictions, if any,
are deemed necessary. Warning labels normally appear on the prescription
bottle and state exactly what, if any, side effects there may be. As an
example and not meant as a limitation, “may cause drowsiness”, “may
cause dizziness”, “may cause periodic nausea”, “use caution while
operating machinery”, “use caution when driving”, or any other warning,
caution, or description of side effects that will affect an employee’s
ability to perform work duties must be disclosed. An employee is not required
to state the name of the medication, the doctor who prescribed it, or the
reason it has been prescribed, in accordance with the patient privacy laws
under HIPAA and all applicable Indiana privacy laws. The only time an
employee may be asked to identify what medication(s) he or she is taking is
during reasonable assessment of a serious reaction to the medication, during
medical treatment for an accident or injury, or for purposes of determining
what medication was prescribed to the employee after a drug or alcohol test
has been performed and a positive result has occurred.



   (C)   Ingestion of products that contain hemp will not be an
acceptable explanation for testing positive for marijuana.



(Ord. 13-33, passed 11-14-13)



§ 34.95  REFUSAL TO TEST.



   (A)   Refusal to submit to the types of drug and alcohol tests
employed by the city will be grounds for refusal to hire
employee/applicant(s) and to discipline existing CDL employee(s) or
non-regulated (non-CDL) employee(s) covered by this policy.



   (B)   A refusal to test would include any of the following
situations:



      (1)   Failing to appear for any test within a reasonable time
after being directed to do so.



      (2)   Failing to remain at the testing site until the testing
process is completed.



      (3)   Failure to provide a breath sample, saliva sample, or
urine sample as directed.



      (4)   Failure to permit, if the situation requires, the
observation or monitoring of providing a urine specimen.



      (5)   Failure to provide a urine, breath, saliva, hair, or any
other test specimen within required time frames may be considered a refusal.
If an employee cannot provide a sufficient quantity of urine or breath,
he/she will be directed to be evaluated by a physician of employer’s
choice. If the physician cannot find a legitimate medical explanation for the
inability to provide a specimen (either breath or urine), it will be
considered a refusal to test. In that circumstance, the employee has violated
one of the prohibitions of the regulations.



      (6)   Failure or decline to take an additional drug test the
employer or collector has directed you to take.



      (7)   Failure to undergo a medical examination or evaluation,
as directed by the MRO as part of the verification process, or as directed by
the DER as part of a “shy bladder” or “insufficient breath” situation.



      (8)   Failure to cooperate with any part of the testing
process and/or conduct that would obstruct the proper administration of a
test, (e.g., refusing to empty pockets when so directed by the collector,
behave in a confrontational way that disrupts the collection process).



      (9)   For an observed collection, fail to follow the
observer’s instruction to raise and lower clothing, and to turn around to
permit the observer to determine if you have any type of prosthetic or other
device that could be used to interfere with the collection process.



      (10)   Possess or wear a prosthetic or other device that could
be used to interfere with the collection process.



      (11)   Admit to the collector or MRO that you adulterated or
substituted the specimen.



      (12)   A report from the MRO that you have a verified
adulterated or substituted test result.



      (13)   Refusing to sign step two of the alcohol testing form.



(Ord. 13-33, passed 11-14-13)



§ 34.96  TYPES OF TESTS.



   (A)   Authority. Pursuant to regulations promulgated by the
Department of Transportation (DOT) and the city’s policy, the following
circumstances for drug and alcohol testing will be required: pre-employment
(drug testing only), post-accident, random, baseline, and reasonable
suspicion.



   (B)   Pre-employment testing.



      (1)   This applies to all applicants applying for a CDL
position and to all other positions defined under § 34.92 (Applicability).



      (2)   As a condition of employment, the applicants applying
for a CDL-covered position shall provide the city with a written
authorization for all previous employers within the past three years to
release drug and alcohol testing records as the DOT FMCSA regulations
require. Within 30 days of performing a safety-sensitive function, DOT
regulations require that the city obtain, to the extent available, certain
drug and alcohol testing records from the employee’s previous employers for
the previous three years. All applicants who are required to have or obtain a
CDL must submit to a urine drug test unless a qualifying pre-employment
exemption can be documented.



   (C)   Random testing.



      (1)   The city conducts random drug and alcohol testing on all
employees covered by this policy. Separate random pools will be established
and maintained for CDL covered employees and other non-regulated employees.
The city will submit all employees’ names to a random selection system. The
random selection system provides an equal chance for each employee to be
selected each time random selection occurs. Random selections will be
reasonably spread throughout the year. The city will drug test, at a minimum,
50% of the average number of employee positions in each calendar year or at a
rate established by the DOT for the given year. The city will select, at a
minimum, 10% of the average number of employee positions in each calendar
year for random alcohol testing, or at the rate established by the DOT for
the given year. The city reserves the right to test above the above-stated
minimum percentages should they feel there is sufficient reasons for doing
so. Random selection, by its very nature, may result in employees being
selected in successive selections or more than once a calendar year.



      (2)   If an employee is selected at random, for either drug or
alcohol testing, a city official will notify the employee. Once notified, the
employee must be escorted by a supervisor or other designated official to the
designated collection site immediately. If the employee does not go to the
collection site as soon as possible after notification, such conduct may be
considered a refusal to test.



   (D)   Post-accident testing.



      (1)   Following any accident, the employee must contact the
city as soon as possible. Employees who are covered under Federal DOT
required testing will be tested for drugs and alcohol any time he or she is
involved in an accident where:



         (a)   A fatality is involved; or



         (b)   The employee receives a citation for a moving
violation arising from the accident that involved:



            1.   Injury requiring medical treatment away from
the scene;



            2.   One or more vehicles having to be towed from
the scene.



         (c)   The accident involves property damage of $500.00
or more, regardless if any citation is given.



      (2)   The employee shall follow the instructions from the city
or its representative to complete required testing.



      (3)   In addition to the testing requirements outlined above
for those holding a CDL, all employees who are covered by this policy may be
tested for the following situations:



         (a)   Any accident/incident involving injury or death.



         (b)   Any accident/incident involving property damage.



         (c)   Any accident/incident where the employee receives
a citation under state or local law for a moving traffic violation arising
from the incident.



         (d)   Any accident/incident in which an employee’s
involvement or actions could have caused or contributed to the cause of the
accident/incident.



         (e)   Any accident involving property damage of $500.00
or more, regardless if any citation is given.



      (4)   Any time a post-accident drug or alcohol test is
required, it must be performed as soon as practical. If no alcohol test can
be made within eight hours, attempts to perform an alcohol test shall cease.
If no urine collection can be obtained for the purpose of post-accident drug
testing within 32 hours, attempts to make such collection shall cease. An
employee is prohibited from consuming alcohol between the time of the
accident and the test.



      (5)   In the event that federal, state, or local officials
conduct breath or blood test for the use of alcohol and/or urine tests for
the use of controlled substances following an accident, employees must comply
with law enforcement personnel requests. The city may request testing
documentation from such agencies and may ask the employee to sign a release
allowing the city to obtain such test results.



      (6)   In the event an employee is so seriously injured that
the employee cannot provide a sample of urine, breath, or saliva at the time
of the accident, the employee must provide necessary authorization for the
city to obtain hospital records or other documents that would indicate the
presence of controlled substances or alcohol in the employee’s system at
the time of the accident.



   (E)   Reasonable suspicion testing.



      (1)   Reasonable suspicion for requiring an employee to submit
to drug and/or alcohol testing shall be deemed to exist when an employee
manifests physical, behavioral, speech, or performance symptoms or reactions
commonly attributed to the use of controlled substances or alcohol. Such
employee conduct must be witnessed by a supervisor who is trained in
compliance with Part 382.603 of the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Regulations
(49 CFR 382.603).



      (2)   A supervisor observing such conditions will take the
following actions immediately:



         (a)   Confront the employee involved, and keep under
direct observation until the situation is resolved.



         (b)   Secure the DER’s concurrence to observations.
After discussing the circumstances with the DER, arrangements will be made to
observe or talk with the employee. If he/she believes, after observing or
talking to the employee, that the conduct or performance problem could be due
to substance abuse, the employee will be immediately required to submit to a
breath test or urinalysis. If the employee refuses to submit to testing for
any reason, the employee will be informed that continued refusal would result
in disqualification from performing any safety- sensitive function.



         (c)   Employees will be asked to release any evidence
relating to the observation for further testing. Failure to comply may
subject the employee to subsequent discipline or suspension from duties. All
confiscated evidence will be receipted for with signatures of both the
receiving supervisor, as well as the provider.



         (d)   The DER shall, within 24 hours or before the
results of the controlled substance test are released, document in writing
the particular facts related to the behavior or performance problems that led
to the reasonable suspicion test and maintain this documentation in
appropriate DOT files, if applicable.



         (e)   The DER shall remove or cause the removal of the
employee from the city-owned vehicle and ensure that the employee is
transported to ah appropriate collection site and thereafter to the
employee’s residence or, where appropriate, to a place of lodging. Under no
circumstances will that employee be allowed to continue to drive a city
vehicle or his/her own vehicle until a confirmed negative test result is
received.



   (F)   Baseline testing. The city may perform baseline testing on all
employees within a department at any given time, regardless or shift or
department.



(Ord. 13-33, passed 11-14-13)



§ 34.97  CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE TESTING PROTOCOL.



   The city may utilize, and the employee is required to submit to, any
method of testing offered by the entity providing the city’s testing
services. The following discusses the routine urine collection procedures,
but does not limit the city’s ability to use any other test method.
Regardless, of the method of test, all tests must adhere to proper
collection, testing and verification protocols, standard for the industry.



   (A)   Urine collection procedures.



      (1)   The testing procedure starts with the collection of a
urine specimen.



      (2)   Collection procedures will follow the specific
guidelines set forth by the U.S. Department of Transportation as outlined in
the published collection procedures guidelines.



      (3)   Employees will be directed to empty their pockets and
display the contents to the collector.



      (4)   Employees will be allowed privacy during the collection
process except as noted in division (A)(5) of this section.



      (5)   Observed collections are required if:



         (a)   The specimen is determined invalid and there is no
medical explanation.



         (b)   The specimen is determined to be negative-dilute
with a creatinine value greater than 2 mg/dl but less than 5 mg/dl.



         (c)   The collector observes evidence of an employee’s
attempt to tamper with the specimen.



         (d)   The temperature of the specimen is out of range.



         (e)   The specimen appears to have been tampered with.



         (f)   The test is a return-to-duty or follow- up test.



      (6)   Observed collections may be required on return-to-duty
and follow-up tests.



      (7)   As part of the collection process, the specimen provided
will be split into two portions; a primary specimen and a secondary (split)
specimen.



      (8)   If the employee is unable to provide 45 ml of urine, the
DOT “shy bladder” rule will apply. The employee will have up to three
hours to provide the required 45 ml, and may consume up to 40 ounces of
fluids during this time period. The employee will be required to be monitored
during the waiting period.



      (9)   After collection, the specimen will be submitted to a
SAMHSA-certified laboratory for testing.



   (B)   Laboratory procedures.



      (1)   Drug testing may be performed through urinalysis.
Urinalysis will test for the presence of drugs and/or metabolites of the
following controlled substances: marijuana, cocaine, opiates, amphetamines,
and phencyclidine (PCP) or other substance identified by the city.



      (2)   The SAMHSA-certified laboratory will perform initial
screenings on all primary specimens. In the event that the primary specimen
tests positive, a confirmation test of that specimen will automatically be
performed. If the confirmatory test is positive it will be reported to the
Medical Review Officer (MRO) as a positive.



   (C)   Validity testing.



      (1)   The laboratory must also perform validity testing on
each specimen received. The purpose of validity testing is to determine
whether certain adulterants or foreign substances were added to the urine, if
the urine was diluted, or if the specimen was substituted. The following will
be measured: creatinine level, specific gravity, and pH. In addition, all
specimens will be tested for known adulterants. An initial validity test is
performed first, followed by a confirmation test if required.



      (2)   All laboratory results will be reported by the
laboratory to a MRO designated by the city or its agents.



   (D)   MRO procedures.



      (1)   All tests results will undergo a review process by the
MRO.



      (2)   Negative test results will be reported directly to the
city by the MRO.



      (3)   Positive, adulterated, or substituted results will be
handled in the following manner by the MRO:



         (a)   Before reporting a positive, adulterated, or
substituted test result to the city, the MRO will attempt to contact the
employee to discuss the test result.



         (b)   The employee is required to discuss the result
with the MRO. The employee will be allowed to explain and present medical
documentation to explain any permissible use of a drug.



         (c)   For adulterated or substituted results, the
employee must demonstrate that he or she did produce or could have produced
urine, through physiological means, a specimen meeting the creatinine and
specific gravity criteria of a substituted or adulterated specimen.



         (d)   If the MRO is unable to contact the employee
directly, the MRO will contact the DER designated in advance by the city, who
shall, in turn., contact the employee and direct the employee to contact the
MRO. Upon being so directed, the employee shall contact the MRO immediately
or, if the MRO is unavailable, at the start of the MRO’s next business day.



         (e)   If, after failing to contact the MRO within 72
hours after being instructed to do so by the DER, or if the employee cannot
be contacted at all within ten days, or the employee expressly declines the
opportunity to discuss the test, the MRO may verify the test as positive or a
refusal.



         (f)   In the MRO’s sole discretion, a determination
will be made as to whether a result is verified as positive, negative, or
considered a refusal.



         (g)   After any verified positive or refusal to test
determination, the employee may petition the MRO to reopen the case for
reconsideration.



   (E)   Diluted specimens. If a test is reported as negative and
diluted, it will be the policy of the city to require an immediate recollect
for another test. The employee will be given the minimum possible advance
notice to report for another test. The result of this second test will become
the test of record. If the second test is also negative and diluted, the test
will be accepted as a valid test and no additional testing will be required.
If the employee is directed to take another test and declines to do so, this
will be considered a refusal to test and have the consequences of a refusal
to test.



   (F)   Medical information disclosure. Pursuant to DOT regulations,
if, in the MRO's opinion, any information provided may mean a medical
disqualification or represent a safety hazard, such as the use of certain
prescription drugs, the MRO must disclose this to the employer. Individual
test results for employee applicants and employees will be released to the
city and will be kept strictly confidential unless consent for the release of
the test result has been obtained. Any individual who has submitted to drug
testing in compliance with this procedure is entitled to receive the results
of such testing upon written request.



   (G)   Safeguards for the integrity of the drug testing process.



      (1)   The collector must obtain photo identification from the
donor or identification by supervisor prior to administering the test.



      (2)   The employee will be asked to wash his or her hands.



      (3)   The donor signs the chain of custody form signifying the
correctness of data for test reporting.



      (4)   Electronic communication of test results from the
laboratory into the MRO reporting system with no external human intervention.



      (5)   The specimen container and specimen bottles are
individually wrapped and unwrapped in employee's presence.



      (6)   After the specimen is provided in a reasonable time, the
collector inspects it for sufficient volume, temperature, and signs of
tampering. If a specimen is not provided, the employee will be referred to a
MRO to determine whether there is a valid medical reason. If there is, the
employee must still attempt to provide a specimen each time his or her name
is drawn.



      (7)   After the specimen is given to the collector, the
remaining collection procedures are conducted in donor's view.



      (8)   The specimen bottles and shipping container are sealed
with tamper evident seals.



      (9)   The donor will be asked to sign the seals covering the
specimen bottles identifying they were sealed in his or her presence.



      (10)   The specimen bottle seals match the identifying seals
on the chain of custody form.



      (11)   The laboratory will check the specimen bottles upon
receipt to insure the seal has not been broken. If the seal has been broken
the laboratory will report the test as cancelled.



      (12)   Blind sample submission through the laboratory for
quality control.



      (13)   A collector who has completed the qualification
training as mandated in CFR Part 49 as amended will perform the collection.



(Ord. 13-33, passed 11-14-13)



§ 34.98  SPLIT SPECIMEN TESTING PROTOCOL.



   (A)   An employee may request that the "split" portion of his/her
specimen be tested at a different SAMHSA laboratory if he/she was notified by
the MRO that his/her test result was positive, adulterated, or substituted.
The request must be made to the MRO within 72 hours of being notified of a
verified positive, adulterated, or substituted result. The MRO will arrange
for all procedures to be done in accordance with split specimen testing
procedures.



   (B)   The cost of a split specimen test will be the responsibility
of the employee. The city will withhold the amount of the cost of testing the
split from the employee's pay unless other arrangements are acceptable to
both the employee and the city. If the employee makes a timely request
(within 72 hours) to the MRO for the split portion to be tested, the MRO
shall immediately make arrangement with the laboratory to initiate the
process.



(Ord. 13-33, passed 11-14-13)



§ 34.99  ALCOHOL TESTING.



   (A)   Protocol.



      (1)   Tests conducted by trained technicians. Alcohol tests
will be conducted by a trained breath alcohol technician (BAT) or screening
test technician (STT). Screening tests may be done using an evidential breath
testing device (EBT) or non-evidential screening device approved by the
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration. Confirmatory tests will be
done by a trained BAT using an evidential breath testing device. The employee
shall report to the alcohol testing site as notified by the city. The
employee shall follow all instructions given by the alcohol technician.



      (2)   Results. If the result of a screening test is a breath
alcohol concentration (BAC) of less than 0.02, no further testing is
authorized. Any initial test indicating a BAC of .02 or greater will be
confirmed on an EBT operated by a BAT. The confirmation test will be
performed no sooner than 15 minutes and no later than 30 minutes following
the completion of the initial test. In the event the confirmation test
indicates a BAC of .020 to .039, the employee shall be removed from duty for
24 hours or until his/her next scheduled on-duty time, whichever is longer.
Employees with tests indicating a BAC of .04 or greater are considered to
have engaged in prohibited conduct, which may result in disciplinary action
up to and including termination. All alcohol tests shall be performed just
prior to, during, or just after performing a safety sensitive function.



   (B)   Alcohol testing safeguards for employee's protection.



      (1)   The BAT must obtain donor's photo identification prior
to administering the test.



      (2)   An individually wrapped mouthpiece will be opened and
inserted into the EBT for the employee’s test.



      (3)   The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration
approves the EBT that is used.



      (4)   Calibration checks are frequently performed to insure
the EBT is working efficiently.



      (5)   If the screening test indicates a 0.02 or greater, a
confirmation test will be administered.



      (6)   An air blank will be administered prior to the
confirmation test with a 0.000 reading.



      (7)   An individually wrapped mouthpiece will be inserted for
the confirmation test.



      (8)   The BAT has completed the required training course in
the correct operation of the EBT.



(Ord. 13-33, passed 11-14-13)



§ 34.100  EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS.



   (A)   CDL employees. The city shall provide educational materials
that explain the requirements of Part 382.601 of the Federal Motor Carrier
Safety Regulations (49 CFR 382.601), consequences of violating the
regulations, and the city’s policies and procedures with respect to meeting
these requirements. The materials supplied to the employees may include
information on additional city policies with respect to the use or possession
of alcohol or controlled substances-for example, the consequences for an
employee found to have specified alcohol or controlled substances level based
on the city’s authority independent of Part 382.601 of the Federal Motor
Carries Regulations (49 CFR 382.601). Materials will also be provided
concerning the effects of alcohol and controlled substances use on an
individual’s health, work, and personal life.



   (B)   CDL employees. Employees are required to attend an educational
meeting(s) to discuss the city’s policies and procedures and to review all
materials covered by this procedure. Each employee is required to sign a
statement (certificate of receipt) certifying that he or she has received a
copy of these materials described in Part 382.601 of the Federal Motor
Carrier Regulations (49 CFR 382.601). The city shall provide these materials
to each employee prior to the start of alcohol and controlled substance
testing and to each employee subsequently hired or transferred into a
position requiring driving a commercial vehicle.



   (C)   Non-regulated employees. The city shall provide educational
materials), consequences of violating the regulations, and the city’s
policies and procedures with respect to meeting these requirements. Materials
will also be provided concerning the effects of alcohol and controlled
substances use on an individual’s health, work, and personal life.
Employees are required to attend an educational meeting(s) to discuss the
city’s policies and procedures and to review all materials covered by this
procedure.



(Ord. 13-33, passed 11-14-13)



§ 34.101  DISCIPLINARY PROCEDURES FOR POLICY VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   Any employee who has a positive test for alcohol (.02 BAC or
greater) or controlled substances or has refused to test is considered in
violation of this policy. This employee is not qualified to drive a
commercial motor vehicle, other city vehicle, or perform any duties for the
city. The consequences of testing positive or refusing to test will result in
termination from employment with the city. City employees who hold a CDL
license will be provided with the name, address, and telephone number of
qualified substance abuse professionals (SAPs) so they may pursue assistance
in completing required DOT rehabilitation should they choose to do this.
Non-regulated employees will also be referred to a qualified SAP.



   (B)   A negative drug or alcohol test conclusion shall result in the
employee being immediately returned to work with payment of any loss of wages
or benefits suffered during this period of time, and interview records will
be destroyed.



   (C)   An employee who refuses to be tested shall be terminated.



   (D)   (1)   A first positive drug test result shall result in the
following discipline:



         (a)   Forty hours off work without pay.



         (b)   Referral for treatment/counseling/education
program.



         (c)   Employee will be required to participate in the
program.



         (d)   The employee must have a negative return to duty
test.



         (e)   Clearance for employee to return to work must be
given by the SAP.



      (2) A second positive drug test shall result in termination.



   (E)   (1)   A first positive alcohol test shall result in the
following discipline:



         (a)   In the event the confirmation test indicates a BAC
of .020 to .039, the employee shall be removed from duty for 24 hours,
without pay, or until his/her next scheduled on-duty time, whichever is
longer.



         (b)   In the event the confirmation test indicates a BAC
of .040 or higher the employee shall be removed from duty for 40 hours,
without pay, or until his/her next scheduled on-duty time, whichever is
longer.



         (c)   Referral for treatment/counseling/education
program.



         (d)   Employee will be required to participate in the
program.



         (e)   The employee must have a negative return to duty
test.



         (f)   Clearance for employee to return to work must be
given by the SAP.



      (2)   A second positive alcohol test for a BAC of .020 or
higher shall result in termination.



   (F)   Return to duty/follow-up tests. When an individual has
violated the prohibited drug or alcohol conduct standards and is reinstated
to his or her former position, follow-up tests are unannounced, and at least
six tests can be conducted in the first 12 months after the employee returns
to duty and may be extended for up to 60 months.



   (G)   The employee shall be responsible for the cost of return to
duty test and the follow-up tests.



   (H)   In the event that an employee is not cleared by the SAP to
return to work following the employee’s suspension without pay, the
employee may use his or her unused vacation while awaiting SAP clearance.



   (I)   For police and firefighters, discipline shall be administered
pursuant to state statute.



   (J)   An employee disagreeing with test results for drugs shall have
the right within 72 hours of when he/she was notified of the test results to
have his/her initial sample independently retested by an authorized
laboratory at his/her expense.



   (K)   A report concerning an employee or volunteer who unlawfully
manufactures, distributes, dispenses, or possesses drugs shall be filed with
legal authorities for appropriate disposition and action.



(Ord. 13-33, passed 11-14-13)



§ 34.102  VOLUNTARY DISCLOSURE.



   (A)   The city encourages personnel to seek help if they feel they
have a problem with drug or alcohol misuse before it becomes a matter of
discipline with the city. The city will assist any employee who voluntarily
discloses to the city that he/she believes that he/she has a drug or alcohol
problem in seeking professional help to address his or her problem. This
voluntary step of self-identification is the responsibility of the individual
and, with the exception of certain conditions, will alleviate the requirement
for disciplinary action if brought to the city’s attention prior to any
testing conducted by the city. Upon disclosure of a problem to city
personnel, the employee will be removed from all safety- sensitive areas
without pay until completion of the following rehabilitation steps are met.



   (B)   To be able to be returned to a CDL position or a non-regulated
position with the city, the following steps must be completed:



      (1)   Complete an initial evaluation with a SAP (substance
abuse professional).



      (2)   Complete any rehabilitation and/or education recommended
by the SAP.



      (3)   Complete a second evaluation with the SAP and obtain
written confirmation of satisfactory progress and/or completion of all
recommendations.



      (4)   Complete a return-to-duty test that is issued with a
negative result.



      (5)   As a condition of continued employment, the employee
will be required to submit to a minimum of six unannounced follow up tests in
the next 12 months after returning to work.



   (C)   Follow-up testing is separate from and in addition to the
city’s reasonable suspicion, post-accident, and random testing procedures.
The schedule for follow-up testing shall be unannounced and in accordance
with the instructions of the SAP.



   (D)   The employee will be responsible for all costs associated with
this process. If the employee makes no commitment to overcoming the problem
and achieving a satisfactory level of performance, attendance, or behavior,
then termination of employment will result.



(Ord. 13-33, passed 11-14-13)



§ 34.103  CONFIDENTIALITY AND RELEASE OF INFORMATION.



   (A)   Under no circumstances, unless required or authorized by law,
will alcohol or drug testing information or results for any employee or
applicant be released without written request from the applicable employee.



   (B)   The city may release information as follows:



      (1)   Copies of the results of alcohol or drug testing to an
identified person provided that the employee has provided written consent.



      (2)   Copies of information requested by the Secretary of
Transportation, any DOT agency, or any state or local official with
regulatory control over the city or any of its employees.



      (3)   The results of post-accident testing when requested by
the National Transportation Safety Board as part of an accident investigation.



      (4)   Legal proceedings to include:



         (a)   Lawsuits (e.g., wrongful discharge action);



         (b)   Grievances (e.g., an arbitration concerning
disciplinary action taken by the employer);



         (c)   Administrative proceedings (e.g., an unemployment
compensation hearing) brought on by, or on behalf of, an employee and
resulting from a positive DOT drug test or alcohol test or a refusal to test
(including, but not limited to, adulterated or substituted test results); and



         (d)   Criminal or civil actions-to the decision maker in
the proceeding (e.g., the court in the lawsuit).



   (C)   Employees are entitled, upon written request, to obtain copies
of any records pertaining to their use of alcohol or controlled substances,
including any records pertaining to his or her alcohol or controlled
substance tests.



(Ord. 13-33, passed 11-14-13)



§ 34.104  RESPONSIBILITY.



   (A)   Employees. All city employees that hold a valid CDL are
responsible for abiding by this procedure as a condition of their employment.
All non-regulated employees are responsible for abiding by this policy to
avoid discipline.



   (B)   Management officials and supervisors. All supervisors and city
officials are responsible for being alert to employee conduct that raises a
reasonable suspicion that an employee is using or is under the influence of
alcohol or controlled substances while on duty or otherwise performing city
business.



   (C)   Policy not a contract. This policy is not intended nor should
it be construed as a contract between the city and the employee. This policy
may change at any time at the sole discretion of the city and/or to comply
with changes in federal DOT regulations.



(Ord. 13-33, passed 11-14-13)



§ 34.105  ABBREVIATIONS AND TERMS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following abbreviations and
terms shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



   BAT.  Breath alcohol technician.



   CDL.  Commercial drivers’ license.



   CMV.  Commercial motor vehicle.



   DER.  Designated employer representative.



   DHHS.  Department of Health and Human Services.



   DOT.  Department of Transportation.



   EAP.  Employee assistance program.



   EBT.  Evidential breath testing device.



   MRO.  Medical review officer.



   SAMHSA.  Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration.



   STT.  Screening test technician.



(Ord. 13-33, passed 11-14-13)



§ 34.106 DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ADULTERATED SPECIMEN.  A specimen that contains a substance that is
not expected to be present in human urine, or contains a substance expected
to be present but is at a concentration so high that it is not consistent
with human urine.



   ALCOHOL.  Intoxicating agent in beverage alcohol, ethyl alcohol, or
other low molecular weight alcohol including methyl and isopropyl alcohol.



   ALCOHOL CONCENTRATION (OR CONTENT).  Alcohol in a volume of breath
(shown as grams of alcohol/210 liters of breath) as indicated by an
evidential breath test.



   ALCOHOL USE.  Consumption of any beverage, mixture, or preparation,
including medications, containing alcohol.



   BREATH ALCOHOL TECHNICIAN (BAT).  An individual who instructs and
assists individuals in the alcohol testing process and operates an evidential
breath measurement (EBT) device.



   CONFIRMATION TEST.  In alcohol testing: a second test, following a
screening test with a result of 0.02 or greater, that provides quantitative
data of alcohol concentration. In controlled substances testing: a second
test to identify the presence of a specific drug or metabolite. In order to
ensure reliability and accuracy, this test is separate from and uses a
different technique and chemical principle from that of the screening test.



   CONFIRMATION VALIDITY TEST.  A second test performed on a urine
specimen to further support a validity test result.



   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES.  In this regulation, the term “drugs” and
“controlled substances” are interchangeable and have the same meaning.
Unless otherwise provided, these terms refer to: marijuana, cocaine, opiates,
phencyclidine (PCP), amphetamines, including methamphetamines.



   DESIGNATED EMPLOYER REPRESENTATIVE (DER).  An employee authorized by
the employer to take immediate action(s) to remove employees from safety-
sensitive duties and to make required decisions in the testing and evaluation
processes. The DER also receives test results and other communications for
the employer.



   DILUTE SPECIMEN.  A specimen with creatinine and specific gravity
values that are lower than expected for human urine.



   EBT or EVIDENTIAL BREATH TESTING DEVICE.  An EBT approved by the
National Highway Traffic Safety Association (NHTSA) for the evidential
testing of breath and placed on NHTSA’s Conforming Products List of
Evidential Breath Measurement Devices (CPL).



   EMPLOYEE.  Any person who operates a commercial vehicle (CMV),
including: full time, regularly employed employees; casual, intermittent, or
occasional employees; leased employees; independent, owner-operated
contractors who are either directly employed by or under lease to an employer
or who operate a commercial motor vehicle at the direction of or with the
consent of an employer.



   EVIDENTIAL BREATH TESTING (EBT) DEVICE.  A device used for alcohol
breath testing that has been approved by the National Highway Traffic Safety
Administration.



   INITIAL DRUG TEST.  The test used to differentiate a negative specimen
from one that requires further testing for drugs or drug metabolites.



   INITIAL VALIDITY TEST.  The first test used to determine if a specimen
is adulterated, diluted, or substituted.



   MEDICAL REVIEW OFFICER (MRO).  A licensed physician (medical doctor or
doctor of osteopathy) responsible for receiving laboratory results generated
by an employer’s drug testing program. The MRO must have knowledge of
substance abuse disorders and appropriate medical training to interpret and
evaluate an individual’s confirmed positive test, medical history, and
other relevant biomedical information.



   PERFORMING (A SAFETY SENSITIVE FUNCTION or EMPLOYED IN A SAFETY
SENSITIVE AREA).  An employee is considered to be PERFORMING A
SAFETY-SENSITIVE FUNCTION or EMPLOYED IN A SAFETY SENSITIVE AREA when he or
she is actually performing, ready to perform, or immediately available to
perform any safety-sensitive function. See § 34.93(A).



   PRIMARY SPECIMEN.  The urine specimen bottle that is opened and tested
first by the laboratory to determine whether the employee has a drug or drug
metabolite in his or her system, and for the purpose of validity testing. The
PRIMARY SPECIMEN is distinguished from the split specimen, defined in this
section.



   SCREENING TEST (INITIAL TEST).  In alcohol testing: a procedure to
determine if an employee has a prohibited concentration of alcohol in his or
her system. In controlled substance testing: a screen to eliminate
“negative” urine specimens from further consideration.



   SPLIT SPECIMEN.  A part of the urine specimen that is sent to a first
laboratory and retained unopened, and which is transported to a second
laboratory in the event that the employee requests that it be tested
following a verified positive test of the primary specimen or a verified
adulterated or substituted test result.



   SUBSTITUTED SPECIMEN.  A specimen with creatinine and specific gravity
values that are so diminished that they are not consistent with human urine.



   SUBSTANCE ABUSE PROFESSIONAL (SAP).  A licensed physician (medical
doctor or doctor of osteopathy), or a licensed or certified psychologist,
social worker, employee assistance professional, or certified addiction
counselor with knowledge of any and clinical experience in the diagnosis and
treatment of alcohol and controlled substances-related disorders.



(Ord. 13-33, passed 11-14-13)



CHAPTER 35:  CITY FUNDS



Section



   35.01   Law Enforcement Firearms Training Fund



   35.02   Special Nonreverting Operating Fund for recreational purposes



   35.03   Cumulative Capital Development Fund



   35.04   Emergency Warning System Fund



   35.05   Special Vehicle Inspection Fund



   35.06   Law Enforcement Continuing Enforcement Fund



   35.07   (Reserved)



   35.08   Insurance Premium and Deferred Compensation Deposit Fund



   35.09   Levy Excess Fund



   35.10   Law Enforcement Assistance Fund



   35.11   Motor Vehicle Highway II Fund



   35.12   Project Fun Fund



   35.13   Brittlebank Pool Lights - PCCF Fund



   35.14   Crow Population Control Fund



   35.15   Survival Life Trailer Fund



   35.16   Rainy Day Fund



   35.17   Downtown Planning Fund



   35.18   Option Income Tax Fund



   35.19   Economic Development Commission Bond Fee Fund



   35.20   Economic Development Income Tax Fund



   35.21   TIF Deposit Fund



   35.22   Mt. Vernon Youth Basketball Fund



   35.23   Imagination Station Fund



   35.24   Operation Pullover Fund



   35.25   West School Stormwater Fund



   35.26   Brittlebank Swim Team Fund



   35.27   Unsafe Building Fund



   35.28   MV Downtown TIF Fund



   35.29   LOIT Special Distribution Fund



   35.30   Bark Park Fund



   35.31   Community Crossing Grant Fund



§ 35.01  LAW ENFORCEMENT FIREARMS TRAINING FUND.



   Handgun license application fees received by the Police Department
which were previously deposited into the Firearms Training Fund, shall now be
deposited with and receipted by the Clerk-Treasurer and held in the Law
Enforcement Continuing Education Fund for refund to unsuccessful applicants
as required by statute and for use by the Police Department for firearms
training and other appropriate training activities.



(Ord. 81-30, passed 9-14-81; Am. Ord. 94-11, passed 7-11-94)



§ 35.02  SPECIAL NONREVERTING OPERATING FUND FOR RECREATIONAL PURPOSES.



   (A)   There is created a special nonreverting operating fund to be
used for the operation and development of sports, recreation programs, and
programs of recreational classes and instruction by the Parks and Recreation
Department of the city and Black Township, pursuant to I.C. 36-10-3-22.



   (B)   The income from fees paid by participants in the sports and
recreational programs, user fees, recreational instruction programs, and
other funds shall, to the extent permitted by statute, be deposited in the
nonreverting operating fund created by this section if the disposition is
approved by the Parks and Recreation Department.  Such funds may be expended
without appropriation to pay officials, instructors, and other costs of the
sports and recreation programs and classes.



(Ord. 79-17, passed 4-23-79; Am. Ord. 82-9, passed 3-8-83)



§ 35.03  CUMULATIVE CAPITAL DEVELOPMENT FUND.



   (A)   There is established a Cumulative Capital Development Fund.



   (B)   An ad valorem property tax levy will be imposed, and the
revenues from the levy will be retained in the Cumulative Capital Development
Fund.



   (C)   The maximum rate of levy under division (B) of this section
shall be and shall not exceed $ .12 per $100 assessed valuation for 2003, and
$.12 per $100 assessed valuation for 2004, and $.12 per $100 assessed
valuation for 2005.



   (D)   The funds accumulated in the Cumulative Capital Development
Fund will be used for the purposes permitted by I.C. 36-8-14 (which include
the purchase of firefighting equipment) and the purposes permitted by I.C.
36-9-16 (which include the purchase of motor vehicles, including firefighting
vehicles and related equipment).



   (E)   Notwithstanding division (D) of this section, funds
accumulated in the Cumulative Capital Development Fund may be spent for
purposes other than the purposes stated in division (D) of this section, if
the purpose is to protect the public health, welfare, or safety in an
emergency situation which demands immediate action.  Money may be spent
under the authority of this section only after the Mayor issues a declaration
that the public health, welfare, or safety is in immediate danger that
requires the expenditure of money in the fund.



(Ord. 87-4, passed 2-9-87; Am. Ord. 90-14, passed 6-25-90; Am. Ord. 93-5,
passed 6-14-93; Am. Ord. 93-5A, passed 7-26-93; Am. Ord. 96-12, passed
5-13-96; Am. Ord. 02-18, passed 7-29-02)



§ 35.04  EMERGENCY WARNING SYSTEM FUND.



   (A)   There is hereby established a separate account for the city
which account shall be known as the Emergency Warning System Fund (EWSF).



   (B)   The Clerk-Treasurer shall have custody of the Emergency
Warning System Fund and shall account for funds therein separate and apart
from other funds of the city, but shall be governed by the laws applicable to
city funds in the investment of and accounting for these funds.



   (C)   Persons receiving donations on behalf of the city for the
Emergency Warning System Fund shall keep accurate records of the names and
addresses of the persons making donations and the amounts donated by each
person.



   (D)   To the extent funds donated for the acquisition and
installation of an emergency warning system are not expended for that
purpose, those funds shall be returned to the donors (on a pro rata basis if
some funds have been expended).  To the extent donors or the location of
donors cannot be ascertained or donors do not wish a refund, any funds
remaining in the Emergency Warning System Fund shall be spent by the city for
emergency, police, or fire equipment.



   (E)   No appropriation shall be required for expenditures from the
Emergency  Warning System Fund for equipment systems or installation or for
any refund to donors to the Emergency Warning System Fund.



(Ord. 86-2, passed 2-10-86)



Cross-reference:



   For additional provisions concerning the Emergency Warning System Fund,
see § 33.152.



§ 35.05  SPECIAL VEHICLE INSPECTION FUND.



   For provisions concerning the Special Vehicle Inspection Fund, see §
70.36.



§ 35.06  LOCAL LAW ENFORCEMENT CONTINUING ENFORCEMENT FUND.



   (A)   Pursuant to I.C. 5-2-8-2, there is established in the city a
Law Enforcement Continuing Education Program for use by its law enforcement
agency.



   (B)   Pursuant to I.C. 5-2-8-2, there is established a Law
Enforcement Continuing Education (LECE) Fund, and funds collected by the law
enforcement agency from the Local User Fee Fund, established by I.C.
33-19-8-1 et seq., shall be deposited into the Local Law Enforcement
Continuing Education Fund to fund the Law Enforcement Continuing Education
Program and training of officers, and for equipment and supplies for law
enforcement purposes.



   (C)   Distribution of money in a local Law Enforcement Continuing
Education Fund shall be made to a city law enforcement agency without the
necessity of first obtaining an appropriation.



(Ord. 89-19, passed 7-10-89; Am. Ord. 94-11, passed 7-11-94)



§ 35.07  (RESERVED).



§ 35.08  INSURANCE PREMIUM AND DEFERRED COMPENSATION DEPOSIT FUND.



   (A)   There is established in the City of Mt. Vernon, Indiana a fund
entitled the “Insurance Premium and Deferred Compensation Deposit Fund.”



   (B)   All insurance premiums and deferred compensation payments paid
by an individual or group which represent premiums of payments paid by a
method other than being withheld from income or wages paid by the City of Mt.
Vernon, shall be receipted into the Insurance Premium and Deferred
Compensation Deposit Fund.



   (C)   The Clerk-Treasurer is authorized to make expenditures from
this Fund for the purpose of paying the insurance premium or making deferred
compensation payments on behalf of the individual or group making the premium
or deferred compensation payment to the city.



   (D)   This Fund shall be a continuing fund and all monies receipted
into the Fund shall be expended for the purposes set forth in division (C) of
this section.  Any balance remaining in the Fund at the end of the year
shall not revert to the General Fund, but shall remain in the Insurance
Premium and Deferred Compensation Deposit Fund to be expended for the
purposes set forth in division (C) of this section.



   (E)   This Fund shall continue until terminated by ordinance.  In
the event the Fund is terminated, any balance in the Fund shall be applied
first to outstanding premiums then due and owing for an individual or group
as their interest may appear and if not so applied, then shall be refunded to
the individual or group who submitted payment and which payment has not been
applied to insurance premiums or deferred compensation payments.



(Ord. 97-02, passed 1-13-97)



§ 35.09  LEVY EXCESS FUND.



   (A)   A City Levy Excess Fund is hereby established.



   (B)   The Clerk-Treasurer may invest money in the Levy Excess Fund
in the same manner in which money in the General Fund may be invested. 
However, any income derived from investment of this money shall be deposited
in and become a part of the Levy Excess Fund.



   (C)   Money in the Levy Excess Fund may not be expended until the
expenditures of the money has been included in a budget that has been
approved by the Department of Local Government Finance.



   (D)   Money in the Levy Excess Fund may be transferred to other
funds to reimburse those funds for amounts withheld from the city as a result
of refunds paid under I.C. 6-1.1-26.



   (E)   Subject to limitation of Indiana law, the money in the City
Levy Excess Fund may be used for any lawful purpose for which money in any of
the city’s other funds may be used.



(Ord. 97-43, passed 11-10-97; Am. Ord. 05-16, passed 6-27-05)



§ 35.10  INDIANA LAW ENFORCEMENT ASSISTANCE FUND.



   There is hereby created the Indiana Law Enforcement Assistance Fund
within the city for proper receipt and disbursement of the Indiana Law
Enforcement Assistance Fund (ILEAF) grant proceeds.



(Res. 97-46, passed 11-24-97)



§ 35.11  MOTOR VEHICLE HIGHWAY II FUND.



   (A)   There is established in the city a fund entitled the Motor
Vehicle Highway II Fund.



   (B)   The amount of money conveyed to the city from the state for
the improvement, maintenance, repair, replacement and care of Indiana State
Highway 69 which was transferred to the city by the state shall be receipted
into the Motor Vehicle Highway II Fund.



   (C)   The Clerk-Treasurer is authorized to make expenditures from
this Fund for the purpose of paying any cost of improvement, maintenance,
repair, replacement and care of that portion of Indiana State Highway 69
which was transferred to the city by the state, now known as Main Street.



   (D)   This Fund shall be a continuing fund and all monies receipted
into the Fund shall be expended for the purposes set forth in division (C) of
this section.  Any balance remaining in the Fund at the end of a year shall
not revert to the General Fund, but shall remain in the Motor Vehicle Highway
II Fund to be expended for the purposes set forth in division (C) of this
section.



   (E)   This Fund shall continue until terminated by ordinance.



(Ord. 98-23, passed 11-9-98)



§ 35.12  PROJECT FUN FUND.



   (A)   There is established in the city a fund entitled "Project Fun."



   (B)   The funds received by the city from Youth Service Bureau, Inc.
for the AFTERNOONS R.O.C.K. in INDIANA Program shall be receipted into the
Project Fun Fund.



   (C)   The Clerk-Treasurer is authorized to make expenditures from
this Fund for the purpose of operating the after school program in compliance
with the YSBI Agreement for the Park and Recreation Department. 
Expenditures shall be made pursuant to the state law and the agreement letter.



   (D)   This Fund shall be a continuing fund and all monies receipted
into the Fund shall be expended for the purposes set forth in division (C)
above. As allowed by law, any balance remaining in the Fund at the end of a
year shall not revert to the General Fund, but shall remain in the Project
Fun Fund to be expended for the purposes set forth in division (C) above.



   (E)   This Fund shall continue until terminated by ordinance.



(Ord. 02-04, passed 2-25-02)



§ 35.13  BRITTLEBANK POOL LIGHTS - PCCF FUND.



   (A)   There is established in the city a fund entitled "Brittlebank
Pool Lights-PCCF" Fund.



   (B)   The funds received by the city from the County Community
Foundation for the lighting improvements grant shall be receipted into the
Brittlebank Pool Lights - PCCF Fund.



   (C)   The Clerk-Treasurer is authorized to make expenditures from
this Fund for the purpose of improving the lighting at Brittlebank Pool in
compliance with the County Community Foundation grant. Expenditures shall be
made pursuant to the state law and the grant.



   (D)   This Fund shall be a continuing fund and all monies receipted
into the Fund shall be expended for the purposes set forth in division (C)
above.  As allowed by law, any balance remaining in the Fund at the end of a
year shall not revert to the General Fund, but shall remain in the
Brittlebank Pool Lights-PCCF Fund to be expended for the purposes set forth
in division (C) above.



   (E)   This Fund shall continue until terminated by ordinance.



(Ord. 02-13, passed 6-10-02)



§ 35.14  CROW POPULATION CONTROL FUND.



   (A)   There is hereby established a separate account for the city
which account shall be known as the Crow Population Control Fund (CPCF).



   (B)   The Clerk-Treasurer shall have custody of the CPCF and shall
account for funds therein separate and apart from other funds of the city,
but shall be governed by the laws applicable to city funds in the investment
and accounting for these funds.



   (C)   Money donated to the city for the purpose of controlling the
crow population within the corporate boundaries shall be received into the
CPCF and expended only for the purpose of controlling said crow population.



   (D)   No appropriation shall be required for expenditures from the
CPCF for equipment, supplies, or services designated for the purposes set
forth herein.



(Ord. 05-09, passed 5-9-05)



§ 35.15  SURVIVAL LIFE TRAILER FUND.



   (A)   There is hereby established a separate account for the city
which account shall be known as the Survival Life Trailer Fund (SLTF).



   (B)   The Clerk-Treasurer shall have custody of the SLTF and shall
account for funds therein separate and apart from other funds of the city,
but shall be governed by the laws applicable to city funds in the investment
of and accounting for these funds.



   (C)   Money donated to the city for the purpose of maintenance and
repair of the Survival Life Trailer of the city Fire Department shall be
received into the SLTF and expended only for those purposes.



   (D)   No appropriation shall be required for expenditures from the
SLTF for the purposes set out in division (C).



(Ord. 05-10, passed 5-24-05)



§ 35.16  RAINY DAY FUND.



   (A)   There is hereby established a Rainy Day Fund pursuant to I.C.
36-1-8-5.1 to be funded by the remaining payments in lieu of annexation
received under the Agreements.  The funds on deposit in the Rainy Day Fund
may be used for the operation of the city and its various departments for any
lawful purpose.



   (B)   The city shall authorize the expenditure of funds from the
Rainy Day Fund by appropriations made in any manner authorized by law.



(Ord. 06-12, passed 4-10-06)



§ 35.17  DOWNTOWN PLANNING FUND.



   (A)   There is hereby established a separate account for the city
which account shall be known as the Downtown Planning Fund.



   (B)   The Clerk-Treasurer shall have the custody of the Downtown
Planning Fund and shall account for the funds therein separate and apart from
other funds of the city, but shall be governed by the laws applicable to city
funds in the investment of and accounting for these funds.



   (C)   Money received from the Auditor of the State of Indiana for
the purpose of the downtown planning grant shall be received into the
Downtown Planning Fund and expended only for those purposes.



   (D)   No appropriation shall be required for expenditures from the
Downtown Planning Fund for the purposes set out in division (C).



(Ord. 06-19, passed 8-28-06)



§ 35.18  OPTION INCOME TAX FUND.



   (A)   There is hereby established a separate account for the city
which account shall be known as the County Option Income Tax Fund (COIT).



   (B)   The Clerk-Treasurer shall have custody of the COIT Fund and
shall account for funds therein separate and apart from other funds of the
city, but shall be governed by the laws applicable to city funds in the
investment of and accounting for these funds.



(Ord. 06-32, passed 11-27-06)



§ 35.19  ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION BOND FEE FUND.



   (A)   There is now created the Economic Development Commission Bond
Fee Fund.



   (B)   Fees paid by applicants pursuant to I.C. 36-7-12-29 shall be
placed in this Fund to be used as provided by statute and the Clerk-Treasurer
is authorized to make receipts into the Fund and make payments from the Fund
in the usual course of business and in accordance with Indiana law.



   (C)   This Fund shall be a continuing fund and all monies receipted
into the Fund shall be expended for the purposes set forth in division (B). 
Any balance remaining in the Fund at the end of a year shall not revert to
the General Fund but shall remain in the Economic Development Commission Bond
Fee Fund to be expended for the purposes set forth in division (B).



(Ord. 07-06, passed 4-9-07)



§ 35.20  ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT INCOME TAX FUND.



   (A)   There is now created the Economic Development Income Tax Fund.



   (B)   Money received by the city as its distribution of the county
economic development income tax shall be placed in this fund to be used as
provided by statute and the Clerk-Treasurer is authorized to make receipts
into said fund and make payments from said fund in accordance with Indiana
law as provided by state law and in accordance with action by the city’s
fiscal body.



   (C)   This fund shall be a continuing fund and all monies receipted
into the fund shall be expended for the purposes set forth in division (B) of
this section.  Any balance remaining in the fund at the end of a year shall
not revert to the general fund but shall remain in the Economic Development
Income Tax Fund to be expended for the purposes set forth in division (B) of
this section.



   (D)   This fund shall continue until terminated by ordinance.



(Ord. 09-36, passed 12-28-09)



§ 35.21  TIF DEPOSIT FUND.



   (A)   There is established the TIF Deposit Fund in order that the
Clerk-Treasurer can receive tax deposits and pay said proceeds to the trustee
in accordance with the TIF bond ordinance.  This fund shall be a
non-reverting fund.



   (B)   This fund shall continue until terminated by ordinance.



(Res. 09-24, passed 9-14-09)



§ 35.22  MT. VERNON YOUTH BASKETBALL FUND.



   (A)   There is established within the Mount Vernon-Black Township
Park and Recreation Department a Mt. Vernon Youth Basketball Fund for the
operation of a youth basketball program.  This fund shall be a non-reverting
fund.



   (B)   This fund shall continue until terminated by ordinance.



(Ord. 09-30, passed 11-9-09)



§ 35.23  IMAGINATION STATION FUND.



   (A)   There is established an Imagination Station Fund to receive
funds or donations and make expenditures for the upkeep, maintenance,
replacements, improvements and other costs related to Imagination Station at
College Park in Mt. Vernon, Indiana. This fund shall be a non-reverting fund.



   (B)   This fund shall continue until terminated by ordinance.



(Res. 10-15, passed 9-13-10)



§ 35.24  OPERATION PULLOVER FUND.



   There is established the Operation Pullover Fund in order that the
Clerk-Treasurer can receive Operation Pullover grant proceeds, make deposits
and pay said proceeds to the participating officers as documented by the
grant procedures and application for funds.  This Fund shall be a
non-reverting fund.



(Res. 11-08, passed 8-8-11)



§ 35.25  WEST SCHOOL STORMWATER FUND.



   (A)   There is established the West School Stormwater Fund in order
that the Clerk-Treasurer can receive grant proceeds, along with any other
amounts designated for this project, make deposits and pay the proceeds in
accordance with the grant procedures and application for funds. This fund
shall be a non-reverting fund.



   (B)   This Fund shall continue until terminated by resolution.



(Res. 12-02, passed 2-13-12)



§ 35.26  BRITTLEBANK SWIM TEAM FUND.



   (A)   There is established within the City of Mount Vernon - Black
Township Park and Recreation Department a Brittlebank Swim Team Fund for the
operation of a swim team. This fund shall be a non-reverting fund.



   (B)   This fund shall continue until terminated by ordinance.



(Res. 13-5, passed 4-4-13)



§ 35.27  UNSAFE BUILDING FUND.



   (A)   There is established the Unsafe Building Fund in order that
the Clerk-Treasurer can receive proceeds as a result of the payment or
collection of fines, costs and fees by persons or entities required to pay
said fines, costs and fees, make deposits, and pay expenses related to the
enforcement of the Unsafe Building Code. This fund shall be a non-reverting
fund.



   (B)   This fund shall continue until terminated by ordinance.



(Res. 13-5, passed 4-4-13; Am. Res. 14-2, passed 1-23-14)



§ 35.28  MV DOWNTOWN TIF FUND.



   (A)   There is established within the City of Mount Vernon the MV
Downtown TIF Fund. This fund shall be a non-reverting fund. The
Clerk-Treasurer is directed to deposit into said fund, the tax revenues
received which are attributable to the designated downtown and adjacent area
TIF District.



   (B)   This fund shall continue until terminated by ordinance.
Expenditure from this fund may be made as provided for by state statute.



   (C)   This section shall be in full force and effect after adoption
by the Council and approval by the Mayor.



(Res. 15-17, passed 6-25-15)



§ 35.29  LOIT SPECIAL DISTRIBUTION FUND.



   (A)   Establishment of the fund.



      (1)   There is established in the city the LOIT Special
Distribution Fund (Fund 257).



      (2)   Said fund shall be a non-reverting fund of the city.



   (B)   Receipts and distributions from the fund.



      (1)   Upon the Clerk-Treasurer’s receipt of the LOIT Special
Distribution proceeds from the Posey County Auditor, the Clerk-Treasurer
shall deposit 75% of the amount received into the LOIT Special Distribution
Fund (Fund 257).



      (2)   Funds held in Fund 257 may only be used for the purposes
provided for in I.C. 6-3.6-9-17, which currently allows the following:



         (a)   Engineering, land acquisition, construction,
resurfacing, maintenance, restoration, or rehabilitation of both local and
arterial road and street systems;



         (b)   The payment of principal and interest on bonds
sold primarily to finance road, street or thorough fare projects;



         (c)   Any local costs required to undertake a
recreational or reservoir road project under I.C. 8-23-5;



         (d)   The purchase, rental, or repair of highway
equipment;



         (e)   Providing a match for a grant from the local road
and bridge matching grant fund under I.C. 8-23-30; or



         (f)   Capital projects for aviation related property or
facilities, including capital projects of a Board of Aviation Commissioners
established under I.C. 8-22-2 or an airport authority established under I.C.
8-22-3-1.



      (3)   Upon the Clerk-Treasurer’s receipt of the LOIT Special
Distribution proceeds from the Posey County Auditor, the Clerk-Treasurer
shall deposit 25% of the amount received into the city’s Rainy  Day Fund
to be used for any purpose allowable by law.



   (C)   This fund shall continue until terminated by ordinance.



(Res. 2016-7, passed 5-12-16)



§ 35.30  BARK PARK FUND.



   (A)   There is established within the City of Mount Vernon-Black
Township Park and Recreation Department the Bark Park Fund for the operation
and maintenance of a dog park. This fund shall be a non-reverting fund.
Deposits into and payments from the Bark Park Fund shall be in accordance
with procedures approved by the State Board of Accounts.



   (B)   This fund shall continue until terminated by ordinance.



(Res. 2017-4, passed 3-2-17)



§ 35.31  COMMUNITY CROSSING GRANT FUND.



   (A)   There is now created a fund within the city entitled the
Community Crossing Grant Fund (Fund). The City Clerk-Treasurer is authorized
and directed to deposit into said fund Community Crossing Grant proceeds
received by the city.



   (B)   Monies within the Fund shall be used for the payment of costs
associated with road improvements within the city, upon proper appropriation.
This fund is a non-reverting fund.



(Ord. 2017-1, passed 1-5-17)



CHAPTER 36:  CITY POLICIES



Section



General Provisions



   36.01   Payment of membership dues to organizations



   36.02   Reimbursement of travel expenses



   36.03   Exemption of certain records from public disclosure



   36.04   Receipt and expenditure of insurance proceeds



   36.05   Credit card policy



   36.06   Preapproved payment of certain claims



   36.07   Smoking prohibited in city-owned and city-occupied buildings



   36.08   Non-discrimination plan and policy



   36.09   Internal control standards and materiality threshold




Employment of Qualified Disabled Persons




   36.15   Policy statement



   36.16   Grievance procedure



Fixed Asset Capitalization Policy



   36.20   Definitions and provisions



   36.21   Recording and accounting



   36.22   Safeguarding of assets



Revenue Bond Fees



   36.30   Economic Development Commission Revenue Bond Fees



Deferred Compensation Plan



   36.40   Adoption; execution



   36.41   Contribution



Sexual Harassment



   36.50   Purpose



   36.51   Definition of sexual harassment



   36.52   Definition of other prohibited forms of harassment



   36.53   Policy



Purchase and Identification of City Vehicles



   36.60   Vehicle purchases to be budgeted expenditures



   36.61   Vehicle specifications



   36.62   Vehicle identification



   36.63   Emergency vehicle purchases



City Purchases



   36.75   Purchasing agency and agent



   36.76   Purchase of supplies costing less than $25,000



   36.77   Purchase of services



   36.78   Purchase of supplies manufactured in the United States



Electronic Communications Policy



   36.85   Purpose



   36.86   Prohibited communications



   36.87   Personal use



   36.88   Access to employee communications



   36.89   Software



   36.90   Security/appropriate use



   36.91   Encryption/passwords



   36.92   Participation in online forums



   36.93   Violations



 



   Appendix A: Employee agreement on use of e-mail and the internet



Cross-reference:



   Public purchases, see §§ 32.20 through 32.28



   GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 36.01  PAYMENT OF MEMBERSHIP DUES TO ORGANIZATIONS.



   (A)   The Common Council is authorized to budget and appropriate
funds from the General Fund or from other funds to provide membership for the
city and the elected and appointed officials and members of the
municipality’s boards, departments, agencies, or Council in local,
regional, state, and national associations of a civic, educational, or
governmental nature, which have as their purpose the betterment and
improvement of municipal operations.



   (B)   The Common Council is further authorized to budget and
appropriate funds to pay the expenses of duly authorized representatives to
attend the meetings and functions of organizations to which the municipality
belongs.



   (C)   Funds appropriated pursuant to  divisions (A)  and (B) of
this section may be expended  for  those  memberships  and  expenses as
authorized by the board or department head responsible for the activities of
the department for which the funds are appropriated.



(Ord. 82-36, passed 11-8-82)



§ 36.02  REIMBURSEMENT OF TRAVEL EXPENSES.



   Upon filing of a claim in accordance with § 34.48 and on a form
approved by the State Board of Accounts, and when the travel has been
authorized by the board or commission having responsibility for approving
claims for the department or activity for which the expense is incurred:



   (A)   The owner of any motor vehicle used or driven on city business
may be reimbursed at the rate of $.25 per mile.  However, there shall be no
reimbursement for mileage traveled to or from meetings of the Common Council
or Board of Public Works and Safety nor for mileage traveled to or from the
person’s office or place of employment to or from his place of residence.



   (B)   Persons traveling to city business by any form of public
transportation shall be reimbursed the actual costs of the transportation at
the lowest rate available for the employee’s travel.



   (C)   Persons traveling on city business who, while on that
business, are required to stay overnight outside the city may be reimbursed
for the actual cost of their lodging at the lowest rate available for the
employee’s stay.



   (D)   Persons traveling on city business who eat meals outside the
city while on that business shall be entitled to be reimbursed for the actual
cost of such meals but not to exceed $25 per day.



(Ord. 84-20, passed 8-13-84; Am. Ord. 96-33, passed 10-14-96)



§ 36.03  EXEMPTION OF CERTAIN RECORDS FROM PUBLIC DISCLOSURE.



   (A)   The following public records are exempted from disclosure
(unless access to the records is specifically required by state or federal
statute or is ordered by a court under the rules of discovery):



      (1)   Those exempted by state statute;



      (2)   Investigatory records of law enforcement agencies except
for disclosure required by I.C. 5-14-3-5;



      (3)   The work product of attorneys representing the city, a
city official, department, commission, agency, or employee;



      (4)   Records relating to negotiations of the Economic
Development Commission with industrial, research, or commercial prospects
while negotiations are in progress;



      (5)   Records that contain intra-agency or inter-agency
advisory or deliberative material that are expressions of opinion or are of a
speculative nature, and that are communicated for the purpose of
decision-making;



      (6)   Diaries, journals, or other personal notes serving as
the functional equivalent of a diary or journal;



      (7)   Personnel files of public employees (however, all
personnel file information shall be made available to the affected employee
or his representative), except for:



         (a)   The name, compensation, application for employment
or appointment, job title, business address, business telephone number, job
description, education and training background, previous work experience, or
dates of first and last employment of present or former officers or employees
of the agency;



         (b)   Information relating to the status of any formal
charges against the employee; and



         (c)   Information concerning the disciplinary actions in
which final action has been taken and that resulted in the employee being
disciplined or discharged;



      (8)   Administrative or technical information that would
jeopardize a record keeping or security system;



      (9)   Computer programs, computer codes, computer filing
systems, and other software that are owned by the public agency or entrusted
to it;



      (10)   Records specifically prepared for discussion or
developed during a discussion in an executive session under I.C. 5-14-1.5-6.1;



      (11)   The identity of a donor of a gift made to a public
agency if the donor requires nondisclosure of his identity as a condition of
making the gift; and



      (12)   Any other record which current or future legislation
allows a public agency to exempt.  Further action by the city is unnecessary.



   (B)   The following procedures, fee schedules, and policies are
adopted to implement compliance with I.C. 5-14-3-l et seq.:



      (1)   Written requests will be received by the person having
custody of the records for a department or agency between 8:00 a.m. and 4:00
p.m. on regular business days.  The request must identify, on forms provided
by the city, the record for which disclosure is sought.



      (2)   Fees for copies are as follows.  Fees are payable
before any record is duplicated and may be paid by cash or money order
payable to the city.



         (a)   Pages not larger than nine inches by 14 inches:
$.10.



         (b)   Pages larger than nine inches by 14 inches:  $.10.



         (c)   Existing computer printouts:  $.10.



         (d)   Initial printout from computer files:  $.10.



         (e)   Any other record:  The actual cost of copying.



      (3)   The persons having custody of the records shall have 24
hours in which to respond to a request for inspection.  Whenever a request
is received on a Friday or on a day preceding a day on which city offices are
closed, the person responsible for release decisions shall have until the
same hour on the next business day in which to respond.



      (4)   With respect to records which are determined not to be
available, a representative of the department or agency will certify upon the
request form that the city does not possess the record or that it could not
be found after diligent search, and return one copy of the form to the
requestor.



      (5)   Records may be inspected only at the office or location
where they are regularly maintained.



      (6)   The person having custody of the city records shall be
guided first by the Indiana Access to Public Records Act and amendments, if
any; second by state and federal law regarding privacy, confidentiality, and
disclosure requirements of certain public records; and third, by this section
which excludes certain records from disclosure.



      (7)   Whenever a request for disclosure is denied by the
person responsible for release decisions, the person making the request may
appeal the denial to the Board of Public Works and Safety.



      (8)   The city will not create or provide lists of names and
addresses unless it is required to publish those lists and disseminate them
pursuant to statutes.



      (9)   Fees for copying as set out above shall be adjusted as
permitted by state statute.  The Board of Public Works and Safety is
authorized to set copying fees lower than the maximum established by statute
and to set any fees not limited by the statute but permitted by statute.



(Ord. 83-40, passed 12-27-83)



§ 36.04  RECEIPT AND EXPENDITURE OF INSURANCE PROCEEDS.



   Upon receipt by city of settlement proceeds as a result of a claim for
damages, said proceeds shall be receipted into the department line or utility
fund from which payment for repair of replacement of the damages was, or will
be, made.



(Ord. 97-13, passed 3-10-97)



§ 36.05  CREDIT CARD POLICY.



   (A)   Credit card issuance.



      (1)   The Clerk-Treasurer is hereby authorized to make
application for credit cards for use by city officials and employees for
official city business limited to travel and educational expenses and public
purchases.



      (2)   Credit cards issued for travel and educational expenses
shall have a maximum limit of $2,000.



      (3)   Credit cards issued for public purchases shall have a
maximum limit of $5,000.



   (B)   Credit card use policies and procedures.



      (1)   When not in use, the credit cards shall be secured in
the office of the Clerk-Treasurer.



      (2)   Upon request by a city official or employee, and
approval by the department's governing body, the Clerk-Treasurer or
Clerk-Treasurer designee shall issue the credit card for use and shall keep a
record showing the name and position of the individual requesting use of the
card, date of issuance, date of return, and purpose of use.



      (3)   City officials and employees shall use credit cards for
the purpose of city travel and educational expenses limited to the following:



         (a)   Standard hotel or motel room at government rate.



         (b)   Meals, including a maximum 20% gratuity, in an
amount(s) not to exceed the total of allowable daily meal allowance as set by
the city.



         (c)   Required registration fees or costs associated
with attending schools, conventions, and seminars.



         (d)   Gasoline if using a city-owned vehicle.



         (e)   Excluded charges include alcoholic beverages, room
service, non-business telephone calls except for one daily telephone call to
the home of the city official or employee, in-room movies or entertainment,
personal purchases or souvenirs, and cash advances.



      (4)   City officials and departments heads may use credit
cards, with approval of the department's governing body, for the purpose of
city public purchases limited to the following:



         (a)   Supplies.



         (b)   Materials.



         (c)   Small tools and minor equipment.



      (5)   Accounts payable vouchers (claims) filed in connection
with the use of credit cards shall be submitted to the Clerk-Treasurer for
processing within 72 hours of use and shall be properly itemized and
documented as provided in I.C. 5-11-10 before approved and paid. The credit
card amount will be paid in full every billing cycle. Improperly itemized and
documented items as well as all interest, carrying charges or penalties shall
be the personal responsibility of the individual user.



      (6)   Improper use of the credit card by any person may
subject the person to discipline, termination, and/or criminal charges.



(Ord. 97-14, passed 3-10-97; Am. Ord. 10-25, passed 12-27-10)



§ 36.06  PREORDAINED PAYMENT OF CERTAIN CLAIMS.



   Notwithstanding I.C. 5-11-10, with the prior written approval of the
board having jurisdiction over the allowance of claims, the City
Clerk-Treasurer may make claim payments in advance of board allowance for the
following kinds of expenses:



   (A)   Property or services purchased or leased from the United
States government, its agencies, or its political subdivisions.



   (B)   License or permit fees.



   (C)   Insurance premiums.



   (D)   Utility payments or utility connection charges.



   (E)   Maintenance or service agreements.



   (F)   Bond or coupon payments.



   (G)   Payroll.



   (H)   State, federal, or county taxes.



   (I)   Expenses that must be paid because of emergency circumstances.



   (J)   In-house charge account for municipal supplies.



   (K)   City of Mt. Vernon credit card account for pre-approved
expenditures.



(Ord. 98-07, passed 7-13-98)



§ 36.07  SMOKING PROHIBITED IN CITY-OWNED AND CITY-OCCUPIED BUILDINGS.



   (A)   Smoking prohibited.  No person shall smoke any tobacco or
other substance in any building or other structure owned or occupied in any
manner by the city.



   (B)   Smokers removed from buildings and structures.  Any person
smoking in violation of the provisions herein shall be removed from the
building or structure, and permitted to return only after the smoking
materials have been extinguished.



   (C)   Signs prohibiting smoking.  The Chief of Police is
authorized, but not required unless directed by the Mayor, to procure and
posts signs containing the words “No Smoking-City Ordinance,” or the
universal symbol for no smoking, or other language that clearly shows that
smoking is prohibited in a particular city-owned or city-occupied building or
structure.



   (D)   Penalty.  In addition to being removed from the building or
structure for smoking therein, any person who violates any of the provisions
of this section shall pay a fine of $100 for each separate violation.



(Ord. 04-03, passed 2-23-04)



§ 36.08  NON-DISCRIMINATION PLAN AND POLICY.



   A non-discrimination implementation plan and policy is adopted as set
forth in Exhibit A attached to Ord. 2016-6 and made a part here of by this
reference. The plan may be viewed in full at www.mountvernon.in.gov.



(Ord. 2016-6, passed 4-28-16)



§ 36.09  INTERNAL CONTROL STANDARDS AND MATERIALITY THRESHOLD.



   (A)   The city hereby adopts the internal control policy attached to
Ord. 2016-12 as Exhibit A, and is hereby incorporated by reference.



   (B)   The Clerk-Treasurer is directed to ensure that all personnel
receive training concerning the internal control procedures adopted and
approved herein prior to December 31, 2016.



   (C)   Materiality threshold.



      (1)   The Common Council of the city recognizes that losses,
shortages, and theft of city funds and other assets may occur from time to
time. State law requires the city to report to the Indiana State Board of
accounts all erroneous or irregular material losses, shortages or theft of
city or property. The Indiana State Board of Accounts requires political
subdivisions to determine their own material threshold for the purposes of
reporting the loss, shortage, or theft to the Indiana State Board of Accounts
as required by state law.



      (2)   The threshold for material losses, shortages, or theft
for the city, including its utilities and departments, which must be reported
to the Indiana State Board of Accounts by the Clerk-Treasurer or the
Clerk-Treasurer’s designee, is as follows:



         (a)   A loss, shortage, or theft of cash from any city
fund, including its utilities and departments, is an amount over $5,000.



         (b)   Other assets loss, shortage or theft. A loss,
shortage, or theft of a city asset, including its utilities and departments,
other than cash exceeding a value of $5,000.



   (D)   Whenever a loss shortage or theft of city funds or property
occurs, no matter the amount or value, or the requirement to report such to
the Indiana State Board of Accounts, the administration should investigate
any and all losses, shortages, or thefts of city funds  or assets. The
investigation and the resolution of the investigation must be documented by
the official who conducts the investigation.  Such documentation should be
maintained in the Clerk-Treasurer’s. State law requires a public employees
who have actual knowledge of, or reasonable cause to believe, a
misappropriation of city funds has occurred to report such misappropriation
to the Indiana State Board of Accounts and the county prosecuting attorney.



(Ord. 2016-12, passed 6-9-16)



EMPLOYMENT OF QUALIFIED DISABLED PERSONS



§ 36.15  POLICY STATEMENT.



   (A)   It is the policy of the city to not exclude qualified
individuals with disabilities from participation in or benefitting from the
services, programs or activities of the municipality.  Also, it is the
policy of this municipality not to discriminate against a qualified 
individual with a disability in its job application procedures; the hiring,
advancement or discharge of employees; employee compensation; job training
and other terms, conditions and privileges of employment.  It is the
intention of this municipality to comply with all applicable requirements of
the Americans With Disabilities Act (ADA).



   (B)   Members of the public, including individuals with disabilities
and groups representing individuals with disabilities, are encouraged to
submit suggestions to municipal officials on how the municipality might
better meet the needs of individuals with disabilities pursuant to this
stated policy.  These individuals or group representatives are also invited
to submit this information to the Mayor’s Advisory Council.



   (C)   The Mayor’s secretary is designated as the ADA coordinator.



   (D)   ADA Compliance Committee.



      (1)   The Mayor shall have the authority to designate an ADA
Compliance Committee which shall be composed of the following membership:



         (a)   Members of the Board of Public Works and Safety;



         (b)   One member of the Mayor’s Advisory Council;



         (c)   One member of the health/medical profession;



         (d)   One member of the disabled community; and



         (e)   One member of the business community.



      (2)   The members appointed under subdivisions (c), (d) or (e)
above may also be members of the Mayor’s Advisory Council.



      (3)   This committee shall not be required to meet on a
regular basis.  Upon the receipt of an appeal from the ADA coordinator, the
Board of Public Works and Safety shall send notice of a meeting within 15
days of receiving the appeal.  Notice of a meeting shall be sent to each
member at least ten days prior to the meeting date.



      (4)   Decisions of the committee shall be by majority of the
members present.  Vote shall not be made by secret ballot.



(Ord. 92-13, passed 5-11-92)



§ 36.16  GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE.



   (A)   The city hereby adopts an internal grievance procedure
providing for prompt and equitable resolution of complaints alleging any
action prohibited by the U. S. Department of Justice regulations implementing
Title II of the Americans with Disabilities Act which states, in part, that
“no otherwise qualified individual shall, solely by reason of such
disability, be excluded from the participation in, be denied the benefits of,
or be subjected to discrimination” in programs or activities sponsored by
the city.



   (B)   Complaint procedure:



      (1)   Complaints should be addressed to ADA coordinator, 520
Main Street, City Hall Annex, Mt. Vernon, Indiana  47620 (812) 838-5576, who
has been designated to coordinate ADA compliance efforts.



      (2)   A complaint should be filed in writing or verbally,
contain the name and address of the person filing it, and briefly describe
the alleged violation of the regulations.



      (3)   A complaint should be filed within 30 days after the
complainant becomes aware of the alleged violation.  (Processing of
allegations of discrimination which occurred before this grievance procedure
was in place will be considered on a case-by-case basis.)



      (4)   An investigation, as may be appropriate, shall follow a
filing of complaint.  The investigation shall be conducted by the ADA
coordinator or her designee.  These rules contemplate informal but thorough
investigations, affording all interested persons and their representatives,
if any, an opportunity to submit evidence relevant to a complaint.  Under
the Department of Justice regulations, the city need not process complaints
from applicants for employment.



      (5)   A written determination as to the validity of the
complaint and a description of the resolution, if any, shall be issued by the
ADA coordinator and a copy forwarded to the complainant no later than 15
working days after its filing.



      (6)   The ADA coordinator shall maintain the files and records
of the city relating to the complaints filed.



      (7)   The complainant can request a reconsideration of the
case in instances where he or she is dissatisfied with the resolution.  The
request for reconsideration should be made within 30 days to the ADA
Compliance Committee c/o the Board of Public Works and Safety, 520 Main
Street, City Hall Annex, Mt. Vernon, Indiana.



      (8)   The right of a person to a prompt and equitable
resolution of the complaint filed hereunder shall not be impaired by the
person’s pursuit of other remedies such as the filing of an ADA complaint
with the responsible federal department or agency.  Use of this grievance
procedure is not a prerequisite to the pursuit of other remedies.



      (9)   These rules shall be construed to protect the
substantive rights of interested persons to meet appropriate due process
standards, and to assure that the city complies with the ADA and implementing
regulations.



(Ord. 92-13, passed 5-11-92)



FIXED ASSET CAPITALIZATION POLICY



§ 36.20  DEFINITIONS AND PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this subchapter, the
following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.



   CAPITAL OUTLAYS.  Expenditures which benefit both the current and
future fiscal periods.  This includes costs of acquiring land or structures;
construction or improvement of buildings, structures or other fixed assets;
and equipment purchases having an appreciable and calculable period of
usefulness.  These are expenditures resulting in the acquisition of or
addition to the government’s general fixed assets.



   ENTERPRISE FUNDS.  Those funds used to account for operations (a) that
are financed and operated in a manner similar to private business enterprise,
where the intent of the governing body is that the costs (expenses, including
depreciation) of providing goods or services to the general public on a
continuing basis be financed or recovered primarily through user charges; or
(b) where the governing body has decided that periodic determination of
revenues earned, expenses incurred, and/or net income is appropriate for
capital maintenance, public policy, management control, accountability and
other purposes.  The enterprise funds of the city shall include the
municipally owned water and sewage utilities.  Operation of these utilities
shall require enterprise fund accounting and reporting.



   FIXED ASSET.  Tangible assets of a durable nature employed in the
operating activities of the unit and that are relatively permanent and are
needed for the production or sale of goods or services are termed property,
plant and equipment or fixed assets.  These assets are not held for sale in
the ordinary course of business.  This broad group is usually separated into
classes according to the physical characteristics of the items (e.g. land,
buildings, improvements other than buildings, machinery and equipment,
furniture and fixtures).



   HISTORICAL COST.  The cash equivalent price exchanged for goods or
services at the date of acquisition.  Land, buildings, equipment, and most
inventories are common examples of items recognized under the historical cost
attribute.



   TANGIBLE ASSETS.  Assets that can be observed by one or more of the
physical senses.  They may be seen and touched and, in some environments,
heard and smelled.



   (B)   Land.



      (1)   The city will capitalize all land purchases, regardless
of cost.



      (2)   Exceptions to land capitalization, are land purchased
outright, or rights-of-way for infrastructure.  Examples of infrastructures
are roads and streets, street lighting systems, bridges, overpasses,
sidewalks, curbs, parking meters, street signs, viaducts, wharfs, and storm
water collection.



      (3)   Original cost of land will include the full value given
to the seller, including relocation, legal services incidental to the
purchase (including title work and opinion), appraisal and negotiation fees,
surveying and costs for preparing the land for its intended purpose
(including contractors and/or city workers [salary and benefits]), such as
demolishing buildings, excavating, clean up, and/or inspection.



      (4)   A department will record donated land at fair market
value on the date of transfer plus any associated costs.



      (5)   Purchases made using federal or state funding will
follow the source funding policies and above procedures.



   (C)   Machinery and equipment.



      (1)   The definition of MACHINERY AND EQUIPMENT is: An
apparatus, tool, or conglomeration of pieces to form a tool.  The tool will
stand alone and not become a part of a basic structure or building.



      (2)   This city will capitalize and tag items with an
individual value equal to or greater than $750.  Machinery combined with
other machinery to form one unit with a total value greater than the above
mentioned limit will be one unit.



      (3)   Shipping charges, consultant fees, and any other cost
directly associated with the purchase, delivery, or set up, (including
contractors and/or city works [salary and benefits]), which makes such
equipment operable for its intended purpose will be capitalized.



      (4)   Improvements or renovations to existing machinery and
equipment will be capitalized only if the result of the change meets all of
the following conditions:



         (a)   Total costs exceeds $750;



         (b)   The useful life is extended two or more years; and



         (c)   The total costs will be greater than the current
book value and less than the fair market value.



      (5)   Examples include:



         (a)   A work truck being equipped with screens, lights
or radios for use as a single unit throughout its life expectancy is
considered one unit.



         (b)   If police cars are constantly changing light bars
or radios to other vehicles, the city will capitalize each piece of equipment
separately, if it meets the required dollar amount.



         (c)   A department’s computer (CPU, monitor, keyboard,
and printer) is considered one unit.



      (6)   A department will record donated machinery and equipment
at fair market value on the date of transfer with any associated costs.



      (7)   Purchases made using federal or state funding will
follow the source funding policies and above procedures.



   (D)   Buildings.



      (1)   A department will capitalize buildings at full cost with
no subcategories for tracking the cost of attachments.  Examples of
attachments are roof, heating, cooling, plumbing, lighting, or sprinkler
systems, or any part of the basic building.  The department will include the
cost of items designed or purchased exclusively for the building.



      (2)   A department’s new building will be capitalized only
if it meets the following conditions:



         (a)   Cost exceeds $5,000; and



         (b)   The useful life is greater than two years.



      (3)   A department improving or renovating an existing
building will capitalize the cost only if the result meets all of the
following conditions:



         (a)   The total cost exceeds $5,000;



         (b)   The useful life is extended two or more years; and



         (c)   The total cost will be greater than the current
book value and less than the fair market value.



      (4)   Capital building costs will include preparation of land
for the building, architectural and engineering fees, bond issuance fees,
interest cost (while under construction), accounting costs if material, and
any costs directly attributable to the construction of a building.



      (5)   A department will record donated buildings at fair
market value on the date of transfer with any associated costs.



      (6)   Purchases made using federal or state funding will
follow the source funding policies and above procedures.



   (E)   Improvements other than buildings.



      (1)   The definition of this group is improvements to land for
better enjoyment, attached or not easily removed, and will have a life
expectancy of greater than two years.



      (2)   Examples are walks, parking areas and drives, golf cart
paths, fencing, retaining walls, pools, outside fountains, planter
underground sprinkler systems, and other similar items.



      (3)   Improvements do not include roads, streets, or assets
that are of value only to the public.  For example, Main Street is a public
street with greatest value to the public. Roads and drives upon city-owned
land that provide support to our facilities are assets.  A sidewalk down the
road for public enjoyment is an infrastructure improvement and is not
capitalized.  However, sidewalks installed upon city-owned land for use by
the public and for the support of our facility are capital assets.



      (4)   This city will capitalize new improvements other than
buildings only if it meets the following conditions:



         (a)   The total cost exceeds $5,000; and



         (b)   The useful life is greater than two years.



      (5)   A department will capitalize improvements or renovations
to existing improvements other than buildings only if the result meets the
following conditions:



         (a)   The total cost exceeds $5,000;



         (b)   The asset’s useful life is extended two or more
years; and



         (c)   The total cost will be greater than the current
book value and less than the fair market value.



      (6)   A department’s donated improvements other than
buildings will be recorded at fair market value on the date of transfer with
any associated costs.



      (7)   Purchases made using federal or state funding will
follow the source funding policies and above procedures.



(Ord. 95-15, passed 8-14-95)



§ 36.21  RECORDING AND ACCOUNTING.



   (A)   The city and its various departments shall classify capital
expenditures as capital outlays within the fund from which the expenditure
was made in accordance with the Chart of Accounts of the Cities and Towns
Accounting Manual.  The cost of property, plant and equipment includes all
expenditures necessary to put the asset into position and ready for use. 
For purposes of recording fixed assets of the city and its departments, the
valuation of assets shall be based on historical cost or where the historical
cost is indeterminable, by estimation for those assets in existence.



   (B)   The city’s municipally owned utilities shall record
acquisition of fixed assets in accordance with generally accepted accounting
principles. When an asset is purchased for cash, the acquisition is simply
recorded at the amount of cash paid, including all outlays relating to its
purchase and preparation for intended use.  Assets may be acquired under a
number of other arrangements including:



      (1)   Assets acquired for a lump-sum purchase price;



      (2)   Purchase on deferred payment contract;



      (3)   Acquisition under capital lease;



      (4)   Acquisition by exchange of nonmonetary assets;



      (5)   Acquisition by issuance of securities;



      (6)   Acquisition by self-construction; and



      (7)   Acquisition by donation or discovery.



   (C)   Some of these arrangements present special problems relating
to the cost to be recorded, for example, in utility accounting, interest
during a period of construction has long been recognized as a part of the
asset cost.  Reference to an intermediate accounting manual will illustrate
the recording of acquisition of assets under the aforementioned acquisition
arrangements. For purposes of recording fixed assets of the utilities the
valuation of assets shall be based on historical cost.



   (D)   In addition, an asset register (prescribed form 211) shall be
maintained to provide a detail record of the capital assets of the
governmental unit.



(Ord. 95-15, passed 8-14-95)



§ 36.22  SAFEGUARDING OF ASSETS.



   Be it ordained that accounting controls be designed and implemented to
provide reasonable assurances that:



   (A)   Capital expenditures made by the city, its various departments
and utilities be in accordance with management’s authorization as
documented in the minutes.



   (B)   Transactions of the utilities be recorded as necessary to
permit preparation of financial statements in conformity with generally
accepted principles.



   (C)   Adequate detail records be maintained to assure
account-ability for city and utility owned assets.



   (D)   Access to assets be permitted in accordance with
management’s authorization.



   (E)   The recorded accountability for assets be compared with the
existing assets at least every two years and appropriate action be taken with
respect to any differences.



(Ord. 95-15, passed 8-14-95)



REVENUE BOND FEES



§ 36.30  ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION REVENUE BOND FEES.



   Any person, firm, or corporation for whom bonds are issued pursuant to
the state Act for Economic Development and Pollution Control, I.C. 36-7-12-1
et seq., shall upon issuance of the bonds or refunding bonds, pay to the city
a fee equal to one percent of the total amount of the issue or refunding,
provided that the fee shall not exceed $10,000.



(Ord. 96-35, passed 10-28-96)



DEFERRED COMPENSATION PLAN



§ 36.40  ADOPTION; EXECUTION.



   (A)   The Common Council hereby adopts the U.S. Conference of Mayors
Deferred Compensation Program and its attendant investment options and hereby
establishes the city Deferred Compensation Plan for the voluntary
participation of all eligible city employees, elected officials, and
independent contractors.



   (B)   The Mayor of the city is hereby authorized to execute for the
city individual participation agreements with each said employee requesting
the same, and to act as the “Administrator” of the plan representing the
city, and to execute such agreements and contracts as are necessary to
implement the program.  There is to be no cost to the city for the program.



(Res. 96-23, passed 8-12-96)



§ 36.41  CONTRIBUTION.



   (A)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



   DEFERRED COMPENSATION PLAN.  The deferred compensation plan
established by § 36.40.



   FULL-TIME EMPLOYEE.  An employee who has been on active duty
regularly, working in excess of 32 hours per week for more than 26
consecutive weeks.  The term shall include the elected position of
Clerk-Treasurer.  The term shall not include employees of the city police
and fire departments who are members of their respective pension plans.



   REGULAR WEEKLY WAGES.  Weekly wages earned by a full-time employee for
work performed, not to exceed 40 hours per week, or an employee’s base
salary.  This amount shall not exceed the base hourly wage times 40 hours
worked (or fewer hours if the employee does not work 40 hours in a given
week) or the base salary, as both are established by the annual salary
ordinance.



   (B)   The city, after proper budget and appropriations, shall
contribute an amount, not to exceed three percent of a full-time employee’s
regular weekly wages, to the full-time employee’s deferred compensation
plan account.  This contribution by the city will be made regardless as to
whether the employee makes individual contributions.



   (C)   If a full-time employee elects, the full-time employee may
waive the contribution authorized by this section by signing a waiver of
benefits form and delivering the form to the Clerk-Treasurer.



(Ord. 96-45, passed 12-23-96)



SEXUAL HARASSMENT



§ 36.50  PURPOSE.



   (A)   The city promotes a work environment free of behaviors which
are illegal and/or which contribute to interpersonal conflicts, poor morale
or poor performance in the workplace. This policy applies to workplace
conduct, conduct at company functions, and to employees at all levels and
positions with the company. This policy not only prohibits sexual
discrimination and harassment, but discrimination or harassment based on
race, color, religion, age, gender, national origin, disability, or
veteran’s status. Further, the city condemns any such conduct and affirms
that it will take appropriate action to eliminate offensive conduct from the
workplace.



   (B)   Sexual harassment and discrimination or harassment based on
race, color, religion, age, gender, national origin, disability, or
veteran’s status are prohibited by state and federal law, and by the city.



(Ord. 08-24, passed 10-27-08)



§ 36.51  DEFINITION OF SEXUAL HARASSMENT.



   (A)   (1)   Federal regulations define sexual harassment as
unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual favors, and other verbal and
physical conduct of a sexual nature when:



         (a)   Submission to such conduct is made either
explicitly or implicitly a term or condition of an individual’s employment;



         (b)   Submission to or rejection of such conduct by an
individual is used as the basis for employment decisions affecting the
individual; or



         (c)   Such  conduct has the purpose or effect of
unreasonably interfering with an individual’s work performance or creating
an intimidating, hostile, or offensive working environment.



      (2)   These are some examples of behaviors that could be
defined as sexual harassment:



         (a)   Pressure for sexual activity;



         (b)   Asking about a person’s sexual fantasies, sexual
preferences, or sexual activities;



         (c)   Unwelcome patting, hugging, or touching of a
person’s body, hair, or clothing;



         (d)   Repeatedly asking for a date after the person has
expressed disinterest;



         (e)   Sexual innuendoes, jokes, or comments;



         (f)   Making sexual gestures with hands or through body
movements;



         (g)   Disparaging remarks to a person about his or her
gender or body;



         (h)   Making suggestive facial expressions; or



         (i)   Sexual graffiti or visuals.



      (3)   Whether these behaviors constitute sexual harassment
depends upon the totality of the circumstances, considering the seriousness,
frequency and pervasiveness of the actions, as well as whether the conduct is
unwelcome.



   (B)   There are two types of sexual harassment: Quid Pro Quo and
Hostile Environment.



      (1)   Quid Pro Quo sexual harassment occurs when an
individual’s submission to or rejection of sexual advances or conduct of a
sexual nature is used as the basis for employment decisions affecting the
individual or the individual’s submission to the conduct is made a term or
condition of employment.



      (2)   Hostile Environment sexual harassment occurs when
unwelcome sexual conduct reasonably interferes with an individual’s job
performance or creates a hostile, intimidating or offensive work environment
even though the harassment may not result in tangible or economic job
consequences, that is, the person may not lose pay or a promotion.



(Ord. 00-05, passed 4-10-00; Am. Ord. 08-24, passed 10-27-08)



§ 36.52  DEFINITION OF OTHER PROHIBITED FORMS OF HARASSMENT.



   (A)   Federal and state law and the city policy also prohibit
derogatory racial, ethnic, religious, age, or other inappropriate remarks,
slurs or jokes that have a tendency to offend or intimidate employees and/or
interfere with workplace productivity. Such conduct is prohibited, whether it
be in the form of physical, verbal, or written harassment, and regardless of
whether committed by supervisory or non-supervisory personnel.



   (B)   These are some examples of behaviors that could be defined as
racial, ethnic, religious or age harassment:



      (1)   Use of derogatory terms that denote a particular racial,
ethnic, religious or age group;



      (2)   Jokes, slurs or other remarks that disparage racial,
ethnic, religious or age groups;



      (3)   Verbal abuse or insults of a racial, ethnic, religious
or age-related nature; and



      (4)   The display in the workplace of objects, pictures,
posters, magazines, cartoons, or other materials that negatively portray any
particular racial, ethnic, religious or age group.



   (C)   The conduct portrayed in the above examples is not
all-inclusive, but only illustrative.



(Ord. 00-05, passed 4-10-00; Am. Ord. 08-24, passed 10-27-08)



§ 36.53  POLICY.



   (A)   It is the policy of the city that all employees shall enjoy a
work environment free from all forms of discrimination and harassment,
including sexual harassment. All employees, including supervisors and
managers, will be subject to disciplinary action, up to and including
discharge, for any sexual harassment behavior, or other forms of harassment
or discrimination.



   (B)   Any employee who believes he or she has been subjected to
sexual harassment or other forms of discrimination or harassment should
immediately report the incident or alleged occurrence to his or her
department head. In order for the company to take appropriate actions, the
city must be notified about the incident. If the complaint involves the head
of the employee’s department, the employee should make the report to the
Mayor’s assistant/secretary.



   (C)   The department head or Mayor’s assistant/secretary shall
promptly investigate a complaint of sexual harassment or other forms of
discrimination or harassment. Every effort will be made to handle all
complaints in a fair, impartial, and efficient manner. In order to protect
both the person making the complaint and the person or persons against whom
the complaint is made, every reasonable effort will be made to handle all
complaints in a confidential and discreet manner. If an employee is not
satisfied with the way a complaint is handled, he or she should bring this to
the attention of the Mayor. In all cases, the employee will be advised of the
conclusion of the investigation.



   (D)   No employee shall willfully bring forth or threaten to bring
forth a false accusation of sexual harassment or other forms of harassment or
discrimination contemplated solely to damage, harm, “get even with”, or
otherwise intimidate a co-worker, supervisor or manager. False accusations
will result in disciplinary action up to and including termination. In
addition, failure to notify the city of a complaint or sexual harassment or
other forms of harassment or discrimination, then subsequently bringing suit
against the city will result in disciplinary action up to and including
termination.



   (E)   Retaliatory action or conduct of any kind taken by any member
of the city against an employee who files a complaint of sexual harassment or
other forms of harassment or discrimination and/or an employee who is a
witness to the alleged conduct is strictly prohibited. Retaliatory action
shall be regarded as a separate and distinct violation of the city’s
policies. Any employee who violates this section is subject to disciplinary
action, up to and including termination.



(Ord. 00-05, passed 4-10-00; Am. Ord. 08-24, passed 10-27-08)



PURCHASE AND IDENTIFICATION OF CITY VEHICLES



§ 36.60  VEHICLE PURCHASES TO BE BUDGETED EXPENDITURES.



   Except in the case of a vehicle lost or destroyed during the year, all
department heads/superintendents shall disclose the need to purchase a new
vehicle in the budget proposal for his/her department or utility tendered to
the Common Council in June of each year for vehicles to be purchased in the
next ensuing calendar year. In the case of the Water and Sewer Departments,
the superintendent shall present to the Common Council vehicle requests for
the next calendar year in the presentation of its pro-forma budget, and if
none exists, by July 1 of the current calendar year for vehicles to be
purchased by the following calendar year.



(Ord. 00-26, passed 9-25-00)



§ 36.61  VEHICLE SPECIFICATIONS.



   (A)   All vehicles purchased for use by the city, its departments
and utilities, excluding fire trucks, shall be selected in the color
according to the following departmental color chart:



      (1)   Fire - Red.



      (2)   Water-Blue.



      (3)   Sewer - Gray.



      (4)   Sanitation - White.



      (5)   Street - Red.



      (6)   Police - White.



      (7)   Park and Recreation - Green.



   (B)   All vehicles purchased for use by the city, its departments
and utilities, shall be purchased with as few options as is practical and
trucks purchased shall not include an extended cab unless such an option can
be provided at the same cost to the city as a standard cab. In the event a
department head or superintendent desires to purchase a vehicle which
includes options, the department head or superintendent must present to the
purchasing agent a description of the option and an explanation why the
option is necessary in the performance of a municipal duty.



   (C)   If there is a state bid for the vehicle sought and the vehicle
is available, the department head/superintendent must obtain the state bid
figure and present the state bid to the purchasing agent. This does not
preclude seeking other bids or quotes as well.



(Ord. 00-26, passed 9-25-00)



§ 36.62  VEHICLE IDENTIFICATION.



   (A)   All vehicles purchased for use by the city, its department
heads and utilities, shall display a permanent decal identifying at least the
following:



      (1)   City of Mt. Vernon, Indiana; and



      (2)   Name of the department or utility possessing the vehicle.



   (B)   The Common Council shall approve the decal.



   (C)   The decal shall be mounted to the front doors, or similar
area, if the vehicle does not have doors, and shall cover an area equal to
the door panel.



   (D)   All decals within a department or utility shall be the same.



   (E)   No vehicle shall be put in service until marked pursuant to
this section.



   (F)   The Chief of Police may waive this identification requirement
for vehicles within the Police Department to be used for investigation
purposes.



(Ord. 00-26, passed 9-25-00; Am. Ord. 04-08, passed 4-12-04)



§ 36.63  EMERGENCY VEHICLE PURCHASES.



   In the event a vehicle owned by the city, its department or utilities,
is lost or destroyed, during a calendar year, replacement of the vehicle, if
approved by the governing body and purchasing agent, may proceed without
compliance with § 36.60 of this subchapter.



(Ord. 00-26, passed 9-25-00)



CITY PURCHASES



§ 36.75  PURCHASING AGENCY AND AGENTS.



   (A)   Purchasing agencies.



      (1)   The Utility Board is hereby designated as the purchasing
agency for the Water Department.



      (2)   The Park and Recreation Board is hereby designated as
the purchasing agency for the Park and Recreation Department.



      (3)   The Board of Public Works is hereby designated as the
purchasing agency for all other city departments.



      (4)   The aforementioned purchasing agencies shall have all of
the powers and duties authorized under I.C. 5-22.



   (B)   Purchasing agents.



      (1)   The Mayor shall be the purchasing agent for all city
departments except the Utility Board and the Park and Recreation Board.



      (2)   The Utility Board and the Park and Recreation Board
shall designate their respective purchasing agents in writing.



(Ord. 04-11, passed 4-12-04)



§ 36.76  PURCHASE OF SUPPLIES COSTING LESS THAN $25,000.



   A purchasing agent may purchase supplies with an estimated cost of less
than $25,000 on the open market, without inviting or receiving quotes or bids.



(Ord. 04-11, passed 4-12-04)



§ 36.77  PURCHASE OF SERVICES.



   It is hereby determined that each agency and/or department may purchase
services in whatever manner the purchaser determines to be reasonable.



(Ord. 04-11, passed 4-12-04)



§ 36.78  PURCHASE OF SUPPLIES MANUFACTURED IN THE UNITED STATES.



   Supplies manufactured in the United States shall be specified for all
purchases and shall be purchased, unless the city determines:



   (A)   The supplies are not manufactured in the United States in
reasonably available quantities:



   (B)   The price of the supplies manufactured in the United States
exceeds by an unreasonable amount the price of available and comparable
supplies manufactured elsewhere;



   (C)   The quality of the supplies manufactured in the United States
is substantially less than the quality of comparably priced available
supplies manufactured elsewhere; or



   (D)   The purchase of supplies manufactured in the United States is
not in the public interest.



(Ord. 04-11, passed 4-12-04)



ELECTRONIC COMMUNICATIONS POLICY



§ 36.85  PURPOSE.



   (A)   To remain competitive, better serve customers and provide
employees with the best tools to do their jobs, the city makes available to
its workforce access to one or more forms of electronic media and services,
including computers, e-mail including attachments, telephones, cell phones,
video cameras, voicemail, facsimile machines, external electronic bulletin
boards, online services, intranet, internet and the World Wide Web.



   (B)   The city encourages the use of these media and associated
services because they can make communication more efficient and effective and
because they are valuable sources of information about vendors, customers,
technology, and new products and services. However, all employees and
everyone connected with the city should remember that electronic media and
services provided by the city are city property and their purpose is to
facilitate and support business. All computer users have the responsibility
to use these resources in a professional, ethical and lawful manner.



   (C)   To ensure that all employees are responsible, the following
guidelines have been established for using electronic media. No policy can
lay down rules to cover every possible situation. Instead, it is designed to
express the city’s philosophy and set forth general principles when using
electronic media and services.



(Ord. 08-23, passed 10-27-08)



§ 36.86  PROHIBITED COMMUNICATIONS.



   Electronic media cannot be used for knowingly transmitting, accessing,
retrieving or storing any communication that is:



   (A)   Discriminatory or harassing;



   (B)   Derogatory, embarrassing, or offensive to any individual or
group;



   (C)   Obscene, sexually explicit, sexually offensive, or
pornographic;



   (D)   Defamatory or threatening;



   (E)   In violation of any license governing the use of software;



   (F)   Engaged in for any purpose that is illegal, contrary to city
policy, or its business interests;



   (G)   Offensive or disparaging to another person because of his or
her race, color, religion, age, gender, national origin, disability or
veteran’s status; or



   (H)   A solicitation of any kind, including the distribution of
chain letters, commercial or profit-generating, and unrelated to city
business.



(Ord. 08-23, passed 10-27-08)



§ 36.87  PERSONAL USE.



   The computers, electronic media and services provided by the city are
primarily for business use to assist employees in the performance of their
jobs. Limited, occasional or incidental use of electronic media (sending or
receiving) for personal, non-business purposes is understandable, however,
all such use should be done in a manner that does not negatively affect the
systems’ performance for their business purposes and cannot be done in any
manner that could be interpreted as an official city act or result in cost to
the city. Further, employees are expected to demonstrate a sense of
responsibility and not abuse this privilege. Employees should not expect that
any use of electronic media will be confidential or private.



(Ord. 08-23, passed 10-27-08)



§ 36.88  ACCESS TO EMPLOYEE COMMUNICATIONS.



   (A)   Generally, electronic information created and/or communicated
by an employee using e-mail, word processing, utility programs, spreadsheets,
voicemail, telephones, internet and bulletin board system access and similar
electronic media is not consistently reviewed by the city.



   (B)   However, the following conditions should be noted:



      (1)   The city does routinely gather logs for most electronic
activities or monitor employee communications directly, for example,
telephone numbers dialed, sites accessed, call length, and time at which
calls are made, for the following purposes:



         (a)   Cost analysis;



         (b)   Resource allocation;



         (c)   Optimum technical management of information
resources;



         (d)   Detecting patterns of use that indicate employees
are violating company policies or engaging in illegal activity; and



         (e)   Compliance with Indiana public record disclosure
laws.



      (2)   The city reserves the right, at its discretion and
without notice, to access, review, display, copy, delete, or listen to any
messages or communications sent, received, created, deleted, or stored
through or in its electronic media systems to ensure electronic media and
services are being used in compliance with the law, this policy and other
company policies.



      (3)   Employees should not assume electronic communications
are private. Accordingly, if they have sensitive information to transmit,
they should use other means.



(Ord. 08-23, passed 10-27-08)



§ 36.89  SOFTWARE.



   To prevent computer viruses from being transmitted through the
company’s computer system, unauthorized downloading of any unauthorized
software is strictly prohibited. Only software registered through the city
may be downloaded. The city may, at any time, conduct an audit of computers
for installed software and related printed material that is not included on a
then-current inventory of city authorized software. All unauthorized software
will be removed. Employees should contact their department head if they have
any questions.



(Ord. 08-23, passed 10-27-08)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 36.90  SECURITY/APPROPRIATE USE.



   (A)   Employees must respect the confidentiality of other
individuals’ electronic communications. Except in cases in which explicit
authorization has been granted by the city, employees are prohibited from
engaging in, or attempting to engage in:



      (1)   Monitoring or intercepting the files or electronic
communications of other employees or third parties;



      (2)   Hacking or obtaining access to systems or accounts they
are not authorized to use;



      (3)   Using other people’s log-ins or passwords; and



      (4)   Breaching, testing or monitoring computer or network
security measures.



   (B)   No e-mail or other electronic communications can be sent that
attempt to hide the identity of the sender or represent the sender as someone
else.



   (C)   Electronic media and services should not be used in a manner
that is likely to cause network congestion or significantly hamper the
ability of other people to access and use the system.



   (D)   Anyone obtaining electronic access to other companies or
individuals’ materials must respect all copyrights and cannot copy,
retrieve, modify or forward copyrighted materials except as permitted by the
copyright owner.



   (E)   Employees must also take adequate measures to ensure that city
electronic media systems are not used by any other individual, including
other members of employee’s household.



   (F)   For security reasons, employees accessing the internet must
only do so through the city authorized connection and must not utilize any
other connection paths to the internet.



(Ord. 08-23, passed 10-27-08)



§ 36.91  ENCRYPTION/PASSWORDS.



   (A)   All passwords and codes used in connection with the electronic
media are the property of the city. To maintain system security, employees
have the responsibility to safeguard passwords and codes. Employees may be
asked to release passwords or codes to department heads on a need-to-know
basis. All passwords and codes must be surrendered upon termination of
employment for whatever reason.



   (B)   Employees can use encryption software supplied to them by the
city for purposes of safeguarding sensitive or confidential business
information. Employees who use encryption on files stored on a city computer
must provide their supervisor with a sealed hard copy record (to be retained
in a secure location) of all of the passwords and/or encryption keys
necessary to access the files.



(Ord. 08-23, passed 10-27-08)



§ 36.92  PARTICIPATION IN ONLINE FORUMS.



   (A)   Employees should remember that any messages or information
sent on city-provided facilities to one or more individuals via an electronic
network (for example, internet mailing lists, bulletin boards, and online
services) are statements identifiable and attributable to the city. Employees
must limit their use on these networks to those necessary for city business.



   (B)   The city recognizes that participation in some forums might be
important to the performance of an employee’s job. For instance, an
employee might find the answer to a technical problem by consulting members
of a group devoted to the technical area.



(Ord. 08-23, passed 10-27-08)



§ 36.93  VIOLATIONS.



   Any employee who abuses the privilege of his or her access to e-mail or
the internet in violation of this policy will be subject to corrective
action, including possible termination of employment, legal action, financial
liability, and criminal liability.



(Ord. 08-23, passed 10-27-08)



APPENDIX A: EMPLOYEE AGREEMENT ON THE USE OF E-MAIL AND THE INTERNET



   Every current employee (full-time, part-time, temporary, and salaried)
and all new employees shall be given a copy of this policy and shall sign the
agreement below. The agreement shall be kept in the employee’s personnel
file and a copy kept by the department head.



   “I have read, understand and agree to comply with the foregoing
policies, rules and conditions governing the use of the city’s electronic
media equipment and services. I understand that I have no expectation of
privacy when I use any of the electronic media services. I am aware that
violations of this guideline on appropriate use of the electronic media,
specifically including, but not limited to, cell phone, e-mail and internet
systems, may subject me to disciplinary action, including termination from
employment, legal action, financial liability, and criminal liability. I
further understand that my use of the e-mail and internet may reflect on the
image of the City of Mount Vernon to our customers, competitors and suppliers
and that I have responsibility to maintain a positive representation of the
city. Furthermore, I understand that this policy can be amended at any
time.”



Employee Signature                                      
                                                   
                       



Date                                                
                                                   
                                   



(Ord. 08-23, passed 10-27-08)



TITLE V:  PUBLIC WORKS



   Chapter



      50.   SEWERS



      51.   WATER



      52.   GARBAGE AND TRASH CONTROL



      53.   CROSS-CONNECTION



CHAPTER 50:  SEWERS



Section



General Provisions



   50.001   Purpose and policy



   50.002   Administration



   50.003   Abbreviations



   50.004   Definitions



General Sewer Use Requirements



   50.015   General requirements



   50.016   Prohibited discharge standards



   50.017   National categorical pretreatment standards



   50.018   State pretreatment standards



   50.019   Local limits



   50.020   High strength wastewater



   50.021   Right of revision



   50.022   Dilution



Building Sewers and Connections



   50.035   Building sewer permit required; fees



   50.036   Supervision of tapping; expense



   50.037   Connection into sewer; expense



   50.038   Laying pipes through sewers; requirement of clean out



   50.039   Construction requirements



   50.040   Order to reopen and repair



   50.041   Excavations



   50.042   Combined sewers



   50.043   Pressure pump sewer systems



Pretreatment of Wastewater



   50.055   Pretreatment facilities



   50.056   Additional pretreatment measures



   50.057   Accidental discharge/slug control plans



   50.058   Hauled wastewater



   50.059   Storm or industrial wastewaters



   50.060   Permissible discharges in storm sewers



   50.061   Grease, oil or sand interceptors



   50.062   Preliminary treatment by owner; control manholes



   50.063   Special arrangements for industrial wastewater



Wastewater Discharge Permits



   50.075   Wastewater analysis



   50.076   Wastewater discharge permit requirement



   50.077   Wastewater discharge permitting; existing connections



   50.078   Wastewater discharge permitting; new connections



   50.079   Wastewater discharge permit application contents



   50.080   Applications signatories and certification



   50.081   Wastewater discharge permit decisions



   50.082   Wastewater discharge permit duration



   50.083   Wastewater discharge permit contents



   50.084   Wastewater discharge permit appeals



   50.085   Wastewater discharge permit modification



   50.086   Wastewater discharge permit transfer



   50.087   Wastewater discharge permit revocation



   50.088   Wastewater discharge permit reissuance



   50.089   Regulation of waste received from other jurisdictions



   50.090   Baseline monitoring reports



   50.091   Compliance schedule progress reports



   50.092   Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment
standard deadline



   50.093   Periodic compliance reports



   50.094   Reports of changed conditions



   50.095   Reports of potential problems



   50.096   Reports from unpermitted users



   50.097   Notice of violation/repeat sampling and reporting



   50.098   Notification of the discharge of hazardous waste



   50.099   Analytical requirements



   50.100   Sample collection



   50.101   Timing



   50.102   Record keeping



Compliance Monitoring



   50.115   Right of entry; inspection and sampling



   50.116   Search warrants



   50.117   Confidential information



   50.118   Publication of users on significant noncompliance



Administrative Enforcement Remedies



   50.130   Notification of violation



   50.131   Consent orders



   50.132   Show cause hearing



   50.133   Compliance orders



   50.134   Cease and desist orders



   50.135   Administrative fines



   50.136   Emergency suspensions



   50.137   Termination of discharge



Judicial Enforcement Remedies



   50.150   Injunctive relief



   50.151   Civil penalties



   50.152   Criminal prosecution



   50.153   Remedies nonexclusive



Supplemental Enforcement Action



   50.165   Performance bonds



   50.166   Liability insurance



   50.167   Water supply severance



   50.168   Public nuisances



   50.169   Informant rewards



   50.170   Contractor listing



Affirmative Defenses To Discharge Violations



   50.180   Prohibited discharge standards



   50.181   Bypass



Wastewater Treatment Rates



   50.195   Rates and charges



   50.196   Wastewater of excessive strength; surcharges



   50.197   Charges for use of disposal system



   50.198   Fee for connecting to sewage utility



   50.199   Pretreatment charges



   50.200   Estimated billing



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 50.001  PURPOSE AND POLICY.



   (A)   This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for users of the
publicly owned treatment works for the city and enables the city to comply
with all applicable state and federal laws, including the Clean Water Act (33
U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.) and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 C.F.R.
pt. 403). The objectives of this chapter are:



      (1)   To regulate the discharge to, and use of, public and
private sewers within the service area of the publicly owned treatment works
(POTW) of the city; and the installation and construction of service
connections to building sewers within the city sewer service area.



      (2)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the
publicly owned treatment works that will interfere with its operation;



      (3)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the
publicly owned treatment works that will pass through the publicly owned
treatment works, inadequately treated, into receiving waters, or otherwise be
incompatible with the publicly owned treatment works;



      (4)   To protect both publicly owned treatment works personnel
who may be affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their
employment and the general public;



      (5)   To promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater
and sludge from the publicly owned treatment works;



      (6)   To provide for fees for the equitable distribution of
the cost of operation, maintenance, and improvement of the publicly owned
treatment works;



      (7)   To enable the city to comply with its National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System permit conditions, sludge use and disposal
requirements, and any other federal or state laws to which the publicly owned
treatment works is subject; and



      (8)   To establish a pretreatment program for the regulation
and control of industrial discharges through the issuance and enforcement of
industrial wastewater discharge permits which set forth the terms, conditions
and regulations under which noncompatible wastewaters may be discharged into
the city’s POTW.



   (B)   This chapter shall apply to all users of the publicly owned
treatment works.  The chapter authorizes the issuance of wastewater
discharge permits; provides for monitoring, compliance, and enforcement
activities; establishes administrative review procedures; requires user
reporting; and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable
distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein.



(Ord. 02-09, passed 5-28-02)



§ 50.002  ADMINISTRATION.



   Except as otherwise provided herein, the Superintendent shall
administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this chapter.  Any
powers granted to or duties imposed upon the Superintendent may be delegated
by the Superintendent to other city personnel.



(Ord. 02-09, passed 5-28-02)



§ 50.003  ABBREVIATIONS.



   The following abbreviations, when used in this chapter, shall have the
designated meanings:



   BOD.  Biochemical oxygen demand.



   C.F.R.  Code of Federal Regulations.



   COD.  Chemical oxygen demand.



   EPA.  U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.



   gpd.  Gallons per day



   IU.  Industrial user.



   mg/l.  Milligrams per liter.



   NPDES.  National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.



   POTW.  Publicly owned treatment works.



   RCRA.  Resource Conservation and Recovery Act.



   SIC.  Standard industrial classification.



   SIU.  Significant industrial user.



   SNC. Significant noncompliance.



   TSS.  Total suspended solids.



   U.S.C.  United States Code.



(Ord. 02-09, passed 5-28-02)



§ 50.004  DEFINITIONS.



   Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and
phrases, as used in this chapter, shall have the meanings hereinafter
designated.



   ACT or THE ACT.  The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known
as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.



   AMMONIA (NH3-N).  Ammonia measured as nitrogen. The laboratory
determinations shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in the
latest edition of 40 C.F.R. pt. 136.3.



   APPLICABLE PRETREATMENT STANDARD.  Any pretreatment limit or
prohibitive standard (federal, state, or local) and considered to be the most
restrictive with which non-domestic users will be required to comply.



   APPROVAL AUTHORITY.  The United States Environmental Protection Agency
- Region V.



   AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF THE USER.



      (1)   If the user is a corporation:



         (a)   The president, secretary, treasurer, or a
vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function,
or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions
for the corporation; or



         (b)   The manager of one or more manufacturing,
production, or operation facilities employing more than 250 persons or having
gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding 25 million dollars (in
second-quarter 1980 dollars), if authority to sign documents has been
assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures.



      (2)   If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a
general partner or proprietor, respectively.



      (3)   If the user is a federal, state, or local governmental
facility: a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee
the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility,
or their designee.



      (4)   The individuals described in divisions (1) through (3)
above may designate another authorized representative if the authorization is
in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position
responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the
discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental
matters for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to the
city.



   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND or BOD.  The quantity of oxygen utilized in
the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory
procedures for five days at 20° centigrade, usually expressed as a
concentration (e.g., mg/l). The laboratory determinations shall be made in
accordance with procedures set forth in the latest edition of 40 C.F.R. pt.
136.3.



   BOARD.  The City Board of Public Works and Safety.



   CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD OR CATEGORICAL STANDARD.  Any
regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in
accordance with sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317) which
apply to a specific category of users and which appear in 40 C.F.R. ch. I,
subch. N, pts. 405-471.



   CITY.  The City of Mount Vernon, Indiana, acting through its Common
Council or Board of Public Works and Safety.



   CITY SEWER SYSTEM.  The sanitary sewer system of the city, located
both within the city limits and within that area beyond the boundaries of the
city limits, over which the city has jurisdiction as to sewers.



   CLEAN OUT.  A vertical standpipe, with a cap, extending above a
lateral pipe and giving access to the lateral pipe on an owner’s property.



   COMBINED SEWER.  A sewer intended to serve as a sanitary sewer and a
storm sewer.



   COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT.  Biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids,
pH, and fecal coliform bacteria, plus any additional pollutants identified in
the POTW’s NPDES permit, where the POTW is designed to treat such
pollutants to the degree required by the POTW’s NPDES permit a substantial
degree.  Substantial degree contemplates removals in the order of 85% or
greater.  Minor incidental removals in the order of 10% to 65% are not
considered substantial.  Except as prohibited herein or where these
materials would interfere with the operations and performance of the POTW,
examples of additional pollutants which may be considered compatible,
depending on the concentration, include: chemical oxygen demand, total
organic carbon, phosphorus and phosphorus compounds, ammonia-N, E. coli,
fats, oils and greases of animal or vegetable origin.  INCOMPATIBLE
POLLUTANT is any pollutant that is not defined as a compatible pollutant.



   COMPOSITE SAMPLE. The sample resulting from the combination of
individual samples taken at selected intervals based on the increment of flow
or time.  Composite wastewater samples shall contain a minimum of four
discrete samples taken at equal time intervals over the compositing period or
proportional to the flow rate over the compositing period.



   CONNECTION AND TAP-IN.  These words shall be identical whether used
independently or jointly and shall cover not only situations where there is
an initial or first tap-in or connection into the city sewer system but also
where improvements which are already connected are tapped into a sewer line,
and there are additions to, enlargements, or expansions of the existing
improvements.



   COUNCIL.  The Common Council of the City of Mount Vernon, Indiana.



   DAILY DISCHARGE.  Discharge of wastewater measured during a 24-hour
period that reasonably represents the calendar day for purposes of sampling.



   DAILY MAXIMUM.  The highest total discharge for any calendar day
during a calendar month.



   DISCHARGER or INDUSTRIAL DISCHARGER.  Any non-residential user who
discharges industrial wastewater to the wastewater treatment plant.



   DOMESTIC WASTEWATER.  Wastewater discharged from the sanitary
conveniences of dwellings, apartment houses, hotels, office buildings,
industrial plants and institutions and a water supply of a community after it
has been used and discharged into a sewer, excluding storm and surface water.



   EQUIPMENT REPLACEMENT COSTS.  The expenditures for obtaining and
installing equipment, accessories, or appurtenances which are necessary
during the useful life of the sewage works to maintain the capacity and
performance for which the works are designed and constructed.



   ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY or EPA.  The U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the Regional Water Management
Division Director, or other duly authorized official of said agency.



   EXISTING SOURCE. Any source of discharge, the construction or operation
of which commenced prior to the publication by the EPA of proposed
categorical pretreatment standards, which will be applicable to such source
if the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with section 307 of
the Act.



   GARBAGE.  Any solid wastes from preparation, cooking, or dispensing of
food and from handling, storage, or sale of produce.



   GRAB SAMPLE.  A sample which is taken from a wastestream without
regard to the flow in the wastestream and over a period of time not to exceed
15 minutes.



   GROUND (SHREDDED) GARBAGE.  Garbage that is shredded to such a degree
that all particles will be carried freely in suspension under the conditions
normally prevailing in the sewerage system, with no particle being greater
than ½-inch in dimension.



   IMPROVEMENT.  Any building, structure, or physical enclosure, whether
attached or unattached to real estate, and whether mobile or immobile.



   INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANT.  Any pollutant that is not defined as a
compatible pollutant including non-biodegradable dissolved solids.



   INDIRECT DISCHARGE or DISCHARGE.  The introduction of pollutants into
the POTW from any nondomestic source regulated under section 307(b), (c), or
(d) of the Act.



   INDUSTRIAL USER (IU).  Any industrial or commercial establishment that
discharges industrial (process) wastewater or waste to the publicly owned
treatment works.



   INDUSTRIAL WASTE.  Solid, liquid, or gaseous waste resulting from any
industrial, manufacturing, trade, or business process or from the
development, recovery, or processing of natural resources exclusive of
sanitary sewage.



   INFILTRATION.  Water entering a sewer system and service connections
from the ground, through such means as, but not limited to, defective pipes,
pipe joints, connections, or manhole walls. (Infiltration does not include
and is distinguished from inflow).  This shall not exceed 200 gallons per
inch of pipe diameter per mile of pipe per day.  The following table shall
be used to determine maximum allowable infiltration:



 

Pipe Size
 

x

 
Allowable Flow
 

÷

 
Feet/Mile
 

=

 
Gallons/Day/Foot of Pipe


6-inch
 

x

 
200 gallons
 

÷

 
5280
 

=

 
0.2273


8-inch
 

x

 
200 gallons
 

÷

 
5280
 

=

 
0.3030


10-inch
 

x

 
200 gallons
 

÷

 
5280
 

=

 
0.3788


12-inch
 

x

 
200 gallons
 

÷

 
280
 

=

 
0.4545








   INFLOW.  Water discharged into a sewer system and service system and
service connections from such sources as, but not limited to, roof leaders,
cellar, yard and area drains, foundation drains, cooling water discharges,
drains from springs and swampy areas, manhole covers, cross connections from
storm waters, surface run-off, street wash waters, or drainage is hereby
expressly prohibited.  Inflow does not include and is distinguished from
infiltration.



   INFLOW/INFILTRATION (I/I).  The total quantity of water from both
inflow and infiltration without distinguishing the source.



   INSTANTANEOUS MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE DISCHARGE LIMIT.  The maximum
concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined
from the analysis of any discrete or composited sample collected, independent
of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event.



   INTERFERENCE.  A discharge, which alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW,
its treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or
disposal; and therefore, is a cause of a violation of the city’s NPDES
permit or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance
with any of the following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued
thereunder, or any more stringent state or local regulations:  section 405
of the Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act, including Title II, commonly
referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); any state
regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant
to Subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic
Substances Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries
Act.



   MAY.  The act referred to is permissive.



   MEDICAL WASTE.  Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and
blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated
bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and
dialysis wastes.



   MONTHLY AVERAGE.  The total discharge during a calendar month.  The
monthly average shall be determined by the summation of the measured daily
discharge divided by the days during the calendar month when measurements
were taken.



   NEW SOURCE.



      (1)   Any building, structure, facility, or installation from
which there is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of
which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards
under section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if
such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section,
provided that:



         (a)   The building, structure, facility, or installation
is constructed at a site at which no other source is located;



         (b)   The building, structure, facility, or installation
totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the
discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or



         (c)   The production or wastewater generating processes
of the building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially
independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether
these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the
new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which
the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the
existing source, should be considered.



      (2)   Construction on a site at which an existing source is
located results in a modification rather than a new source if the
construction does not create a new building, structure, facility, or
installation meeting the criteria of division (1)(b) or (c) above but
otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production
equipment.



      (3)   Construction of a new source as defined under this
division has commenced if the owner or operator has:



         (a)   Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous
onsite construction program:



            (1)   Any placement, assembly, or installation of
facilities or equipment;



            (2)   Significant site preparation work including
clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or
facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of
new source facilities or equipment;



         (b)   Entered into a binding contractual obligation for
the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its
operation within a reasonable time.  Options to purchase or contracts which
can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for
feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual
obligation under this division.



   NONCONTACT COOLING WATER.  Water used for cooling which does not come
into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste
product, or finished product.



   NORMAL DOMESTIC SEWAGE.  Wastewater or sewage having an average daily
concentration as follows:



      (1)   CBOD not more than 250 mg/l;



      (2)   TSS not more than 250 mg/l;



      (3)   Ammonia-N not more than 25 mg/l; and



      (4)   COD not more than 500 mg/l.



   NPDES PERMIT.  A permit issued pursuant to the National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System as provided in 33 U.S.C. § 1341.



   OTHER WASTES.  Decayed wood, sawdust, shavings, bark, lime, refuse,
ashes, garbage, offal, oil, tar, chemicals, and all other substances except
sewage and industrial wastes.



   OWNER. The owner of the property that is being served by the sewage
works of the city.



   PASS THROUGH.  A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the
United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction
with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation
of any requirement of the city’s NPDES permit, including an increase in the
magnitude or duration of a violation.



   PERSON.  Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental
entity, or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents, or
assigns.  This definition includes all federal, state, and local
governmental entities.



   pH.  A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution, expressed
in standard units.



   POLLUTANT.  Dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter
backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical
wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or
discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal, agricultural and
industrial wastes, and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH,
temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor).



   PRETREATMENT.  The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the
elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, introducing such pollutants
into the POTW. This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical,
chemical, or biological processes; by process changes; or by other means,
except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an
applicable pretreatment standard.



   PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS.  Any substantive or procedural requirement
related to pretreatment imposed on a user, other than a pretreatment standard.



   PRETREATMENT STANDARDS or STANDARDS.  Prohibited discharge standards,
categorical pretreatment standards, and local limits.



   PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS or PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.  Absolute
prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances.  These
prohibitions appear in § 50.015.



   PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS or POTW.  A treatment works, as defined
by section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1292) which is owned by the city. 
This definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection,
storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes
of a liquid nature and any conveyances which convey wastewater to a treatment
plant.



   SANITARY SEWAGE.  Includes liquid waste and wastewater from water
closets, urinals, lavatories, sinks, bathtubs, showers, laundries, bars, soda
fountains, cuspidors, refrigerator drips, drinking fountains, and all other
water-carried wastes except industrial wastes.



   SANITARY SEWER.  A sewer that carries liquid and water wastes from
residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions, into
which ground, storm, and surface waters are not intentionally admitted.



   SEPTIC TANK WASTE.  Any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels,
chemical toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks.



   SEWAGE.  Human excrement and gray water (household showers,
dishwashing operations, and the like).



   SEWAGE WORKS.  All of the works heretofore or hereafter established,
financed, and constructed under the provisions of any federal or state
statute.



   SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.



   SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER.



      (1)   A user subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or



      (2)   A user that:



         (a)   Discharges an average of 25,000 gpd or more of
process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling, and
boiler blowdown wastewater);



         (b)   Contributes a process wastestream which makes up
5% or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the
POTW treatment plant; or



         (c)   Is designated as such by the city on the basis
that it has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW’s
operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement.



      (3)   Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in
division (2) above has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the
POTW’s operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement,
the city may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition
received from a user, and in accordance with procedures in 40 C.F.R. §
403.8(f)(6), determine that such user should not be considered a significant
industrial user.



   SLUG LOAD or SLUG.  Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration
which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards of this
chapter.  Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial wastewater which in
concentration of any given constitutent or in quantity of flow exceeds for
any period of duration longer than 30 minutes more than four times the
average 24-hour concentration for flows during normal operation.



   STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC) CODE.  A classification
pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the
United States Office of Management and Budget.



   STANDARD METHODS.  The laboratory procedures set forth in the latest
edition, at the time of analysis of “Standard Methods for the Examination
of Water and Wastewater,” prepared and published jointly by the American
Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association, and the
Water Pollution Control Federation.



   STORM SEWER.  A sewer intended to carry only storm waters, surface
runoff, street wash waters, and drainage.



   STORMWATER.  Any flow occurring during or following any form of
natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation, including
snowmelt.



   SUPERINTENDENT.  The person designated by the city to supervise the
operation of the POTW, and who is charged with certain duties and
responsibilities by this chapter, or a duly authorized representative.



   SUSPENDED SOLIDS (TSS).  The total suspended matter that floats on the
surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater, or other liquid, and which
is removable by laboratory filtering.  The laboratory determination shall be
made in accordance with the latest editions of 40 C.F.R. pt. 136.



   TOXIC AMOUNT. Concentrations of any pollutant or combination of
pollutants which upon exposure or assimilation into an organism will cause
adverse effects, such as cancer, genetic mutations, and physiological
manifestations as defined in standards issued pursuant to section 307(a) of
the Act.



   TOXIC POLLUTANT.  Those substances referred to in section 307(a) of
the Act, as well as any other known potential substance capable of producing
toxic effects.



   TOTAL TOXIC ORGANICS (TTOs).  TTOs are toxic organics, as defined and
analytically measured by definition in the Federal Register.



   UPSET.  An exceptional incident in which a discharger unintentionally
and temporarily is in a state of noncompliance with the standards set forth
herein due to factors beyond the reasonable control of the discharger, and
excluding noncompliance to the extent caused by operator error, improperly
designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of
preventative maintenance, or careless or improper operation of the facilities.



   USER.  Any person or persons or any establishment of any kind
discharging or causing the discharge of wastewater into the sewer system of
the city.



   WASTEWATER.  Liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and sewage
from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and
manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated,
which are contributed to the POTW.



   WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT or TREATMENT PLANT.  That portion of the
POTW which is designed to provide treatment of municipal sewage and
industrial waste.



   WEEKLY AVERAGE.  The highest average of a calendar week during a
calendar month. The weekly average shall be determined by the summation of
the measured daily discharge divided by the number of days during the
calendar week when measurements were taken.



(Ord. 02-09, passed 5-28-02; Am. Ord. 05-34, passed 10-24-05)



GENERAL SEWER USE REQUIREMENTS



§ 50.015  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, permit
to be deposited or discharge to any natural outlet within the city or any
area under the jurisdiction of the city any sanitary, commercial, industrial
or polluted wastewaters except where suitable treatment has been provided in
accordance with this chapter.



   (B)   Except as herein provided, no person shall construct or
maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other wastewater
treatment facility intended or used for the treatment and/or disposal of
sewage.



   (C)   No person shall construct, repair, modify or alter a sewer
lateral, public sewer, manhole or other sewer system appurtenance without
first obtaining a permit from the Superintendent.



   (D)   No person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break,
damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance,
pipe or equipment which is part of the sewage system.



   (E)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm
water, surface water, ground water, roof run-off, parking lot run-off,
cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters into any sanitary sewer.



   (F)   The owners of all houses, buildings or properties used for
human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purpose situated in the city
and abutting on any street, alley, right-of-way or easement in which there is
now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary or combined
sewer of the city are hereby required at their own expense to install
suitable toilet facilities therein and to connect such facilities and
industrial waste outlets directly with the public sewer in accordance with
this chapter within 90 days after the date of official notice to do so,
provided that such public sewer is within 300 feet of the property line.



   (G)   No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed as
preventing the city from entering into an agreement between the city and any
industrial discharger whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or
character may be accepted by the city for treatment subject to payment for
treatment services by the industrial discharger.



   (H)   The responsibility for maintaining sewers is as follows:



      (1)   City.  The city shall maintain all accepted main sewer
pipes, cleanouts, manholes, lift stations, force mains, and wastewater
treatment plants.



      (2)   User.  The user shall maintain all sewer pipes,
cleanouts, manholes, lift stations and force mains on private property.  The
user shall also maintain all sewer pipes which serve as laterals originating
from private property to their terminus with the main sewer pipe within
public right-of-ways and public easements.  The lateral includes the “Y”
or connection onto the main sewer pipe.



      (3)   Repairs.  The city shall have the power to compel any
user, at his or her expense, to repair his or her sewer lateral if, in the
opinion of the city, the sewer lateral is broken, collapsed, stopped up, or
is causing surface subsidence.



      (4)   Refusal to repair.  If, upon proper written
notification from the city, the user refuses to repair his or her sewer
lateral, the city shall make the needed repairs with city personnel or
private contractors. The cost of these repairs shall be assessed the user.



   (I)   A separate and independent sanitary sewer lateral shall be
provided for each and every building, except present sewer structures in use;
and except that where one building stands at the rear of another on the same
lot and no sanitary sewer can be constructed to the rear building through an
adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the sewer lateral from the front
building may be extended to the rear building and the whole sewer lateral
considered as one sewer lateral for the single property.



   (J)   Old building sanitary sewer laterals may be used in connection
with new buildings only when they are found on examination and testing by the
Superintendent to meet all requirements of new sanitary sewer laterals.



   (K)   The Superintendent shall develop and submit to the Board of
Public Works for approval written construction standards for the construction
of sewer laterals, sewer mains, manholes and other appurtenances which are
connected to the city sewer system.  The Superintendent shall revise the
construction standards as appropriate and on a regular basis.



   (L)   The construction of all sewers, components, systems or private
sewers which connect to the city sewer system shall comply with the
requirements of the city’s construction standards.  The acceptance of the
applicability of these standards to all sewers shall be considered part of
the terms for the approval of connection to the city sewer system.



   (M)   A request for acceptance by the city of a sanitary sewer for
maintenance shall comply with the procedures set forth in the latest approved
version of the “Construction Standards for Sanitary Sewers.”



(Ord. 02-09, passed 5-28-02)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 50.016  PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS.



   (A)   General prohibitions.



      (1)   A user of the POTW, whether or not the user is subject
to national categorical standards or state, local or any other national
pretreatment standard or requirement shall not allow the introduction of the
following into the POTW. These limits shall apply to prohibited substances
such that the following are limited:



         (a)   A pollutant contributed by a user, from any source
of nondomestic wastewaters, that has caused, may cause, or is likely to cause
interference or pass through at the receiving POTW; and



         (b)   The recurrence of the contributed pollutant's
affect on the POTW.



      (2)   The POTW, through its superintendent or Superintendent's
designee, shall require compliance with all applicable pretreatment standards
and requirements by indirect dischargers.



   (B)   Specific prohibitions.  No user shall introduce or cause to
be introduced into the POTW the following pollutants, substances, or
wastewater:



      (1)   Pollutants which could create a fire or explosive hazard
in the POTW, including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed-cup
flashpoint of less than 140° F (60° C) using the test methods specified in
40 C.F.R. § 261.21;



      (2)   A pollutant that could cause corrosive structural damage
to the POTW, including a discharge with a pH lower than 5.0;



      (3)   Solid or viscous substances in amounts which could cause
obstruction of the flow in the POTW resulting in interference but in no case
solids greater than ¾-inch in any dimension;



      (4)   Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD
and the like), released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant
concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants,
could cause interference with the POTW;



      (5)   Heat in an amount that could:



         (a)   Inhibit biological activity in the POTW and result
in interference or damage to the POTW: or



         (b)   Exceed 40° Celsius or 104° degrees Fahrenheit at
the POTW treatment plant unless the Commissioner, upon request of the POTW,
approves alternate temperature limits.



      (6)   Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products
of mineral oil origin, in amounts that could cause interference or pass
through;



      (7)   Pollutants that could result in the presence of toxic
gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute
worker health and safety problems;



      (8)   Trucked or hauled pollutants, except with the permission
of the POTW and at discharge points designated by the Superintendent in
accordance § 50.058;



      (9)   Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other
wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are
sufficient to create a public nuisance or a hazard to life, or to prevent
entry into the sewers for maintenance or repair;



      (10)   Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed
by the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and
vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to the
treatment plant’s effluent, thereby violating the city’s NPDES permit;



      (11)   Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or
isotopes except in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations;



      (12)   Storm water, surface water, ground water, artesian well
water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate,
deionized water, noncontact cooling water, and unpolluted wastewater, unless
specifically authorized by the Superintendent;



      (13)   Sludges, screenings, or other residues from the
pretreatment of industrial wastes;



      (14)   Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by
the Superintendent in a wastewater discharge permit;



      (15)   Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other
sources, the treatment plant’s effluent to fail a toxicity test;



      (16)   Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances
which may cause excessive foaming in the POTW;



      (17)   Fats, oils, or greases of animal or vegetable origin in
concentrations greater than 100 mg/l;



      (18)   Wastewater causing two readings on an explosion hazard
meter at the point of discharge into the POTW, or at any point in the POTW,
of more than 10% or any single reading over 10% of the lower explosive limit
of the meter; and/or



      (19)   Any water or waste containing iron-bearing compounds or
substances in quantities sufficient to cause the average concentration in the
raw sewage at the wastewater treatment facility to exceed 25 mg/l of total
iron or 5 mg/l soluble iron.



   (C)   Processing and storage.  Pollutants, substances, or
wastewater prohibited by this section shall not be processed or stored in
such a manner that they could be discharged to the POTW.



(Ord. 02-09, passed 5-28-02; Am. Ord. 2016-11, passed 6-9-16)



§ 50.017  NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.



   The categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 C.F.R. ch. I, subch.
N, pts. 405-471 are hereby incorporated.



   (A)   Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in
terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater,
the Superintendent may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in
accordance with 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(c).



   (B)   When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard
is mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the
Superintendent shall impose an alternate limit using the combined wastestream
formula in 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(e).



   (C)   A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment
standard if the user can prove, pursuant to the procedural and substantive
provisions in 40 C.F.R. § 403.13, that factors relating to its discharge are
fundamentally different from the factors considered by the EPA when
developing the categorical pretreatment standard.



   (D)   A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical
standard in accordance with 40 C.F.R. § 403.15.



(Ord. 02-09, passed 5-28-02)



§ 50.018  STATE PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.



   State pretreatment standards located at 327 IAC 5-16 are hereby
incorporated.  State requirements and limitations on discharges to the POTW
shall be met by industrial sources which are subject to these standards in
any instance in which they are more stringent than federal requirements and
limitations or those in this chapter or any applicable ordinance.



(Ord. 02-09, passed 5-28-02)



§ 50.019  LOCAL LIMITS.



   The following pollutant limits are established to protect against pass
through and interference.  No person shall discharge wastewater containing
in excess of the following instantaneous maximum allowable discharge limits:



 


Pollutant

 

Maximum Limits (mg/l)




Daily

 

Monthly
Average






Ammonia-N (NH3-N)

 

*

 

*




Arsenic

 

25.00

 

15.00




CBOD5

 

*

 

*




COD

 

*

 

*




Cadmium (Cd)

 

1.30

 

0.70




Hexavalent chromium (Cr+6)

 

1.00

 

0.50




Chromium (Cr) total

 

10.00

 

5.00




Copper (Cu)

 

4.00

 

1.70




Cyanide (CN-) total

 

1.90

 

1.70




Lead (Pb)

 

5.00

 

1.00




Mercury (Hg)

 

0.200

 

0.100




Molybdenum (Mo)

 

1.00

 

0.50




Nickel (Ni)

 

5.00

 

1.00




Oil and grease

 

100.00

 

--




Selenium (Se)

 

0.50

 

0.10




Silver (Ag)

 

1.00

 

0.50




TSS

 

*

 

*




Zinc (Zn)

 

10.00

 

5.00




Total toxic organics (TTOs)

 

1 **

 

1 **




Notes to table:



* Refer to § 50.020



** There shall be no unpermitted discharges of TTOs to the POTW





 



(Ord. 02-09, passed 5-28-02)



§ 50.020  HIGH STRENGTH WASTEWATER.



   (A)   Any wastewater containing in excess of the following table
shall be surcharged as high strength wastewater. The issuance of surcharges
for treating high strength wastewater shall not be construed as acceptance of
high strength wastewater by the city. The city reserves the right and
authority to prohibit the discharge of high strength wastewater when such
wastewater cause or are reasonably expected to cause POTW upsets, overloading
or damage to the sewer collection system.



 


Pollutant

 

Concentration, mg/l



CBOD5
 

250



Total suspended solids (TSS)
 

250



COD
 

500



Ammonia-N (NH3-N)
 

25




 



   (B)   The above limits apply at the point where the wastewater is
discharged into the public sewer. The Superintendent may, at his or her
discretion, designate in writing a sampling point other than the point where
the wastewater is discharged into the public sewer so long as that designated
sampling point is an accurate representation of the wastewater discharged
into the public sewer.



   (C)   The above limits apply at the point where the wastewater is
discharged to the POTW.  All concentrations for metallic substances are for
total metal unless indicated otherwise. The Superintendent may impose mass
limitations in addition to, or in place of, the concentration-based
limitations above.



(Ord. 02-09, passed 5-28-02)



§ 50.021  RIGHT OF REVISION.



   The city reserves the right to amend this chapter utilizing appropriate
City Board processing to provide for more or less stringent limitations or
requirements on discharges to the wastewater treatment plant where deemed
necessary to comply with the objectives.



(Ord. 02-09, passed 5-28-02)



§ 50.022  DILUTION.



   No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way
attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for
adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless
expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement.
The Superintendent may impose mass limitations on users who are using
dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in
other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate.



(Ord. 02-09, passed 5-28-02)



BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS



§ 50.035  BUILDING SEWER PERMIT REQUIRED; FEES.



   (A)   No unauthorized persons shall uncover, make any connections
with, or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or
appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the City
Sewer Department.



   (B)   There shall be one class of building sewer permits which
include residential and commercial sewer permits and service to
establishments producing industrial wastes.



   (C)   In the case of building sewer permits, the owner or his or her
agent shall make application for the permit to the city. The permit
application shall be supplemented by any plan, specification, or other
information considered pertinent in the judgment of the city.



   (D)   No water tap will be issued for any improvement until the
owner or his or her agent has paid the sanitary sewer tap-in fee.  Under no
circumstances will a connection to the sanitary sewer system be allowed prior
to the sanitary sewer tap-in fee being paid.



   (E)   In the event additions and/or improvements are made to a
development, the owner shall pay a tap-in fee to the City Sewer Department
for the addition and/or improvements.  The tap-in fee shall be calculated
for the entire building after adoption and/or improvements are completed with
tap-in fee credit being given the owner for that portion of the building
which existed prior to the building addition and/or improvements being made.



(Ord. 02-09, passed 5-28-02)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 50.036  SUPERVISION OF TAPPING; EXPENSE.



   Any person desiring to tap a sewer may employ any licensed plumber to
perform the work.  The connection shall be made without injury to the sewer
and in accordance with the permit and this chapter. It shall be the duty of
the city, on notice of not less than 24 hours given by the applicant, to have
an employee of the City Sewer Department be present at the place of the tap
to inspect the sewer installations and connections to the municipal sewers. 
The entire expense of the tap and installation shall be paid by the person
making the connection.



(Ord. 02-09, passed 5-28-02)



§ 50.037  CONNECTION INTO SEWER; EXPENSE.



   (A)   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer
shall be made at the “Y” branch, if such a branch is available at a
suitable location.  If the public sewer is 15 inches in diameter or less and
no properly located “Y” branch is available, the owner shall, at his or
her expense, install a saddle “Y” on the public sewer at the location
specified by the city.  Where the public sewer is greater than 15 inches in
diameter and no properly located “Y” branch is available, a neat hole may
be cut into the public sewer to receive the building sewer with an entry in
the downstream direction at an angle of approximately 45 degrees.  A
45-degree elbow may be used to make the connection with the spigot and cut so
as not to extend past the inner surface of the public sewer.  The invert of
the building sewer at the point of connection shall be the same or at a
higher elevation than the invert of the public sewer. A smooth neat joint
shall be made, and the connection made secure and watertight by encasement in
concrete.  Special fittings shall be used for the connections as approved by
the city.



   (B)   All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and
connection of the building sewer shall be paid by the owner.  The owner
shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or
indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.



   (C)   Whenever the city adopts a preliminary resolution for the
permanent improvement of the roadway of any street, it shall in the
resolution declare its intention of making, at the owner’s expense, all
private connections with sewers, gas, water, and other like pipes and public
conveniences and bringing the connections inside the curb line of the street
when it shall be done by the abutting property owners.  Note of this
intention shall also be made a part of the notice to be given concerning the
improvement of the street as required by law.



      (1)   Should any owners of property abutting the proposed
improvement fail to make the connections, the city shall at once proceed to
authorize the proper city official to do so at the owner’s expense and the
city shall have the power to designate the official who shall perform the
work of making the connections.  The city shall also have authority, in the
event it deems it necessary, to cause the work of making the connections to
be done by any competent contractor.  The city may also, if it deems
necessary, in the final resolution ordering the improvement, declare that all
such connections not made by abutting property owners shall be made by the
contractor, in which event bidders shall state the amount at which they are
willing to make the connections based either on the frontage of the lots
where the connections are to be made or otherwise as may be ordered by the
city.



      (2)   The cost of making the connections, whether by a city
official designated by the city or by contract, shall be a lien on the
property of the owner and shall be included in and constitute a part of the
assessment for the improvement of the street and shall be collectible in the
same manner as expenses for other street or sewer improvements are collected.



(Ord. 02-09, passed 5-28-02)



§ 50.038  LAYING PIPES THROUGH SEWERS; REQUIREMENT OF CLEAN OUT.



   (A)   No person shall lay any gas, water, or other pipe or conduit
of any kind through any sewer of the city or, except as provided in division
(B) below, make any opening or connection of any kind through, into, or with
any sewer except for the purpose of making connection therewith as provided
in this chapter.



   (B)   Notwithstanding division (A) above, an owner of residential or
commercial property shall install or cause to be installed a clean out when
connecting to the public sewer or when making any additions and/or
improvements to the property.



(Ord. 02-09, passed 5-28-02; Am. Ord. 05-34, passed 10-24-05)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 50.039  CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The building sewer shall be cast iron soil pipe PVC SDR35 or
vitrified clay sewer pipe or other suitable material in conformity with the
city and state building codes.  Joints shall be tight and waterproof. Any
part of the building sewer that is located within ten feet of a water service
pipe shall be constructed of pressure rated joints.  The size and slope of
the building sewer shall be in conformity with the city and state building
codes, but in no event shall the diameter be less than 6 inches.  The slope
of the 6-inch pipe shall be not less than -inch per foot.



   (B)   No building sewers shall be laid parallel to or within three
feet of any bearing wall which might be weakened. The depth shall be
sufficient to afford protection from frost.  The building sewer shall be
laid at a uniform grade and in straight alignment insofar as possible. 
Changes in directions shall be made only with properly curved pipes and
fittings.  In all buildings in which any building drainage is too low to
permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by the drain
shall be lifted by approved artificial means and discharged to the building
sewer.



   (C)   No person shall construct a residential or commercial building
with any plumbing located in its basement or any below ground level floor
connected by gravity to the sanitary sewer unless the top of the nearest
upstream manhole or cleanout with a pop-off cover on the sanitary sewer is a
minimum of one foot lower than the elevation of the basement or floor in
question.  All plumbing located in basements or any below ground level
floors shall be connected to an appropriate pump to direct the discharge from
such plumbing to the sewer.



   (D)   New improvements shall have separate sanitary sewer and storm
water connections to existing combined sewers.  The sanitary sewer shall
include sanitary sewage only.



(Ord. 02-09, passed 5-28-02)



§ 50.040  ORDER TO REOPEN AND REPAIR.



   The city shall have the power to compel the person making the
connection to repair it at any time and to reopen the drain or relay the pipe
as in its opinion shall be necessary.



(Ord. 02-09, passed 5-28-02)



§ 50.041  EXCAVATIONS.



   (A)   All excavations required for the installation of the sewer
shall be open trench unless otherwise approved by an employee of the City
Sewer Department.  Pipe laying and backfill shall be performed in accordance
with standard practices; however, no backfill shall be placed until the work
has been inspected by an employee of the City Sewer Department.



   (B)   All excavations for building sewer installations shall be
adequately guarded with barricades and lights to be installed by the property
owner. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in
the course of work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city.



(Ord. 02-09, passed 5-28-02)



§ 50.042  COMBINED SEWERS.



   Construction of combined sewer is hereby prohibited.



(Ord. 02-09, passed 5-28-02)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 50.043  PRESSURE PUMP SEWER SYSTEMS.



   Any person who installs a pressure pump sewer system, which includes,
but is not necessarily limited to, a system whereby effluent is pumped from
homes in pipes under pressure to a municipal sanitary sewer or a grinder
which grinds solids and pumps effluents under pressure to municipal sewers or
any other similar system, shall maintain the system at all times. 
Maintenance shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, the maintenance
of all individual service lines on private property so that the lines do not
leak or cause the spillage of effluent on the ground, the maintenance of all
pumps, grinders, or other mechanical devices used in the pressure sewer
system.  Any failure to maintain the system shall be a violation of this
section.



(Ord. 02-09, passed 5-28-02)  Penalty, see § 10.99



PRETREATMENT OF WASTEWATER



§ 50.055  PRETREATMENT FACILITIES.



   Users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply with
this chapter and shall achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment
standards, local limits, and the prohibitions set out in § 50.016 within the
time limitations specified by the EPA, the state, or the Superintendent,
whichever is more stringent.  Any facilities necessary for compliance shall
be provided, operated, and maintained at the user’s expense.  Detailed
plans describing such facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted
to the Superintendent for review, and shall be acceptable to the
Superintendent before such facilities are constructed.  The review of such
plans and operating procedures shall in no way relieve the user from the
responsibility of modifying such facilities as necessary to produce a
discharge acceptable to the city under the provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 02-09, passed 5-28-02)



§ 50.056  ADDITIONAL PRETREATMENT MEASURES.



   (A)   Whenever deemed necessary, the Superintendent may require
users to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that
certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or
consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage wastestreams from industrial
wastestreams, and such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the
POTW and determine the user’s compliance with the requirements of this
chapter.



   (B)   The Superintendent may require any person discharging into the
POTW to install and maintain, on their property and at their expense, a
suitable storage and flow-control facility to ensure equalization of flow. 
A wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely for flow equalization.



   (C)   Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in
the opinion of the Superintendent, they are necessary for the proper handling
of wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease and oil, or sand; except
that such interceptors shall not be required for residential users.  All
interception units shall be of type and capacity approved by the
Superintendent and shall be so located to be easily accessible for cleaning
and inspection.  Such interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned, and repaired
regularly, as needed, by the user at their expense.



   (D)   Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may
be required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection
meter.



(Ord. 02-09, passed 5-28-02)



§ 50.057  ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE/SLUG CONTROL PLANS.



   (A)   At least once every two years, the Superintendent shall
evaluate whether each significant industrial user needs an accidental
discharge/slug control plan.  The Superintendent may require any user to
develop, submit for approval, and implement such a plan.  Alternatively, the
Superintendent may develop such a plan for any user.



   (B)   An accidental discharge/slug control plan shall address, at a
minimum, the following:



      (1)   Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine
batch discharges;



      (2)   Description of stored chemicals;



      (3)   Procedures for immediately notifying the Superintendent
of any accidental or slug discharge, as required by § 50.065; and



      (4)   Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental
or slug discharge.  Such procedures include, but are not limited to,
inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of
materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff,
worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures
for containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures
and equipment for emergency response.



(Ord. 02-09, passed 5-28-02)



§ 50.058  HAULED WASTEWATER.



   (A)   Septic tank waste may be introduced into the POTW only at
locations designated by the Superintendent, and at such times as are
established by the Superintendent. Such waste shall not violate §§ 50.015
through 50.022 or any other requirements established by the city.  The
Superintendent may require septic tank waste haulers to obtain wastewater
discharge permits.



   (B)   The Superintendent shall require haulers of industrial waste
to obtain wastewater discharge permits.  The Superintendent may require
generators of hauled industrial waste to obtain wastewater discharge
permits.  The Superintendent also may prohibit the disposal of hauled
industrial waste.  The discharge of hauled industrial waste is subject to
all other requirements of this chapter.



   (C)   Industrial waste haulers may discharge loads only at locations
designated by the Superintendent. No load may be discharged without prior
consent of the Superintendent.  The Superintendent may collect samples of
each hauled load to ensure compliance with applicable standards.  The
Superintendent may require the industrial waste hauler to provide a waste
analysis of any load prior to discharge.



   (D)   Industrial waste haulers must provide a waste tracking form
for every load.  This form shall include, at a minimum, the name and address
of the industrial waste hauler, permit number, truck identification, names
and addresses of sources of waste, and volume and characteristics of waste. 
The form shall identify the type of industry, known or suspected waste
constituents, and whether any wastes are RCRA hazardous wastes.



   (E)   There shall be a charge for the introduction of septic tank
waste into the POTW as follows:



      (1)   $25 per 0-1,500 gallons;



      (2)   $45 per 1,501-3,000 gallons.



      (3)   3,000 gallons of hauled wastewater shall be the maximum
load permitted.



(Ord. 02-09, passed 5-28-02; Am. Ord. 04-35, passed 10-25-04; Am. Ord. 05-13,
passed 5-24-05)



§ 50.059  STORM OR INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATERS.



   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water,
surface water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, cooling water,
or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer from any source
including, but not limited to roof leaders, cellar drains, yard drains, area
drains, foundation drains, or the resources of the inflow (as defined in 40
C.F.R. § 35.905).



(Ord. 02-09, passed 5-28-02)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 50.060  PERMISSIBLE DISCHARGES IN STORM SEWERS.



   Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to
sewers specifically designated storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved
by the city.  New construction of storm sewers which are tributary to
existing downstream combined sewers shall be designed to minimize or delay
inflow contribution to the existing combined sewer system.  Industrial
cooling water or unpolluted process water may be discharged on approval of
the city to a storm sewer, combined sewer, or natural outlet.



(Ord. 02-09, passed 5-28-02)



§ 50.061  GREASE, OIL OR SAND INTERCEPTORS.



   Grease, oil, or sand interceptors shall be provided when in the opinion
of the city they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid waste
containing grease in excessive amounts or any flammable waste, sand, or other
harmful ingredients.  The interceptors shall not be required for private
living quarters or dwelling units.  All interceptors shall be of a standard
approved type and capacity, which meets the Mount Vernon Sewer Department
requirements and shall be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and
inspection.  Where installed, all grease, oil, or sand interceptors required
under this section shall be maintained by the owner at his or her expense, in
continuously efficient operation at all times.  The owner shall, at his or
her expense, install larger grease, oil, or sand interceptors if in the
opinion of the City Sewer Department the originally installed interceptors do
not function properly or are inadequate.



(Ord. 02-09, passed 5-28-02)



§ 50.062  PRELIMINARY TREATMENT BY OWNER; CONTROL MANHOLES.



   (A)   The admission into public sewers of any substances, materials,
waters, or waste described in this chapter, or of water or waste having an
average daily flow greater than 5% of the average daily sewage flow of the
city shall be subject to the review and approval of the city.  Where
necessary in the judgement of the city, the owner shall provide at his or her
expense any preliminary treatment necessary to reduce the objectionable
characteristics or constituents to within the maximum limits provided for in
§ 50.019 or to control the quantities and rate of discharge of the waters or
wastes.  Plans, specifications, and other pertinent information relating to
proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for the approval
of the city and the state, and no construction of such facilities shall be
commenced until approval is obtained in writing.



   (B)   Where preliminary treatment facilities required under this
section are provided for any water or wastes, they shall be maintained
continuously in satisfactory and efficient operation by the owner at his or
her expense.  When required by the city, the owners of any property served
by a building sewer carrying industrial waste shall install suitable control
manholes in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and
measurement of the waste.  The manholes, when required, shall be accessible
and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved
by the city.  The manholes shall be installed by the owner at his or her own
expense and shall be maintained by him or her so as to be safe and accessible
at all times.



(Ord. 02-09, passed 5-28-02)



§ 50.063  SPECIAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER.



   No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed as preventing
any special agreement or arrangement between the city and a non-residential
discharger whereby the discharge of wastewater whose strength is greater than
the concentrations contained in § 50.009 may be accepted provided that the
POTW has treatment capacity and is subject to charges consistent with the
appropriate cost of treatment.



(Ord. 02-09, passed 5-28-02)



WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITS



§ 50.075  WASTEWATER ANALYSIS.



   When respected by the Superintendent, a user must submit information on
the nature and characteristics of its wastewater within 30 days of the
request.  The Superintendent is authorized to prepare a form for this
purpose and may periodically require users to update this information.



(Ord. 02-09, passed 5-28-02)



§ 50.076  WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT REQUIREMENT.



   (A)   No significant industrial user (SIU) shall discharge
wastewater into the POTW without first applying for and obtaining a
wastewater discharge permit from the IDEM, except that a SIU that has filed a
timely application pursuant to § 50.077 or has a valid permit issued by the
IDEM of this chapter may continue to discharge for the time period specified
therein.



   (B)   If the IDEM does not issue a permit to the SIU, then the
Superintendent may require the SIU to obtain a wastewater discharge permit
from the city, as necessary, to carry out the purposes of this chapter.  The
determination from IDEM shall be in writing.  If the city issues a permit to
the SIU, the permit will be issued in accordance with §§ 50.079 through
50.090 of this chapter.



   (C)   Any violation of the terms and conditions of a wastewater
discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and subjects the
wastewater discharge permittee to the sanctions set out in §§ 50.130
through 50.153.  Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit from either the
city or the IDEM does not relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply
with all federal and state pretreatment standards or requirements or with any
other requirements of federal, state, and local law.



(Ord. 02-09, passed 5-28-02)



§ 50.077  WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITTING; EXISTING CONNECTIONS.



   Any user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who was
discharging wastewater into the POTW prior to the effective date of this
chapter and who wishes to continue such discharges in the future, shall,
within 60 days after said date, apply either IDEM if they are a SIU or to the
Superintendent if they are not a SIU for a wastewater discharge permit in
accordance with § 50.079, and shall not cause or allow discharges to the
POTW to continue after 90 days of the effective date of this chapter except
in accordance with a wastewater discharge permit issued by either IDEM or the
Superintendent.



(Ord. 02-09, passed 5-28-02)



§ 50.078  WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITTING; NEW CONNECTIONS.



   Any user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who proposes
to begin or recommence discharging into the POTW must obtain such permit
prior to the beginning or recommencing of such discharge. An application for
this wastewater discharge permit, in accordance with § 50.079, must be filed
at least 30 days prior to the date upon which any discharge will begin or
recommence.



(Ord. 02-09, passed 5-28-02)



§ 50.079  WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT APPLICATION CONTENTS.



   (A)   All users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit
must submit a permit application.  The Superintendent may require all users
to submit as part of an application the following information:



      (1)   All information required by § 50.016(B);



      (2)   Description of activities, facilities, and plant
processes on the premises, including a list of all raw materials and
chemicals used or stored at the facility which are, or could accidentally or
intentionally be, discharged to the POTW;



      (3)   Number and type of employees, hours of operation, and
proposed or actual hours of operation;



      (4)   Each product produced by type, amount, process or
processes, and rate of production;



      (5)   Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and
maximum per day);



      (6)   Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans,
and details to show all sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by size,
location, and elevation, and all points of discharge;



      (7)   Time and duration of discharges; and



      (8)   Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the
Superintendent to evaluate the wastewater discharge permit application.



   (B)   Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed
and will be returned to the user for revision.



(Ord. 02-09, passed 5-28-02)



§ 50.080  APPLICATION SIGNATORIES AND CERTIFICATION.



   All wastewater discharge permit applications and user reports must be
signed by an authorized representative of the user and contain the following
certification statement:



   “I certify under penalty of law that this document and all
attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance
with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and
evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or
persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for
gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my
knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are
significant penalties for submitting false information, including the
possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations.”



(Ord. 02-09, passed 5-28-02)



§ 50.081  WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT DECISIONS.



   The Superintendent will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may
require additional information.  Within 90 days of receipt of a complete
wastewater discharge permit application, the Superintendent will determine
whether or not to issue a wastewater discharge permit.  The Superintendent
may deny any application for a wastewater discharge permit.  The
Superintendent shall publish a written record documenting the reasons for
approving or disproving the discharge permit application.  This
documentation shall be published in the local newspaper designated for other
legal publications. The Superintendent may accept or deny any new or
increased discharges from any indirect discharger.



(Ord. 02-09, passed 5-28-02; Am. Ord. 2016-11, passed 6-9-16)



§ 50.082  WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT DURATION.



   A wastewater discharge permit shall be issued for a specified time
period, not to exceed five years from the effective date of the permit.  A
wastewater discharge permit may be issued for a period less than five years,
at the discretion of the Superintendent.  Each wastewater discharge permit
will indicate a specific date upon which it will expire.



(Ord. 02-09, passed 5-28-02)



§ 50.083  WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT CONTENTS.



   A wastewater discharge permit shall include such conditions as are
deemed reasonably necessary by the Superintendent to prevent pass through or
interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment
plant’s effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge
management and disposal, and protect against damage to the POTW.



   (A)   Wastewater discharge permits must contain:



      (1)   A statement that indicates wastewater discharge permit
duration, which in no event shall exceed five years;



      (2)   A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is
nontransferable without prior notification to the city in accordance with §
50.086, and provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy
of the existing wastewater discharge permit;



      (3)   Effluent limits based on applicable pretreatment
standards;



      (4)   Self monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and
record-keeping requirements.  These requirements shall include an
identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling
frequency, and sample type based on federal, state, and local law; and



      (5)   A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties
for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable
compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance
beyond that required by applicable federal, state, or local law.



   (B)   Wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be
limited to, the following conditions:



      (1)   Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge,
time of discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization;



      (2)   Requirements for the installation of pretreatment
technology, pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment
devices, designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of
pollutants into the treatment works;



      (3)   Requirements for the development and implementation of
spill control plans or other special conditions including management
practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or
nonroutine discharges;



      (4)   Development and implementation of waste minimization
plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW;



      (5)   The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for
the management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW;



      (6)   Requirements for installation and maintenance of
inspection and sampling facilities and equipment;



      (7)   A statement that compliance with the wastewater
discharge permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for
compliance with all applicable federal and state pretreatment standards,
including those which become effective during the term of the wastewater
discharge permit; and



      (8)   Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the
Superintendent to ensure compliance with this chapter, and state and federal
laws, rules, and regulations.



(Ord. 02-09, passed 5-28-02)



§ 50.084  WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT APPEALS.



   Within 15 days, the Superintendent shall provide public notice, in the
newspaper designated for other legal publications, of the issuance of a
wastewater discharge permit.  Any person, including the user, may petition
the Superintendent to reconsider the terms of a wastewater discharge permit
within 30 days of notice of its issuance.



   (A)   Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed
to be a waiver of the administrative appeal.



   (B)   In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the
wastewater discharge permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this
objection, and the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the
wastewater discharge permit.



   (C)   The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit shall not
be stayed pending the appeal.



   (D)   If the Superintendent fails to act within 20 days, a request
for reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions not to reconsider
a wastewater discharge permit, not to issue a wastewater discharge permit, or
not to modify a wastewater discharge permit shall be considered final
administrative actions for purposes of judicial review.



(Ord. 02-09, passed 5-28-02)



§ 50.085  WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT MODIFICATION.



   The Superintendent may modify a wastewater discharge permit for good
cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons:



   (A)   To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local
pretreatment standards or requirements;



   (B)   To address significant alterations or additions to the
user’s operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the
time of wastewater discharge permit issuance;



   (C)   A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or
permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge;



   (D)   Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a
threat to the city’s POTW, city personnel, or the receiving waters;



   (E)   Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater
discharge permit;



   (F)   Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant
facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required
reporting;



   (G)   Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical
pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 C.F.R. § 403.13;



   (H)   To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater
discharge permit; and/or



   (I)   To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation
to a new owner or operator.



(Ord. 02-09, passed 5-28-02)



§ 50.086  WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT TRANSFER.



   (A)   Wastewater discharge permits may be transferred to a new owner
or operator only if the permittee gives at least 90 days advance notice to
the Superintendent and the Superintendent approves the wastewater discharge
permit transfer.



   (B)   The notice to the Superintendent must include a written
certification by the new owner or operator which:



      (1)   States that the new owner and/or operator has no
immediate intent to change the facility’s operations and processes;



      (2)   Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to
occur; and



   (C)   Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the
existing wastewater discharge permit.



   (D)   Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the
wastewater discharge permit void as of the date of facility transfer.



(Ord. 02-09, passed 5-28-02)



§ 50.087  WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT REVOCATION.



   (A)   The Superintendent may revoke a wastewater discharge permit
for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons:



      (1)   Failure to notify the Superintendent of significant
changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge;



      (2)   Failure to provide prior notification to the
Superintendent of changed conditions pursuant to § 50.064;



      (3)   Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all
relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application;



      (4)   Falsifying self-monitoring reports;



      (5)   Tampering with monitoring equipment;



      (6)   Refusing to allow the Superintendent timely access to
the facility premises and records;



      (7)   Failure to meet effluent limitations;



      (8)   Failure to pay fines;



      (9)   Failure to pay sewer charges;



      (10)   Failure to meet compliance schedules;



      (11)   Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the
wastewater discharge permit application;



      (12)   Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of
business ownership of a permitted facility; and/or



      (13)   Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement,
or any terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this chapter.



   (B)   Wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon cessation
of operations or transfer of business ownership.  All wastewater discharge
permits issued to a particular user are void upon the issuance of a new
wastewater discharge permit to that user.



(Ord. 02-09, passed 5-28-02)



§ 50.088  WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT REISSUANCE.



   A user with an expiring wastewater discharge permit shall apply for
wastewater discharge permit reissuance by submitting a complete permit
application, in accordance with § 50.079, a minimum of 120 days prior to the
expiration of the user’s existing wastewater discharge permit.



(Ord. 02-09, passed 5-28-02)



§ 50.089  REGULATION OF WASTE RECEIVED FROM OTHER JURISDICTIONS.



   (A)   If another municipality, or user located within another
municipality, contributes wastewater to the POTW, the Superintendent shall
enter into an intermunicipal agreement with the contributing municipality.



   (B)   Prior to entering into an agreement required by division (A)
above, the Superintendent shall request the following information from the
contributing municipality:



      (1)   A description of the quality and volume of wastewater
discharged to the POTW by the contributing municipality;



      (2)   An inventory of all users located within the
contributing municipality that are discharging to the POTW; and



      (3)   Such other information as the Superintendent may deem
necessary.



   (C)   An intermunicipal agreement, as required by division (A)
above, shall contain the following conditions:



      (1)   A requirement for the contributing municipality to adopt
a sewer use ordinance which is at least as stringent as this chapter and
local limits which are at least as stringent as those set out in § 50.018. 
The requirement shall specify that such ordinance and limits must be revised
as necessary to reflect changes made to the city’s ordinance or local
limits;



      (2)   A requirement for the contributing municipality to
submit a revised user inventory on at least an annual basis;



      (3)   A provision specifying which pretreatment implementation
activities, including wastewater discharge permit issuance, inspection and
sampling, and enforcement, will be conducted by the contributing
municipality; which of these activities will be conducted by the
Superintendent; and which of these activities will be conducted jointly by
the contributing municipality and the Superintendent;



      (4)   A requirement for the contributing municipality to
provide the Superintendent with access to all information that the
contributing municipality obtains as part of its pretreatment activities;



      (5)   Limits on the nature, quality, and volume of the
contributing municipality’s wastewater at the point where it discharges to
the POTW;



      (6)   Requirements for monitoring the contributing
municipality’s discharge;



      (7)   A provision ensuring the Superintendent access to the
facilities of users located within the contributing municipality’s
jurisdictional boundaries for the purpose of inspection, sampling, and any
other duties deemed necessary by the Superintendent; and



      (8)   A provision specifying remedies available for breach of
the terms of the intermunicipal agreement.



(Ord. 02-09, passed 5-28-02)



§ 50.090  BASELINE MONITORING REPORTS.



   (A)   Within either 180 days after the effective date of a
categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a
category determination under 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later,
existing categorical users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge
to the POTW shall submit to the Superintendent a report which contains the
information listed in division (B) below.  At least 90 days prior to
commencement of their discharge, new sources, and sources that become
categorical users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical
standard, shall submit to the Superintendent a report which contains the
information listed in division (B) below.  A new source shall report the
method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical
standards. A new source also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and
quantity of pollutants to be discharged.



   (B)   Users described above shall submit the information set forth
below.



      (1)   Identifying information.  The name and address of the
facility, including the name of the operator and owner.



      (2)   Environmental permits.  A list of any environmental
control permits held by or for the facility.



      (3)   Description of operations.  A brief description of the
nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial classifications
of the operation(s) carried out by such user.  This description should
include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to
the POTW from the regulated processes.



      (4)   Flow measurement.  Information showing the measured
average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from
regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of
the combined wastestream formula set out in 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(e).



      (5)   Measurement of pollutants. 



         (a)   The categorical pretreatment standards applicable
to each regulated process.



         (b)   The results of sampling and analysis identifying
the nature and concentration, and/or mass, where required by the standard or
by the Superintendent, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each
regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term average
concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported. The sample shall
be representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in accordance
with procedures set out in § 50.099.



         (c)   Sampling must be performed in accordance with
procedures set out in § 50.100.



      (6)   Certification.  A statement, reviewed by the user’s
authorized representative and certified by a qualified professional,
indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent
basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or
additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and
requirements.



      (7)   Compliance schedule.  If additional pretreatment and/or
O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest
schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or
O&M.  The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the
compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A
compliance schedule pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set
out in § 50.091.



      (9)   Signature and certification.  All baseline monitoring
reports must be signed and certified in accordance with § 50.080.



(Ord. 02-09, passed 5-28-02)   



§ 50.091  COMPLIANCE SCHEDULE PROGRESS REPORTS.



   The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule
required by § 50.090(B)(7):



   (A)   The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of
dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the
construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user
to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but are
not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans,
executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing
construction, and beginning and conducting routine operation);



   (B)   No increment referred to above shall exceed nine months;



   (C)   The user shall submit a progress report to the Superintendent
no later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date
of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the
increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the
steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule; and



   (D)   In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such
progress reports to the Superintendent.



(Ord. 02-09, passed 5-28-02)



§ 50.092  REPORTS ON COMPLIANCE WITH CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD
DEADLINE.



   Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable
categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following
commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user
subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the
Superintendent a report containing the information described in §
50.090(B)(4) through (6).  For users subject to equivalent mass or
concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40
C.F.R. § 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the
user’s long-term production rate. For all other users subject to
categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant
discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report
shall include the user’s actual production during the appropriate sampling
period.  All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance
with § 50.080.



(Ord. 02-09, passed 5-28-02)



§ 50.093  PERIODIC COMPLIANCE REPORTS.



   (A)   All significant industrial users shall, at a frequency
determined by the Superintendent but in no case less than twice per year (in
June and December), submit a report indicating the nature and concentration
of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards
and the measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the
reporting period.  All periodic compliance reports must be signed and
certified in accordance with § 50.080.



   (B)   All wastewater samples must be representative of the user’s
discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be
properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all
times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working
order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are
unrepresentative of its discharge.



   (C)   If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section
monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the Superintendent,
using the procedures prescribed in § 50.100, the results of this monitoring
shall be included in the report.



(Ord. 02-09, passed 5-28-02)



§ 50.094  REPORTS OF CHANGED CONDITIONS.



   Each user must notify the Superintendent of any planned significant
changes to the user’s operations or system which might alter the nature,
quality, or volume of its wastewater at least 30 days before the change.



   (A)   The Superintendent may require the user to submit such
information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition,
including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under
§ 50.079.



   (B)   The Superintendent may issue a wastewater discharge permit
under § 50.081 or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit under §
50.085 in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions.



   (C)   For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include,
but are not limited to, flow increases of 20% or greater, and the discharge
of any previously unreported pollutants.



(Ord. 02-09, passed 5-28-02)



§ 50.095  REPORTS OF POTENTIAL PROBLEMS.



   (A)   In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to,
accidental discharges, discharges of a nonroutine, episodic nature, a
noncustomary batch discharge, or a slug load, that may cause potential
problems for the POTW, the user shall immediately telephone and notify the
Superintendent of the incident. This notification shall include the location
of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and
corrective actions taken by the user.



   (B)   Within five days following such discharge, the user shall,
unless waived by the Superintendent, submit a detailed written report
describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the
user to prevent similar future occurrences.  Such notification shall not
relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may
be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural resources, or any
other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the
user of any fines, penalties, or other liability which may be imposed
pursuant to this chapter.



   (C)   A notice shall be permanently posted on the user’s bulletin
board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event
of a discharge described in division (A) above.  Employers shall ensure that
all employees, who may cause such a discharge to occur, are advised of the
emergency notification procedure.



(Ord. 02-09, passed 5-28-02)



§ 50.096  REPORTS FROM UNPERMITTED USERS.



   All users not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall
provide appropriate reports to the Superintendent as the Superintendent may
require.



(Ord. 02-09, passed 5-28-02)



§ 50.097  NOTICE OF VIOLATION/REPEAT SAMPLING AND REPORTING.



   If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must
notify the Superintendent within 24 hours of becoming aware of the
violation.  The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit
the results of the repeat analysis to the Superintendent within 30 days after
becoming aware of the violation.  The user is not required to resample if
the Superintendent monitors at the user’s facility at least once a month,
or if the Superintendent samples between the user’s initial sampling and
when the user receives the results of this sampling.



(Ord. 02-09, passed 5-28-02)



§ 50.098  NOTIFICATION OF THE DISCHARGE OF HAZARDOUS WASTE.



   (A)   Any user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall
notify the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director, and
state hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge into the POTW
of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste
under 40 C.F.R. pt. 261.  Such notification must include the name of the
hazardous waste as set forth in 40 C.F.R. pt. 261, the EPA hazardous waste
number, and the type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other).  If the
user discharges more than 100 kilograms of such waste per calendar month to
the POTW, the notification also shall contain the following information to
the extent such information is known and readily available to the user:  an
identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes, an
estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the
wastestream discharged during that calendar month, and an estimation of the
mass of constituents in the wastestream expected to be discharged during the
following 12 months.  All notifications must take place no later than 180
days after the discharge commences.  Any notification under this division
need be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged.  However,
notifications of changed conditions must be submitted under § 50.094.  The
notification requirement in this section does not apply to pollutants already
reported by users subject to categorical pretreatment standards under the
self-monitoring requirements of §§ 50.090 through 50.092.



   (B)   Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of division (A)
above, during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than 15
kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes
as specified in 40 C.F.R. §§ 261.30(d) and 261.33(e).  Discharge of more
than 15 kilograms of nonacute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any
quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 C.F.R. §§ 261.30(d)
and 261.33(e), requires a one-time notification.  Subsequent months during
which the user discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do
not require additional notification.



   (C)   In the case of any new regulations under section 3001 of RCRA
identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any
additional substance as a hazardous waste, the user must notify the
Superintendent, the EPA Regional Waste Management Waste Division Director,
and state hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substance
within 90 days of the effective date of such regulations.



   (D)   In the case of any notification made under this section, the
user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and
toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be
economically practical.



   (E)   This provision does not create a right to discharge any
substance not otherwise permitted to be discharged by this chapter, a permit
issued thereunder, or any applicable federal or state law.



(Ord. 02-09, passed 5-28-02)



§ 50.099 ANALYTICAL REQUIREMENTS.



   All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted
as part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be
performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 C.F.R. pt. 136,
unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment
standard.  If 40 C.F.R. pt. 136 does not contain sampling or analytical
techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses must be
performed in accordance with procedures approved by EPA.



(Ord. 02-09, passed 5-28-02)



§ 50.100  SAMPLE COLLECTION.



   (A)   Except as indicated in division (B) below, the user must
collect wastewater samples using flow proportional composite collection
techniques. In the event flow proportional sampling is infeasible, the
Superintendent may authorize the use of time proportional sampling or a
minimum of four grab samples where the user demonstrates that this will
provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged.  In
addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous
discharge limits.



   (B)   Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols,
sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab
collection techniques.



(Ord. 02-09, passed 5-28-02)



§ 50.101  TIMING.



   Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date
postmarked. For reports which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail
facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt of
the report shall govern.



(Ord. 02-09, passed 5-28-02)



§ 50.102  RECORD KEEPING.



   Users subject to the reporting requirements of this chapter shall
retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records of
information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this
chapter and any additional records of information obtained pursuant to
monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such
requirements.  Records shall include the date, exact place, method, and time
of sampling, and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates
analyses were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical
techniques or methods used; and the results of such analyses.  These records
shall remain available for a period of at least three years. This period
shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning
the user or the city, or where the user has been specifically notified of a
longer retention period by the Superintendent.



(Ord. 02-09, passed 5-28-02)



COMPLIANCE MONITORING



§ 50.115  RIGHT OF ENTRY; INSPECTION AND SAMPLING.



   (A)   The Superintendent shall have the right to enter the premises
of any user to determine whether the user is complying with all requirements
of this chapter and any wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder.



   (B)   Users shall allow the Superintendent ready access to all parts
of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination
and copying, and the performance of any additional duties.



      (1)   Where a user has security measures in force which
require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises,
the user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that,
upon presentation of suitable identification, the Superintendent will be
permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing specific
responsibilities.



      (2)   The Superintendent shall have the right to set up on the
user’s property, or require installation of such devices as are necessary
to conduct sampling and/or metering of the user’s operations.



      (3)   The Superintendent may require the user to install
monitoring equipment as necessary.  The facility’s sampling and monitoring
equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating
condition by the user at its own expense. All devices used to measure
wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated semiannually to ensure their
accuracy.



      (4)   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy
access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly
removed by the user at the written or verbal request of the Superintendent
and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne
by the user.



      (5)   Unreasonable delays in allowing the Superintendent
access to the user’s premises shall be a violation of this chapter.



(Ord. 02-09, passed 5-28-02)



§ 50.116  SEARCH WARRANTS.



   If the Superintendent has been refused access to a building, structure,
or property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause
to believe that there may be a violation of this chapter, or that there is a
need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling
program of the city designed to verify compliance with this chapter or any
permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health,
safety and welfare of the community, then the Superintendent may seek
issuance of a search warrant from the Circuit or Superior Court.



(Ord. 02-09, passed 5-28-02)



§ 50.117  CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.



   Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys,
wastewater discharge permit applications, wastewater discharge permits, and
monitoring programs, and from the Superintendent’s inspection and sampling
activities, shall be available to the public without restriction, unless the
user specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of
the Superintendent that the release of such information would divulge
information, processes, or methods of production entitled to protection as
trade secrets under applicable state law.  Any such request must be asserted
at the time of submission of the information or data.  When requested and
demonstrated by the user furnishing a report that such information should be
held confidential, the portions of a report which might disclose trade
secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the
public, but shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental
agencies for uses related to the NPDES program or pretreatment program, and
in enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report.
Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other effluent data as
defined by 40 C.F.R. § 2.302 will not be recognized as confidential
information and will be available to the public without restriction.



(Ord. 02-09, passed 5-28-02)



§ 50.118  PUBLICATION OF USERS IN SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE.



   The Superintendent shall publish annually, in the newspaper designated
for other legal publications, a list of the users which, during the previous
12 months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment
standards and requirements. The term significant noncompliance shall mean:



   (A)   Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined
here as those in which 66% or more of wastewater measurements taken during a
six-month period exceed the daily maximum limit or average limit for the same
pollutant parameter by any amount;



   (B)   Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as
those in which 33% or more of wastewater measurements taken for each
pollutant parameter during a six-month period equals or exceeds the product
of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable
criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other
pollutants except pH);



   (C)   Any other discharge violation that the Superintendent believes
has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or
pass through, including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the
general public;



   (D)   Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent
endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the
Superintendent’s exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent
such a discharge;



   (E)   Failure to meet, within ninety days of the scheduled date, a
compliance schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or
enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or
attaining final compliance;



   (F)   Failure to provide within 30 days after the due date, any
required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on
compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic
self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules;



   (G)   Failure to accurately report noncompliance; and/or



   (H)   Any other violation(s) which the Superintendent determines
will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local
pretreatment program.



(Ord. 02-09, passed 5-28-02)



ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES



§ 50.130  NOTIFICATION OF VIOLATION.



   When the Superintendent finds that a user has violated, or continues to
violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or
order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement,
the Superintendent may serve upon that user a written notice of violation. 
Within 20 days of the receipt of this notice, an explanation of the violation
and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include
specific required actions, shall be submitted by the user to the
Superintendent.  Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of
liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice
of violation.  Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the
Superintendent to take any action, including emergency actions or any other
enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation.



(Ord. 02-09, passed 5-28-02)



§ 50.131  CONSENT ORDERS.



   The Superintendent may enter into consent orders, assurances of
voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement
with any user responsible for noncompliance.  Such documents will include
specific action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a
time period specified by the document. Such documents shall have the same
force and effect as the administrative orders issued pursuant to §§ 50.132
and 50.133, and shall be judicially enforceable.



(Ord. 02-09, passed 5-28-02)



§ 50.132  SHOW CAUSE HEARING.



   The Superintendent may order a user which has violated, or continues to
violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or
order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, to
appear before the Superintendent and show cause why the proposed enforcement
action should not be taken.  Notice shall be served on the user specifying
the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the
reasons for such action, and a request that the user show cause why the
proposed enforcement action should not be taken.  The notice of the meeting
shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt
requested) at least ten calendar days prior to the hearing.  Such notice may
be served on any authorized representative of the user.  A show cause
hearing shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other
action against the user.



(Ord. 02-09, passed 5-28-02)



§ 50.133  COMPLIANCE ORDERS.



   When the Superintendent finds that a user has violated, or continues to
violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or
order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement,
the Superintendent may issue an order to the user responsible for the
discharge directing that the user come into compliance within a specified
time.  If the user does not come into compliance within the time provided,
sewer service may be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities,
devices, or other related appurtenances are installed and properly
operated.  Compliance orders also may contain other requirements to address
the noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring and management
practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the
sewer.  A compliance order may not extend the deadline for compliance
established for a pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a compliance
order relieve the user of liability for any violation, including any
continuing violation.  Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar
against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.



(Ord. 02-09, passed 5-28-02)



§ 50.134  CEASE AND DESIST ORDERS.



   (A)   When the Superintendent finds that a user has violated, or
continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge
permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or
requirement, or that the user’s past violations are likely to recur, the
Superintendent may issue an order to the user directing it to cease and
desist all such violations and directing the user to:



      (1)   Immediately comply with all requirements; and



      (2)   Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as
may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation,
including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge.



   (B)   Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar
against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.



(Ord. 02-09, passed 5-28-02)



§ 50.135  ADMINISTRATIVE FINES.



   (A)   (1)   Violations other than violations of pretreatment
standards and requirements by industrial users.  When the Superintendent
finds that a user, other than an industrial user under pretreatment
requirements/permit, has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of
this chapter, or order issued hereunder, the POTW may fine such user in an
amount not to exceed $2,500. Such fines shall be assessed on a per violation,
per day basis.



      (2)   Violations by industrial users of pretreatment standards
and requirements.  The POTW shall have the authority to seek injunctive
relief for noncompliance by industrial users with pretreatment standards and
the requirements.  Also, the POTW shall impose a fine of at least $1,000 per
day, per violation, in accordance with 40 CFR 403.8(f)(1)(vi)(A), but no more
than $2,500 per day, per violation for a first violation nor more than $7,500
per day, per violation for subsequent violations, in accordance with I.C.
36-1-3-8(a)(10)(B) upon an industrial user violating pretreatment standards
and requirements.  In the case of monthly or other long term average
discharge limits, fines shall be assessed for each day during the period of
violation.  In the case of monthly or other long term average discharge
limits, fines shall be assessed for each day during the period of violation.



   (B)   Unpaid charges, fines, and penalties shall, after 30 calendar
days, be assessed an additional penalty of 10% of the unpaid balance, and
interest shall accrue thereafter at a rate of 10% per month.  A lien against
the user’s property will be sought for unpaid charges, fines, and penalties.



   (C)   Users desiring to dispute such fines must file a written
request for the Superintendent to reconsider the fine along with full payment
of the fine amount within 15 calendar days of being notified of the fine. 
Where a request has merit, the Superintendent may convene a hearing before
the Board on the matter.  In the event the user’s appeal is successful,
the payment, together with any interest accruing thereto, shall be returned
to the user.  The Superintendent may add the costs of preparing
administrative enforcement actions, such as notices and orders, to the fine.



   (D)   Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a bar against,
or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.



(Ord. 02-09, passed 5-28-02; Am. Ord. 11-04, passed 6-13-11)



§ 50.136  EMERGENCY SUSPENSIONS.



   (A)   The Superintendent may  immediately halt or prevent any
discharge of pollutants to the POTW which reasonably appears to present an
imminent endangerment to the health or welfare of the public, the
environment, and/or which threatens to interfere with the operation of the
POTW.



      (1)   Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall
immediately stop or eliminate its contribution.  In the event of a user’s
failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the
Superintendent may take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate
severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW,
its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals.  The
Superintendent may allow the user to recommence its discharge when the user
has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Superintendent that the period of
endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings in § 50.137 are
initiated against the user.



      (2)   A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any
discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written
statement, describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures
taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the Superintendent prior to the
date of any show cause or termination hearing under §§ 50.132 or 50.137.



   (B)   Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a
hearing prior to any emergency suspension under this section.



(Ord. 02-09, passed 5-28-02; Am. Ord. 2016-11, passed 6-9-16)



§ 50.137  TERMINATION OF DISCHARGE.



   (A)   In addition to the provisions in § 50.087, any user who
violates the following conditions is subject to discharge termination:



      (1)   Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions;



      (2)   Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents
and characteristics of its discharge;



      (3)   Failure to report significant changes in operations or
wastewater volume, constituents, and characteristics prior to discharge;



      (4)   Refusal of reasonable access to the user’s premises
for the purpose of inspection, monitoring, or sampling; or



      (5)   Violation of the pretreatment standards in § 50.015
through 50.022.



   (B)   Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its
discharge and be offered an opportunity to show cause under § 50.132 why the
proposed action should not be taken.  Exercise of this option by the
Superintendent shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking any other
action against the user.



(Ord. 02-09, passed 5-28-02)



JUDICIAL ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES



§ 50.150  INJUNCTIVE RELIEF.



   When the Superintendent finds that a user has violated, or continues to
violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit, or
order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement,
the Superintendent may petition the circuit or superior court through the
City’s Attorney for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as
appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance of the
wastewater discharge permit, order, or other requirement imposed by this
chapter on activities of the user. The Superintendent may also seek such
other action as is appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief, including a
requirement for the user to conduct environmental remediation. A petition for
injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking
any other action against a user.



(Ord. 02-09, passed 5-28-02)



§ 50.151  CIVIL PENALTIES.



   (A)   A user who has violated, or continues to violate, any
provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued
hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall be liable
to the city for a maximum civil penalty of $2,500 per violation, per day. In
the case of a monthly or other long-term average discharge limit, penalties
shall accrue for each day during the period of the violation.



   (B)   The Superintendent may recover reasonable attorneys’ fees,
court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement activities,
including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual
damages incurred by the city.



   (C)   In determining the amount of civil liability, the court shall
take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to,
the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the
violation, any economic benefit gained through the user’s violation,
corrective actions by the user, the compliance history of the user, and any
other factor as justice requires.



   (D)   Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against,
or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user.



(Ord. 02-09, passed 5-28-02)



§ 50.152  CRIMINAL PROSECUTION.



   (A)   A user who willfully or negligently violates any provision of
this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or
any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall, upon conviction, be
guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than allowed under
state law per violation, per day, or imprisonment for not more than allowed
under state law, or both.



   (B)   A user who willfully or negligently introduces any substance
into the POTW which causes personal injury or property damage shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and be subject to a penalty, or be
subject to imprisonment, or both as allowed by state law.  This penalty
shall be in addition to any other cause of action for personal injury or
property damage available under state law.



   (C)   A user who knowingly makes any false statements,
representations, or certifications in any application, record, report, plan,
or other documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this
chapter, wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or who
falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring
device or method required under this chapter shall, upon conviction, be
punished by a fine of not more than allowed under state law per violation,
per day, or imprisonment as allowed by state law, or both.



   (D)   In the event of a second conviction, a user shall be punished
by a fine of not more than allowable under state law per violation, per day,
or imprisonment as allowed by state law, or both.



(Ord. 02-09, passed 5-28-02)



§ 50.153  REMEDIES NONEXCLUSIVE.



   The remedies provided for in this chapter are not exclusive.  The
Superintendent may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against
a noncompliant user.  Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally
be in accordance with the city’s enforcement response plan.  However, the
Superintendent may take other action against any user when the circumstances
warrant.  Further, the Superintendent is empowered to take more than one
enforcement action against any noncompliant user.



(Ord. 02-09, passed 5-28-02)



SUPPLEMENTAL ENFORCEMENT ACTION



§ 50.165  PERFORMANCE BONDS.



   The Superintendent may decline to issue or reissue a wastewater
discharge permit to any user who has failed to comply with any provision of
this chapter, a previous wastewater discharge permit, or order issued
hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, unless such
user first files a satisfactory bond, payable to the city, in a sum not to
exceed a value determined by the Superintendent to be necessary to achieve
consistent compliance.



(Ord. 02-09, passed 5-28-02)



§ 50.166  LIABILITY INSURANCE.



   The Superintendent may decline to issue or reissue a wastewater
discharge permit to any user who has failed to comply with any provision of
this chapter, a previous wastewater discharge permit, or order issued
hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, unless the user
first submits proof that it has obtained financial assurances sufficient to
restore or repair damage to the POTW caused by its discharge.



(Ord. 02-09, passed 5-28-02)



§ 50.167  WATER SUPPLY SEVERANCE.



   Whenever a user has violated or continues to violate any provision of
this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or
any other pretreatment standard or requirement, water service to the user may
be severed.  Service will only recommence, at the user’s expense, after it
has satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply.



(Ord. 02-09, passed 5-28-02)



§ 50.168  PUBLIC NUISANCES.



   A violation of any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge
permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or
requirement is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected or
abated as directed by the Superintendent.  Any person(s) creating a public
nuisance shall be subject to the civil or criminal prosecution as contained
in §§ 50.151 and 50.152 governing such nuisances, including reimbursing the
city for any costs incurred in removing, abating, or remedying said nuisance.



(Ord. 02-09, passed 5-28-02)



§ 50.169  INFORMANT REWARDS.



   The Superintendent may pay for information leading to the discovery of
noncompliance by a user. In the event that the information provided results
in a civil penalty or an administrative fine levied against the user, the
Superintendent may disperse up to 10% of the collected fine or penalty to the
informant. However, a single reward payment may not exceed $250.



(Ord. 02-09, passed 5-28-02)



§ 50.170  CONTRACTOR LISTING.



   Users which have not achieved compliance with applicable pretreatment
standards and requirements are not eligible to receive a contractual award
for the sale of goods or services to the city. Existing contracts for the
sale of goods or services to the city held by a user found to be in
significant noncompliance with pretreatment standards or requirements may be
terminated at the discretion of the Superintendent.



(Ord. 02-09, passed 5-28-02)



AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES TO DISCHARGE VIOLATIONS



§ 50.180  PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS.



   A user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action
brought against it for noncompliance with the general requirements in §
50.015 or the specific prohibitions in § 50.016 if it can prove that it did
not know, or have reason to know, that its discharge, alone or in conjunction
with discharges from other sources, would cause pass through or interference
and that either:



   (A)   A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the
user was in compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the
pass through or interference; or



   (B)   No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change
substantially in nature or constituents from the user’s prior discharge
when the city was regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit, and in the
case of interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or
disposal requirements.



(Ord. 02-09, passed 5-28-02)



§ 50.181  BYPASS.



   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      BYPASS.  The intentional diversion of wastestreams from any
portion of a user’s treatment facility.



      SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE. Substantial physical damage to property,
damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or
substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be
expected to occur in the absence of a bypass.  Severe property damage does
not mean economic loss caused by delays in production.



   (B)   A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause
pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is
for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are
not subject to the provision of divisions (C) and (D) below.



   (C)   (1)   If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass,
it shall submit prior notice to the Superintendent, at least ten days before
the date of the bypass, if possible.



      (2)   A user shall submit oral notice to the Superintendent of
an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within
24 hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission
shall also be provided within five days of the time the user becomes aware of
the bypass.  The written submission shall contain a description of the
bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and
times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is
expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and
prevent reoccurrence of the bypass.  The Superintendent may waive the
written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received
within 24 hours.



   (D)   (1)   Bypass is prohibited, and the Superintendent may take
an enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless:



         (a)   Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life,
personal injury, or severe property damage;



         (b)   There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass,
such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated
wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This
condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been
installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a
bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or
preventive maintenance; and



         (c)   The user submitted notices as required under
division (C) above.



      (2)   The Superintendent may approve an anticipated bypass,
after considering its adverse effects, if the Superintendent determines that
it will meet the three conditions listed in division (D)(1) above.



(Ord. 02-09, passed 5-28-02)



WASTEWATER TREATMENT RATES



§ 50.195  RATES AND CHARGES.



   The monthly user charges and rates to each user levied and assessed by
this chapter or by other ordinance of the city shall be due and payable to
the Sewer Department Office as and when charges for sewer consumption and
sewer service charges are due and payable.  The tap-in fees shall be due
under § 50.198.



   (A) The quantity of water obtained from sources other than the water
utility serving the city and discharged into the public sanitary sewer system
may be determined by the city in such manner as the city shall elect, and the
sewage treatment service may be billed at the appropriate monthly user
charges and rates, as established by this chapter.



   (B)   In the event a lot, parcel of real estate or building
discharging sanitary sewage, industrial waste, water or other liquids into
the city’s sanitary sewage system, either directly or indirectly, is not a
user of the water supplied by the water utility serving said city, the water
used thereon or therein is not measured by a meter, or is measured by a meter
not acceptable to the city, then the amount of water used shall be otherwise
measured or determined by the city in order to ascertain the rates of charge,
or the owner or other interested party, at his or her expense, may install
and maintain meters, wells, volumetric measuring devices or any adequate and
approved method of measurement acceptable to the city for the determination
of the sewage discharge.



   (C)   In the event a lot, parcel of real estate or building
discharging sanitary sewage, industrial waste, water or other liquids into
the city’s sanitary sewage system, either directly or indirectly, is a user
of water supplied by the water utility serving said city, and in addition
uses water from another source which is not measured by a water meter or is
measured by a water meter not acceptable to the city, then the amount of
water used shall be otherwise measured or determined by the city in order to
ascertain the rates of charges, or the owner or other interested party, at
his or her expense, may install and maintain meters, wells, volumetrical
measuring devices or any adequate and approved method of measurement
acceptable to the city for the determination of sewage discharge.



   (D)   Where a metered water supply is used for fire protection as
well as for other uses, the city may, in its discretion, make adjustments in
the minimum charge and in the use charge as may be equitable.



   (E)   For the service rendered to the city, the city shall be
subject to the same rates and charges hereinabove provided or to rates and
charges established in harmony therewith.



   (F)   The city may make and enforce such regulations as may be
deemed necessary for the safe, economic and efficient management of the
city’s sewage works, including the sewer system and the treatment plant,
for the construction and use of house sewers and connections to the sewer
system, and for the regulation, collection, rebating and refunding of rates
and charges.



(Ord. 02-09, passed 5-28-02; Am. Ord. 05-13, passed 5-24-05; Am. Ord. 10-07,
passed 5-10-10)



§ 50.196  WASTEWATER OF EXCESSIVE STRENGTH; SURCHARGES.



   (A)   Wastewater having strengths in excess of the concentrations
set forth in § 50.020 shall be surcharged at the following rates:



 


Discharge/Concentration

 

Surcharge




CBOD5, mg/l

 

TSS, mg/l

 

COD, mg/l

 

NH3-N, mg/l

 





>250 but <400

 

>250 but <400

 

>500 but <600

 

>25 but <30

 

$0.18 per second




>400 but <500

 

>400 but <500

 

>600 but <700

 

>30 but <40

 

$0.25 per second




>500

 

>500

 

>700

 

>40

 

Written agreement as contained in § 50.063




 



   (B)   Surcharges shall be calculated as follows:



      (1)   Actual concentration of the discharge minus the maximum
allowable concentration (from the table above) times the appropriate
surcharge rate times the number of days of discharge.  The surcharge amount
will be based on the actual concentration of the discharge.



      (2)   Example:       CBOD = 450 mg/l



                  Daily flow = 0.050 MGD



                  Number of days discharged = 15



         450-250  200 mg/l × 0.050 MGD × 8.34 Ib/gal  83.4
lbs/day



         83.4 lbs/day × $0.25  $20.85/day × 15 days  $312.75
(amount of surcharge added to utility bill)



(Ord. 02-09, passed 5-28-02)



§ 50.197  CHARGES FOR USE OF DISPOSAL SYSTEM.



   (A)   Charges for use of the city sewage disposal system shall be
based upon volume of water used by each sewage user or upon a minimum charge
based upon the size of the water meter connecting that user to the city’s
water system.  These charges, to be billed monthly, shall be the greater of
the charge based on water use or the charge based upon water meter size.



   (B)   Charges based upon volume of water used shall be as follows:



 


Consumption per Month

 

Rate per 1,000 Gallons





First 10,000 gallons
 

$10.57



Next 25,000 gallons
 

9.86



Next 65,000 gallons
 

9.25



Next 100,000 gallons
 

8.46



Next 300,000 gallons
 

7.80



Next 500,000 gallons
 

5.71



Over 1,000,000 gallons
 

4.23





 



   (C)   Charges based upon water meter size shall be as follows:



 


Minimum Charges per Month (Meter Size)

 

Gallons

 

Rate





- –¾- inch meter
 
2500
 
$ 26.43


1-inch meter
 
4,200
 
44.39


1¼-inch meter
 
6,700
 
70.82


1½-inch meter
 
8,300
 
87.73


2-inch meter
 
13,000
 
135.28


3-inch meter
 
25,000
 
253.60


4-inch meter
 
41,700
 
414.18


6-inch meter
 
83,300
 
798.98


12-inch meter
 
358,300
 
3,034.19




 



   (D)   For metered users as to lots, parcels of real estate and/or
buildings located outside the corporate limits of the city, the rates and
charges are increased by an additional 25% per month. Monthly bills for such
users outside the city shall be computed by adding 25% to the charges
computed according to divisions (B) and (C) above.



   (E)   Charges for the domestic (residential only) use of the city
sanitary sewer disposal system shown on the June, July, August, September,
and October billings shall be based upon the domestic user’s average
sanitary sewage disposal charges calculated from November, December, January,
February, March, April, and May billings.



   (F)   All bills for sewer services not paid within 30 days from the
due date thereof as stated on the bill shall be subject to a collection or
deferred or payment of 10%.  For governmental entities and public school
systems, the collection or deferred payment charge shall be assessed only if
payment is not paid within 60 days from the due date thereof.



(Ord. 02-09, passed 5-28-02; Am. Ord. 05-13, passed 5-24-05; Am. Ord. 09-10,
passed 4-27-09; Am. Ord. 09-21, passed 8-10-09; Am. Ord. 11-02, passed
4-11-11; Am. Ord. 2017-10, passed 5-11-17)



§ 50.198  FEE FOR CONNECTING TO SEWAGE UTILITY.



   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      CONNECTION and TAP-IN.  These words shall be identical whether
used independently or jointly and shall cover not only situations where there
is an initial or first tap-in or connection into the city sewer system, but
also where improvements which are already connected to the city sewer system
are added to, enlarged, or expanded.



      IMPROVEMENT.  Any building, structure or physical enclosure,
whether attached or unattached to real estate, and whether mobile or immobile.



   (B)   (1)   There is hereby established a connection fee upon all
persons, firms, corporations or entities who shall tap-in to the sewer system
which is either publicly or privately owned and which is either a part of the
city sewer system or directly or indirectly or eventually extends to or flows
into the city sewer system.



      (2)   The connection fee shall be paid to the Utility
Department prior to obtaining a permit for construction on the premises. 
The Building Commissioner shall not issue any permit until such connection
fee has been paid to the Utility Department.



   (C)   (1)   Where an individual connection is sought within
developed areas already being served by a municipal sewer main, a connection
charge shall be paid to the Sewer Utility which shall be based upon the size
of the water meter serving the premises to be connected. Only one water
meter, of adequate size to properly serve the facility, shall be permitted.
Said fee shall be designated as a connection fee and shall be in addition to
any cost for service, work or materials to connect with the Utility. The
connection charges shall be as follows:



 


Water Meter Size (inches)

 
Fee





5/8 - 3/4

 

$750




1

 

$1,875




2

 

$7,500



For water meter larger than 2 inches, the connection fee shall be negotiated
with the Board of Public Works and Safety, after verification of
availability. However, in no event shall the connection be less than the
following:
 
Negotiated fee, but not less than the amount shown below, which is based on
equivalency factors. Fee may also include additional costs related to
equipment and capacity



3

 

$17,250




4

 

$30,000




6

 

$68,250




8

 

$121,575




10

 

$189,900





 



      (2)   The above schedule reflects the initial sewage
connection fees. After the initial connection is made, if the service is ever
up-graded from the initial service to a larger service, the property owner
shall pay the difference between the connection fees for the larger service
and the existing service that is effective at such time.



   (D)   In addition to all other requirements for connection, no
person outside the corporate limits of the city shall be permitted to connect
to the sewer system unless that person has:



      (1)   Paid the connection fee; and



      (2)   Furnished the Department with a waiver of right to
remonstrate against annexation, executed by the record owners of the real
estate to be connected.



   (E)   All connections shall meet the construction standards, as
adopted by the vity. All persons or entities seeking connection shall furnish
the Sewer Utility with a legal description of real estate to be connected.
All persons or entities seeking connection shall file at the office of the
Sewer Utility Office a copy of the specifications and blueprints/drawings of
the sewage system to be installed and connected to the Sewage Utility system.
At the time of construction, and prior to flow, the connection shall be open
for inspection by a designated representative of the sewage Utility to assure
that the terms of this chapter have been met.



   (F)   No refunds will be issued for a downsize of water meter.



(Ord. 02-09, passed 5-28-02; Am. Ord. 18-11, passed 4-26-18)



§ 50.199  PRETREATMENT CHARGES.



   (A)   A pretreatment charge shall be collected from users of the
city’s wastewater disposal system, which includes the following charges:



      (1)   A charge for wastewater discharge permits as required by
§ 50.046 shall be $350 for a five-year permit. This fee shall include the
charge for annual inspections and permit reviews performed during the
duration of the permit.



      (2)   A charge for laboratory analysis of each industrial user
sample collected by the POTW will be $170 per sample. Any sample analysis
performed by a contract (outside) laboratory will be charged based on the
prevailing fee of the contract laboratory.



      (3)   In-house laboratory analytical fees are as follows:



 

HOD (Total or Carbonaceous)
 
$25


TSS
 
$10


NH3-N   
 
$10


pH
 
$ 5



 



      (4)   A sampling fee of $70 will be charged for each sampling
event.



      (5)   Monthly pretreatment fees per 1,000 gallons: $0.516
(surcharge for non-residential accounts).



      (6)   If any nonresidential account discharges waste causing
the city to utilize sewer cleaning equipment to remove grease or other
obstruction from sewer lines, lift stations or wet wells, a fee of $150 per
hour with a minimum of three hours will be imposed. If the city purchases
chemicals, hardware or other material for the purpose of cleaning or
maintaining sewer lines, lift stations or wet wells due to the discharge of
grease or other obstructive substances by any user, the city shall maintain
the right to assess the user for the cost of said materials.



   (B)   The city shall make and enforce such regulation as deemed
necessary for the safe, economic and efficient management of the POTW. The
city shall reserve the right to increase or decrease the frequencies of
sampling and testing of any wastewater discharges if it deems necessary in
order to make the pretreatment program more efficient and cost effective for
the city.



(Ord. 03-02, passed 3-24-03; Am. Ord. 05-13, passed 5-24-05; Am. Ord. 11-02,
passed 4-11-11; Am. Ord. 2017-10, passed 5-11-17)



§ 50.200  ESTIMATED BILLING.



   The Sewer Department may estimate the bill of any customer pursuant to
a billing procedure approved by the Board of Public Works and Safety or for
other good cause, including, but not limited to: request of customer;
inclement weather; labor union disputes; inaccessibility of a customer’s
meter if the Sewer Department has made a reasonable attempt to read it; and
other circumstances beyond the control of the Sewer Department or its
personnel.



(Ord. 05-28, passed 9-6-05)



CHAPTER 51:  WATER



Section



General Provisions



   51.01   Application for water service



   51.02   Adjustments to water utility billings



   51.03   Placement and use of water meters in multi-unit developments



Rates and Charges



   51.15   Rates and charges for usage



   51.16   Rates and charges for nonrecurring services



   51.17   Collection of delinquent water bills



Extension of Water Distribution Lines



   51.25   Extension; qualification; testing; inspection



   51.26   Connection or tap-on; building water lines; inspection
expense



City Waterworks



   51.35   Removal from authority of State Commission



   51.36   Statutory authority



Disconnection Regulations



   51.45   Definitions



   51.46   Retention of records



   51.47   Record of meters and meter te



   51.48   Location of meters



   51.49   Meter dials



   51.50   Meter accuracy



   51.51   Determination of meter accuracy



   51.52   Bills for water service



   51.53   Creditworthiness of customer



   51.54   Disconnection of service



   51.55   Customer complaints



Cross-reference:



   Water Utility Board, see §§ 33.135 and 33.136



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 51.01  APPLICATION FOR WATER SERVICE.



   (A)   Each applicant for water from the constructed 12-inch water
main from the western city limit line to the site of the General Electric
Company plant on Highway 69 south, shall be in one or more of the following
categories:



      (1)   The owner of a home constructed prior to the date of
this section.



      (2)   The owner of an industrial plant which requires water
for purposes other than fire protection.



      (3)   The owner of an industrial plant which requires water
for purposes other than fire protection, and for fire protection provided the
owner constructs adequate water storage facilities on his plant site to meet
all anticipated firefighting requirements.



      (4)   The owner of a newly constructed home who shall agree to
relinquish his right to use water from the water line after six months’
notice that users in divisions (A)(1), (2), and (3) above will require the
full capacity of that main.



   (B)   Each owner who applies for the right to use water from this
line shall enter into an agreement with the city by which he shall agree to
use not more than a specified number of gallons per day and that he may be
charged a reasonable stand-by service charge in any month in which he fails
to use 75% or more of such specified amount. No owner shall be permitted to
use water from this main when such use will jeopardize the supply of any
previous users.



   (C)   An owner who anticipates the use of water from this line for
firefighting purposes shall furnish storage space for water on his site which
shall be adequate for use during any firefighting emergency, without drawing
more than the normal allotment of water from the line during the emergency.



(Res. 944, passed 7-5-60)



§ 51.02  ADJUSTMENTS TO WATER UTILITY BILLINGS.



   (A)   Definitions.



      (1)   LEAK.  Unintentional flow of water due to a mechanical
failure.



      (2)   CUSTOMER.  The name in which the water meter is placed.



      (3)   UTILITY.  The Mount Vernon Waterworks.



   (B)   Adjustment request.



      (1)   When the Water Utility notifies customer of potential
leak.



         (a)   From the date of notification by the utility, the
customer has 30 days to repair the leak and request an adjustment.



         (b)   The utility shall keep a record of the date
customer was notified of leak and address affected.



         (c)   If the customer fails to repair the leak and
request an adjustment within 30 days from the date of notification, no
adjustment will be made.



      (2)   When customer requests adjustment with no prior
notification from utility.



         (a)   Customer must furnish written proof that a leak
has been repaired within 30 days of requesting adjustment.



         (b)   The written proof must include the address
affected.



   (C)   Adjustment procedure.



      (1)   Except as provided below, no more than one adjustment
may be made in any calendar year (for services rendered in that calendar
year) for any one account.  A customer whose account has been adjusted one
time during the year may make written application for a second adjustment
during the same year only if the second leak is the result of extraordinary
circumstances.  In addition to the requirements for adjustments set forth
herein, a customer requesting a second adjustment must follow the following
additional requirements:



         (a)   The request for the second adjustment must be made
in writing and filed at the Mt. Vernon Utility Department;



         (b)   The written request for second adjustment must set
forth and contain all information in § 51.02(B) and must specifically set
forth the extraordinary circumstances causing or resulting in the second leak.



         (c)   The Water Utility may approve or deny the request
for second adjustment upon submission of the requested information. If
requested by the Water Utility, the customer making the request for a second
adjustment must be present, in person, at the Water Utility Board meeting
during which the request for adjustment may be considered if the Water
Utility has submitted the second adjustment request to the Water Utility
Board, and said customer should be prepared to provide information or
documentation to the Board to support the customer’s request. There is no
requirement that the second adjustment request go before the Water Utility
Board, but shall only do so if the Water Utility submits the second
adjustment request to the Board.



         (d)   The approval or denial of a request for a second
adjustment is within the sole discretion of the Mt. Vernon Water Utility. 
No provision contained in this code shall be construed to grant any customer
a right to a second adjustment.



      (2)   Except as set forth in § 51.02(C)(1)(c), the Water
Utility Department may make the appropriate adjustments as provided in this
section without application to the Water Utility Board.



      (3)   Adjustment shall be made by reviewing the customer
billing history at the address affected and an average pre-leak consumption
shall be calculated for a minimum of four billing periods.  In the event
summer rates are in effect, the utility computer will indicate the average
consumption.



      (4)   Adjustment for the billing periods with the leak shall
be made conforming to the average consumption computed.



      (5)   An adjustment will be made for no more than three
billing periods, including the period notification is made pursuant to
division (B)(1).



      (6)   No adjustment shall be made for water used in watering
lawns, except to the extent of summer rates.  If a customer wishes to
measure the water used for watering the lawn, a second meter may be installed
to the water supply for watering the lawn only and no sanitary sewer charges
will be assessed on the meter measuring the water used for watering the lawn.



   (D)   Swimming pools.



      (1)   During April through September, if a water utility
employee is present to read the meter at the time a customer’s swimming
pool is filled, for billing purposes sewer consumption shall be reduced by
amount of water used to fill pool. The utility employee must be present
immediately prior to filling of pool and at finish of filling pool.



      (2)   If the water meter is not read prior to and after
filling the pool, customer must present written documentation from the
manufacturer of pool capacity and adjustment to sewer consumption for that
billing period shall not be more than 70% of pool capacity.



      (3)   Sewer consumption adjustments shall be made not more
than once from April through September for any one account.



(Ord. 92-09, passed 4-27-92; Am. Ord. 95-2, passed 3-13-95; Am. Ord. 2016-2,
passed 2-18-16)



§ 51.03  PLACEMENT AND USE OF WATER METERS IN MULTI-UNIT DEVELOPMENTS.



   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      CITY.  The City of Mt. Vernon, Indiana, including its
departments and utilities.



      MASTER METER.  The water meter which is installed on the service
line nearest to the municipal water main tap.  The master meter will measure
the total amount of water which is delivered to the multi-unit development.



      MULTI-UNIT DEVELOPMENT.  A residential development which
receives its water supply from the city, which is comprised of more than one
residential unit, and each unit is serviced by a separate and distinct water
service line originating from the master meter.



      REMOTE READ METER.  A meter which is capable of transmitting the
volume of water used by remote recall.



      UNIT METERS.  The water meter installed on the service line at a
point after the master meter that shall measure the amount of water delivered
to a residential unit.



   (B)   (1)   An owner or developer of a multi-unit development may
design the development as to allow each unit’s water usage to be separately
metered.  An owner/developer who designs the multi-unit development for
separate metering, and the unit users receiving the municipal service, shall
follow the provisions of this section, along with all other city ordinances
governing customers and users of the municipal utilities, which are not
inconsistent with this section.



      (2)   When an owner/developer develops a multi-unit
development with unit meters the following requirements shall apply in
addition to, and not in lieu of, any other construction standard of the City
Water, Waste Water, and Street Departments and all rules, regulations and
requirements of the State Board of Health, State Department of Environmental
Management, or other local, state or federal agency:



         (a)   The owner/developer will be responsible for and
bear all costs of installing the unit meters.



         (b)   All individual unit meters must be remote read
meters.



         (c)   The owner/developer must maintain a master meter.



         (d)   All meters must be installed in a location near
the main roadway or in a location easily accessible to the city.  The
owner/developer shall submit three copies of the utility plans for the
multi-unit development to the City Water Works.  Unit and master meter
placement shall be subject to the approval of the city.  By installing unit
meters, the owner/developer grants the city authority to enter onto the
owner/developer’s multi-unit development for the purpose of reading the
unit meters.



         (e)   All occupants in the multi-unit development served
by a unit meter shall pay the standard meter deposit charged to like
customers.



         (f)   With the first meter reading cycle that occurs
after all occupants in a multi-unit development served by a unit meter have
paid the required meter deposit, the city will issue utility billings based
on unit meter readings to the unit occupants.



         (g)   The city may, at its option, read the master meter
for the purpose of confirming that all water used is being metered through
the unit meters.  If the master meter reading is higher than the total of
all unit meters combined, the city shall notify the owner/developer and the
owner/developer shall be responsible for the additional utility cost
equivalent to the difference between the master meter reading and the
combined unit meter readings.



   (C)   (1)   The owner/developer and unit occupants shall be
governed by all other local, state and federal ordinances, rules, regulations
and laws applicable to the utility users of the city.



      (2)   Nothing shall preclude the city from collecting
delinquent utility charges by all means available under the law, including
real estate liens for delinquent sewer charges.



(Ord. 02-03, passed 2-11-02)



RATES AND CHARGES



§ 51.15  RATES AND CHARGES FOR USAGE.



   (A)   Charges.  Charges for use of the city water system shall be
based upon the volume of water used by each water user or upon a minimum
charge based upon the size of the water meter connecting that user to the
city’s water system.  These charges, to be billed monthly, shall be the
greater of the charge based on water use, or the charge based upon water
meter size.



      (1)   Charges based upon volume of water used shall be as
follows:



 


Consumption Unit (Gallons Per Month)

 
Per 1,000 Gallons




First 10,000 gallons
 
$7.98


Next 25,000 gallons
 
7.43


Next 65,000 gallons
 
6.95


Next 100,000 gallons
 
6.33


Next 300,000 gallons
 
5.83


Next 500,000 gallons
 
4.30


Next 9,000,000 gallons
 
3.21


Over 10,000,000 gallons
 
2.55




 



      (2)   Charges based upon water meter size shall be as follows:



 


Meter Size Charge per Month

 

Gallons

 

Rate





5/8- or 3/4-inch meter or less
 
2,500
 
$19.95


1-inch meter
 
4,200
 
33.52


1 ¼-inch meter
 
6,700
 
53.47


1 ½-inch meter
 
8,300
 
66.23


2-inch meter
 
13,000
 
102.09


3-inch meter
 
25,000
 
191.25


4-inch meter
 
41,700
 
312.12


6-inch meter
 
83,300
 
601.24


12-inch meter
 
358,300
 
2,273.19




 



      (3)   Private fire protection.  Water service (for use only
in extinguishing fires), sprinkler connection and fire hydrants owned and
maintained by the consumer:



         (a)   Automatic sprinkler, per head: $1.04 annually,
billed quarterly.



         (b)   Fire hydrant, each: $1,061.37 annually, billed
quarterly.



      (4)   Public fire protection water service.  Municipal fire
hydrants (billed quarterly, monthly and/or annually), each: $1,061.37
annually.



      (5)   For users as to lots, parcels of real estate and/or
buildings located outside the corporate limits of the city, the rates and
charges are increased by an additional 25% per month.  Monthly bills for
such users outside the city shall be computed by adding 25% to the charges
computed according to division (A).



   (B)   Temporary service.  Temporary service where metered shall be
calculated upon the registration of meter or meters installed at the approved
meter rates.  In such cases as the utility may deem it impracticable to
install a meter for temporary service, there shall be a minimum charge of
$38.  If the water consumption computed at the approved rates is known to be
in excess of the $38 minimum charge, an authorized agent of the utility shall
have the right to estimate the water consumption and the estimated
consumption shall be billed at the approved meter rates.



   (C)   Collection or deferred payment charge.  All bills for water
services not paid within 30 days from the due date thereof as stated in the
bills, shall be subject to a collection or deferred payment charge of 10%. 
For governmental entities and public school systems, the collection or
deferred payment charge shall be assessed only if the payment is not paid
within 60 days from the due date thereof.



   (D)   Required deposits.  Any lessee, user, or occupant, as defined
in § 50.095, shall pay a water meter deposit in the amount required in §
51.16(B).



   (E)   Time of payment of deposit.



      (1)   The water deposit shall be paid at the same time the
lessee, user, or occupant contacts the city water utility, to receive water
service.  The water deposit must be paid prior to water service being given
to the customer.



      (2)   At the time the lessee, user, or occupant requests water
service, that customer must place the water meter and sewage service in the
same name as shown on the lease, rent receipt, or contract.  A copy of the
lease, receipt, or contract shall be presented to the utility clerk for
verification at the time of the request for services.



      (3)   Any owner requesting water utility services shall place
the water meter in the same named as shown on the deed.



   (F)   Use and refund of deposit.



      (1)   The deposit, less any outstanding water, sanitary sewer
and trash collection account balances, penalties, service fees, interest or
other legitimate deductions, shall be refunded to the depositor.  No
interest shall be paid by the city on the deposit.



      (2)   The deposit shall be refunded upon the presentation of a
notarized statement from the depositor that as of a certain date the property
being served:



         (a)   Has been conveyed or transferred to another
person. This statement must include the name and address of the person to
whom the property is conveyed or transferred; or



         (b)   No longer uses or is connected with any part of
the municipal water system.



      (3)   Application of the deposit to any fees listed in
division (F)(1) above shall be made by the city immediately upon termination
or transfer of service.



      (4)   Any excess fees and costs due from the depositor that
remain outstanding after application of the forfeiture may be collected in
any manner allowed by state law.



      (5)   A deposit may be used to satisfy all or part of any
judgement awarded the municipality pursuant to I.C. 36-9-23-31.



      (6)   If a deposit has remained unclaimed by the depositor for
more than seven years after the termination of the services for which the
deposit was made, the deposit becomes the property of the city.



(Ord. 82-11, passed 4-26-82; Am. Ord. 92-26, passed 7-27-92; Am. Ord. 95-23,
passed 10-9-95; Am. Ord. 97-27, passed 7-28-97; Am. Ord. 97-31, passed
8-11-97; Am. Ord. 97-44, passed 11-24-97; Am. Ord. 97-49, passed 12-8-97; Am.
Ord. 00-04, passed 3-27-00; Am. Ord. 01-09, passed 4-9-01; Am. Ord. 05-02,
passed 4-11-05; Am. Ord. 08-33, passed 11-24-08; Am. Ord. 09-32, passed
11-23-09; Am. Ord. 15-10, passed 4-2-15; Am. Ord. 2017-09, passed 5-11-17)



§ 51.16  RATES AND CHARGES FOR NONRECURRING SERVICES.



   (A)   Tap fee. 



      (1)   Each user, at the time he or she is connected with the
waterworks system, shall pay a charge to cover the cost of tapping the main,
furnishing and laying service pipe, corporation and stop cocks, service and
meter box and installing the meter.



      (2)   The charge for a ¾ -inch meter tap shall be $650 plus
cost of the meter.



      (3)   The charge for a 1-inch meter shall be $800.



      (4)   The charge for a 2-inch meter shall be $2,800.



      (5)   The charge for a tap larger than the 2-inch meter tap
will be the cost of labor and materials, including the cost of meter, but not
less than the charge for a 2-inch meter tap.  The charge for any tap shall
not be less than the charge for a ¾-inch meter tap.



      (6)   To the extent special or additional facilities or
modifications are necessary to provide service to the connecting customer,
the customer shall also be responsible for such costs in addition to the tap
fee.



   (B)   Service fees:



 

Service
 
Fee




Shut off or Reconnection charge
 
$20


Special meter reading
 
No charge


Bad check charge
 
$15


Late payment charge
 
10%


Water deposit
 
$100


Sewer deposit
 
$66


After hours service calls for shut off for problems on the user side of the
meter
 
$25




 



   (C)   The following charges shall be made for water sales not
covered by § 51.15:



 

Special Water Sales
 
Charges


Commercial boats
 

$62.00



Coin machine (per 200 gallons)
 

1.50




 



   (D)   For users as to lots, parcels of real estate and/or buildings
located outside the corporate limits of the city, the rates and charges are
increased by an additional 25% per month. Monthly bills for such users
outside the city shall be computed by adding 25% to the charges computed
according to § 51.15.



(Ord. 85-11, passed 3-11-85; Am. Ord. 85-20, passed 4-22-85; Am. Ord. 92-26,
passed 7-27-92; Am. Ord. 94-8, passed 5-23-94; Am. Ord. 00-04, passed
3-27-00; Am. Ord. 01-09, passed 4-9-01; Am. Ord. 05-02, passed 4-11-05; Am.
Ord. 06-11, passed 4-10-06; Am. Ord. 15-10, passed 4-2-15)



§ 51.17  COLLECTION OF DELINQUENT WATER BILLS.



   The Water Utility shall discontinue water service to any user who has
failed to pay his or her water utility bill for a period of 60 days or more
and who has received a notice of delinquency as more particularly described
herein.



   (B)   A notice of delinquency shall be mailed or delivered
personally to any water user who has failed for a period of 60 days to pay
any water bill charged and mailed to that user.  The notice shall state:



      (1)   The full amount owed to the utility on the date of the
notice including any collection or deferred payment charge;



      (2)   The date on which service will be discontinued if
delinquent bills are not paid;



      (3)   The cost to the user for disconnecting or reinstating
water service; and



      (4)   Any other information the Water Utility Board may deem
appropriate.



   (C)   Water service may be continued for users who have received the
notices described in division (B) of this section and who within ten days
after receipt of the notice make a satisfactory showing of financial hardship
along with satisfactory arrangements for payment of their current water
utility bill and reduction of their delinquent bills.  No arrangement for
payment of delinquent bills while receiving continued water service shall be
permitted unless the arrangement includes the requirement that the delinquent
user pay each future water bill as it becomes due and with each bill, not
less than 10% of the total amount, including penalty, due at the time of the
notice.



   (D)   The Water Utility Board hereby authorizes the Superintendent
to determine on its behalf whether a financial hardship exists with respect
to users whose bills are delinquent and whether an arrangement should be made
for reduction of the delinquent bills.  A user dissatisfied with the
decision of the Superintendent may request an adjustment of that decision by
the Utility Board.



   (E)   Once an account of the water works is turned over to the
collection agency, any payment made on that account must be paid to the
collection agency.  If available, self-addressed envelopes to the collection
agency shall be available at the Water Department Office for customers who
desire to make payment.  The customer is responsible for mailing the payment.



(Res. 77-9, passed 3-28-77; Am. Res. 92-06, passed 4-13-92)



EXTENSION OF WATER DISTRIBUTION LINES



§ 51.25  EXTENSION; QUALIFICATION; TESTING; INSPECTION.



   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



   APPLICANT.  Person or persons, corporations or public entity causing
the extension to be made.



   EXTENSION.  Construction of new water pipe line (main) where there is
no main in front of property and the main must be extended to serve a
particular premise or area.



   (B)   (1)   The Utility shall perform a capacity review of the
plans for the proposed extension and determine if the Utility has the
capacity or pressure available to service the proposed extension.  The
Utility shall have the right to modify the proposed extension to increase
capacity or to service areas beyond the proposed extension.  The Utility may
participate in the cost of such modifications as approved by the Water
Utility Board.  Construction of any extension shall not be started until
final approval of the plans has been granted by the Utility and by the
Indiana Department of Environmental Management (IDEM) if applicable.



      (2)   The Utility operations staff shall be notified two
working days before construction of the water extension begins and they shall
be renotified at least one working day before construction restarts after an
interruption of work.  All work is to conform with the approved plans plus
adopted Utility regulations and construction standards plus rules and
regulations of the Indiana Department of Environmental Management (IDEM).



   (C)   (1)   Construction of any extension of the water
distribution system shall only be done by a contractor who has qualified by
having a $10,000 bond on file with the Utility along with a current
certification of insurance in amounts specified by the Utility.  The bond
filed shall be for the use and benefit of the Utility in making needed
repairs and/or completing construction.



      (2)   The Utility may disqualify for cause any contractor who
fails to perform in accordance with the plans and specifications, the rules
and regulations of the state, or the rules and regulations of the Water
Utility Board.



   (D)   (1)   Inspections during construction will be done by the
Utility; however, these inspections will not relieve the contractor of his
obligations to conform to applicable rules and regulations.



      (2)   After laying and backfilling the pipe extension
sections, the contractor shall perform hydrostatic testing, flushing and
disinfection conforming to the construction standards for potable water
systems.  The Utility shall be notified at least two days before any water
line testing and shall witness these procedures.  The expense of after hours
inspections shall be paid by the applicant or contractor requesting the
special inspection.



      (3)   The contractor shall furnish all labor, tools, and
equipment necessary to make the tests and to perform any work incidental
thereto; contractor shall, at his own expense, repair any damage to the pipe
line and its appurtenances or to any structure resulting from the testing. 
If the section tested fails the test, it shall be repaired and retested by
the contractor, until the required pressure is obtained.



      (4)   Upon completion, the applicant shall provide in writing
the certified results of testing and one set of as-built drawings of the
extension.  The Utility will review the documents submitted and perform an
inspection of the installation.



      (5)   A list (i.e. “punch list”) of required corrections
will be compiled and submitted within two weeks to the applicant.  The
applicant shall respond within four weeks that the punch list items have been
completed within a stated reasonable time.  This procedure shall be repeated
as necessary and the applicant shall be notified in writing when the system
has passed final inspection.  The applicant shall submit one set of
reproducible mylar copies of the as-built drawings prior to the Utility
notification of final approval.



   (E)   Prior to final approval, there shall be no flow from the
existing system into the extension except water for flushing and testing.



   (F)   The Utility shall not restrict the issuance of a building
permit for a building that will connect to a water line extension if the
water line extension applicant has posted surety sufficient to complete the
water line extension with the Utility and agrees to turn the water line
extension over to the Utility.



   (G)   The applicant shall pay for all materials, tapping machines,
equipment, and labor supplied by the Utility along with an inspection fee
sufficient to cover costs of inspection and engineering review of the plans
and installed work.  An estimate of the Utility charges for the above listed
items will be prepared by the Utility if requested in writing.  The request
must include a complete listing of items desired from the Utility and an
estimate of the anticipated installation and testing time required.



(Ord. 91-10, passed 2-25-91)



§ 51.26  CONNECTION OR TAP-ON; BUILDING WATER LINES; INSPECTION EXPENSE.



   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



   CONNECTION or TAP-ON.  Water service connection to serve an individual
parcel where there is an existing main in front of the property.  The
service line will be metered unless it is for separate private fire hydrant
or sprinkler systems.



   (B)   No building water line from a residence or commercial building
shall be tapped or connected to the water distribution system by a private
individual or corporation.  The connection from the main to the water meter
setter shall be made by the Utility.  All connection fees shall be paid in
full before the Utility will make the connection.



   (C)   The installation of any building water line shall be made in
compliance with state plumbing codes and Utility rules and regulations.



   (D)   Before water service can be extended into a premise: 
Plumbing will be required to place the meter tile for the meter pit and meter
setter/yoke; also piping from the stop cock to the meter setter and to the
premise.  The Utility will furnish the meter tile (meter pit), meter setter
(yoke) collar and lid for original installation, as a part of the tap-on
fee.  All plumbing from the stop box to the building, including the
installation of the meter pit, is the property owner’s responsibility, and
all costs for such shall be borne by the property owner.



(Ord. 91-10, passed 2-25-91)



CITY WATERWORKS



§ 51.35  REMOVAL FROM AUTHORITY OF STATE COMMISSION.



   (A)   The city is classified as a third class city and owns and
operates a utility known as the City Waterworks.



   (B)   The City Waterworks shall be removed from the jurisdiction of
the Indiana Regulatory Commission for the approval of rates and charges and
of the issuance of stocks, bonds, notes or other evidence of indebtedness.



(Ord. 91-20, passed 6-10-91)



§ 51.36  STATUTORY AUTHORITY.



   The removal procedure for utilities owned by a third-class city is
authorized by I.C.8-1.5-3-9.1.



(Ord. 91-20, passed 6-10-91)



DISCONNECTION REGULATIONS



§ 51.45  DEFINITIONS.



   CUSTOMER.  Any person, firm, or corporation or entity which has
agreed, orally, or otherwise, to pay for water service received from the
Mount Vernon Water Department.



   DEPARTMENT.  The City of Mt. Vernon Water Department.



   DISCONNECTION.  The termination or discontinuance of water service.



   LATE PAYMENT CHARGE.  The one time penalty assessed by a water utility
upon all current bills at such time as they become delinquent.



   NOTICE.  Notice mailed by regular first class U. S. Postal Service
mail to the service address or last known address for customer or personal
delivery to customer.



(Ord. 93-17, passed 9-13-93)



§ 51.46  RETENTION OF RECORDS.



   All records required by these rules shall be preserved for at least
three years.  Such records shall be kept at the principal place of business
of the Mount Vernon Water Department.



(Ord. 93-17, passed 9-13-93)



§ 51.47  RECORD OF METERS AND METER TESTS.



   Whenever any meter in service is tested, a record shall be preserved
containing the information necessary for identifying the meter, the reason
for making the test, the reading of the meter before the test and the results
of the test, together with all data taken at the time of the test in
sufficiently complete form to permit the convenient checking of the methods
employed.



(Ord. 93-17, passed 9-13-93)



§ 51.48  LOCATION OF METERS.



   The meter may be located either in an outdoor pit, or inside the
building or premises of the customer being served, as designated by the Water
Department.



(Ord. 93-17, passed 9-13-93)



§ 51.49  METER DIALS.



   All meters used to measure the volume of water sales shall register in
U.S. gallons or cubic feet.



(Ord. 93-17, passed 9-13-93)



§ 51.50  METER ACCURACY.



   All meters and appurtenances used for measuring quantity of water
delivered to a customer shall be in good mechanical condition and shall be
adequate in size and design for the type of service which they measure and
shall be accurate to within generally accepted standards.



(Ord. 93-17, passed 9-13-93)



§ 51.51  DETERMINATION OF METER ACCURACY.



   (A)   A meter shall not be placed in service if it registers less
than 97% of the water passed through it at the minimum test flow or registers
more than 103% in the normal test flow limits.



   (B)   The Department shall make a test of the accuracy of
registration of a meter upon written request by a customer.  If the meter
tests determine that the meter in question is registering more than 103% of
the actual water used, the Department shall pay for the test.  If the test
shows that the meter in question registers less than 103% of the actual water
flow, the customer shall pay for the test.  The test shall be conducted by
an independent meter testing firm selected at the discretion of the
Department.  The test fees shall be immediately due and payable.



(Ord. 93-17, passed 9-13-93)



§ 51.52  BILLS FOR WATER SERVICE.



   (A)   Bills.  Bills rendered periodically to customers for water
service shall show at least the following information:



      (1)   The meter readings of the meter at the beginning and
ending period for which the bill is rendered and the billing date;



      (2)   The previous balance, if any;



      (3)   The amount of the bill;



      (4)   The sum of the amount of the bill and the late payment
charge, if any;



      (5)   The date on which the bill becomes delinquent and on
which a late payment charge will be added to the bill.



   (B)   Delinquencies.  A Water/Sewer Department bill is due
immediately upon receipt.  The bill shall list a net amount due and a gross
amount due.  The net amount may be paid through and including the 20th of
the month in which the bill is mailed.  The gross amount includes a late
payment penalty of 10% and the gross amount must be paid if the bill is not
paid on or before the 20th of the month in which the bill is mailed.



   (C)   Estimated billing.  The Water Department may estimate the
bill of any customer pursuant to a billing procedure approved by the Utility
Board or for other good cause, including, but not limited to:  request of
customer; inclement weather; labor union disputes; inaccessibility of a
customer’s meter if the utility has made a reasonable attempt to read it;
and other circumstances beyond the control of the Water Department or its
personnel.



(Ord. 93-17, passed 9-13-93)



§ 51.53  CREDITWORTHINESS OF CUSTOMER.



   When water service is requested, the Water Department shall determine
the creditworthiness of any applicant for service in an equitable and
non-discriminatory method and shall determine the creditworthiness solely
upon the credit risk of the applicant and shall request appropriate
information from the applicant in order to do so.



(Ord. 93-17, passed 9-13-93)



§ 51.54  DISCONNECTION OF SERVICE.



   (A)   Upon a customer’s request, the Water Department shall
disconnect upon at least three working days notice in advance of when service
is requested to be disconnected.  For purposes of disconnection, working
days shall be Monday through Thursday, 8:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m.  Customer
shall remain responsible for service used and the billings therefor until
service is disconnected pursuant to that notice.  Upon request by a customer
to disconnect the service within three working days of the request of
disconnection date, the customer shall not be liable for any service rendered
to such address or location after the expiration of those three working days.



   (B)   The Water Department may disconnect service without request by
the customer and without prior notice only: if a condition dangerous or
hazardous to life, physical safety or property exists; or upon order by any
court, the Indiana Utility Regulatory Commission or other duly authorized
public authority; or a fraudulent or unauthorized use of water is detected
and the Water Department has reasonable ground to believe the affected
customer is responsible for such use; or if the Water Department’s
regulating or measuring equipment has been tampered with and that it has
reasonable grounds to believe the affected customer is responsible for such
tampering.  In all other instances the Water Department may not disconnect
service involuntarily without notice except as is provided herein below.



   (C)   Except as provided herein in division (B) above, service to
any residential customer shall not be disconnected for a violation of any of
these rules or for the non-payment of a bill, except after written notice to
customer mailed not less than ten days prior to the date of disconnection. 
If disconnection is made due to non-payment of a regular monthly bill, the
disconnection notice will be sent at the same time as the monthly statements
(approximately the first of the month).  Notice shall be made by either
mailing the notice to the customer’s address shown on the records of the
Water Department or personal delivery of the notice to the customer at the
address shown on the records of the utility.  The notice must be in language
that is clear, concise and easily understandable to a lay person and shall
state the date of the proposed disconnection; the specific basis and reason
for the proposed disconnection; the amount which must be paid to avoid
disconnection; and the telephone number of the Water Department which the
customer may call during regular business hours in order to question the
proposed disconnection.  At the time a representative of the Water
Department arrives at the location to disconnect the service, he shall have
in his possession information sufficient to enable him to inform the customer
of the reason for the disconnection, including the amount of the delinquent
bill if the customer shall so request.  The employee of the Water Department
shall not be allowed to accept payment from the customer in order to prevent
the service from being disconnected, such payment must be made at the
Department office.  When the Department employee has disconnected the
service, he shall give to the customer, or leave at a conspicuous place on
the premises, notice stating the service has been disconnected and stating
the address and phone number of the utility where the customer may arrange to
have service reconnected.



   (D)   The Water Department shall disconnect service only on Monday
through Thursday of every regular business week between the hours of 8:00
a.m. and 3:00 p.m. local time.  The Water Department shall not disconnect
service for non-payment on any day in which the Water Department is closed to
the public or after 3:00 p.m. immediately preceding the day on which the
Water Department shall not be open to the public.



   (E)   The Water Department shall charge a $20 reconnection charge. 
If the Water Department disconnects service in violation of these rules, the
service shall immediately be restored at no charge to the customer.  The
Water Department shall reconnect the service to the customer as soon as
reasonably possible but at least within one working day after it is requested
to do so provided that payment of all delinquent charges and all current
bills owed the Department by the customer and any deposit which may be
authorized has been made.



(Ord. 93-17, passed 9-13-93)



§ 51.55  CUSTOMER COMPLAINTS.



   A customer may complain at any time to the Water Department about any
bill which is not delinquent at that time, security deposit, disconnection
notice, or any other matter relating to its service thereon.  A complaint
shall be considered filed upon receipt by the Water Department and in making
a complaint the customer shall state, at a minimum, his name, service
address, and the general nature of the complaint.  The Water Department
shall promptly, thoroughly and completely investigate the complaint, confer
with the customer, if possible, by either phone or in person when requested,
and notify the customer of the results of the proposed disposition of the
complaint after having made a good faith attempt to resolve the complaint.



(Ord. 93-17, passed 9-13-93)



CHAPTER 52:  GARBAGE AND TRASH CONTROL



Section



   52.01   Title



   52.02   Definitions



   52.03   Premises shall be kept clean; trash barrels or containers;
dumpsters



   52.04   Deposits of trash and the like upon public or private
property prohibited



   52.05   Enforcement



   52.06   Service charges; payment



 



   52.99   Penalty



§ 52.01  TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known as the Garbage and Trash Control Chapter.



(Ord. 1329, passed 5-22-72)



§ 52.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   TRASH.  All nonputrid waste materials of every kind, including but not
limited to such items as tree trimmings, cans, glass, paper, and metal
devises and parts, whether or not those items are a health hazard.



   UNWHOLESOME SUBSTANCE.  Garbage and any other putrescible material
which may provide food or breeding places for rats, mice, or other
disease-carrying animals or insects.



(Ord. 1329, passed 5-22-72)



§ 52.03  PREMISES SHALL BE KEPT CLEAN; TRASH BARRELS OR CONTAINERS;
DUMPSTERS.



   (A)   All persons, firms, and corporations within the corporate
limits of the city shall keep their premises in a clean and sanitary
condition, free from trash and unwholesome substances.



   (B)   However, while awaiting scheduled garbage or trash collection
by the city or a private collector, all persons, except for restaurants, may
accumulate and store trash and unwholesome substances in trash barrels or
containers approved by the city or State Board of Health. 



   (C)   Businesses, except for restaurants, operating within the
provisions of the ordinances of the city and the laws of the state shall not
be affected by the provisions of this chapter.



   (D)   Restaurants shall store all trash and unwholesome substances
in dumpsters approved by the city or State Board of Health.



(Ord. 1329, passed 5-22-72; Am. Ord. 04-09, passed 4-12-04)  Penalty, see §
52.99



§ 52.04  DEPOSITING TRASH AND THE LIKE UPON PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY
PROHIBITED.



   No person shall deposit trash or unwholesome substances on public or
private property within the city except that trash may be deposited in litter
barrels or private trash barrels.



(Ord. 1329, passed 5-22-72)  Penalty, see § 52.99



§ 52.05  ENFORCEMENT.



   In addition to the fines set forth in § 52.99, the city may require
the property owner on which unwholesome substances are located to remove
those unwholesome substances.  If after reasonable notice the owner of the
premises on which the unwholesome substances are located fails to remove
those substances the city, acting through its agents or employees, may go
onto the property and remove the unwholesome substances and submit a bill for
costs of removal to the owner of the premises.  If the owner of the premises
fails for a period of 30 days to pay the costs of removal, the city may
certify the amount due to the Auditor of the county for collection as real
estate taxes collected pursuant to I.C. 36-l-6-2.



(Ord. 1329, passed 5-22-72; Am. Ord. 2017-20, passed 10-26-17)



§ 52.06  SERVICE CHARGES; PAYMENT.



   (A)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



   SPECIAL PICK-UP.  That trash which is too large, cumbersome or heavy
for pick-up on a weekly routine trash pick-up route or trash that is not
normal household waste or commercial trash as defined.  The customer
desiring this service shall contact the sanitation department and arrange a 
time and  date for this special pick-up and the customer will sign a special
pick-up work order as provided by the City Sanitation Department.  Payment
for this pick-up must be made prior to the time of pick-up, and payment shall
be made at the Sanitation Department.



   TRASH.  All putrescible and nonputrescible solid and semisolid normal
household wastes except:



      (1)   Human and animal body wastes, and other liquid and water
carried wastes, which are normally disposed of in the sanitary sewer system
of the city;



      (2)   Dead animals;



      (3)   Hazardous and/or toxic wastes;



      (4)   Liquids;



      (5)   Contract materials;



      (6)   Automotive or vehicle parts; and



      (7)   Yard waste, including but not limited to grass clippings
and leaves.



   WEEKLY TRASH PICK-UP.  That trash generated as normal household trash
which may be picked up on the weekly routine trash pick-up route.  For
commercial trash pick-up, weekly trash pick-up is that trash which is
generated as normal office waste and that which can be picked up in
containers not exceeding 55 gallons in size.



   (B)   Services.  The city shall provide trash collection services
to each owner, tenant, or occupant of residential property in the city, and
to those owners, tenants, or occupants of certain commercial properties in
the city to whom municipal trash collection is made available.  Such trash
collection services shall be provided at least one time per week.



   (C)   Amount and type of trash collected.



      (1)   All trash to be collected must be placed in the pick-up
location by 7:00 a.m. on the day of the trash collection.



      (2)   Each owner, tenant, or occupant shall place all trash to
be collected in weatherproof containers not to exceed 55 gallons in size.



      (3)   Special instructions for trash collection shall be
observed by each owner, tenant, or occupant as follows:



         (a)   Items not in portable weatherproof containers will
not be picked up; 



         (b)   Tires must be cut in quarters;



         (c)   Trees and limbs must be cut in three-foot lengths;



         (d)   The city does not have the equipment or capacity
to pick up dumpsters and therefore no dumpster will be emptied by the city.



   (D)   Rates and charges for weekly trash pick-up or special pick-ups.



      (1)   The trash pick-up fee shall be listed and billed with
the water and sewage utility billing.



      (2)   Trash pick-up service charges shall be as follows:



         (a)   Single-family dwellings: $10.00 per month.



         (b)   Multiple-family dwellings or parks with separate
water meters for each unit: $10.00 per unit per month.



         (c)   Multiple family dwellings or parks with less than
one water meter per unit:



 

1 - 2 units
 
$10.00 per unit per month


3 - 5 units
 
$29.00 per month


6 - 10 units
 
$59.00 per month


11 - 20 units
 
$117.00 per month


21 - 40 units
 
$233.00 per month


41 units & over
 
$349.00 per month



 



billed to the same person, firm or corporation named on the water meter
records or listed as owner of the water meter.



         (d)   Commercial, school or church: $10.00 per month.



      (3)   Special pick-up charges:



         (a)   $40 per dump truck load, $20 minimum.  Payment
must be made prior to the time of pick-up, to be paid at the Sanitation
Department;



         (b)   Preparation of trash for hauling will be charged
pursuant to rates and charges approved by the City Board of Public Works and
Safety.



      (4)   Payment of the trash pick-up service charge may be
sought from the owner, occupant or tenant of the premises receiving trash
pick-up services.  If a tenant or occupant is billed, the owner shall in no
way be relieved of liability in the event payment is not made by the tenant
or occupant.



      (5)   All sums collected as trash pick-up service charge shall
be added to the City General Fund and shall be used for the purchase,
maintenance and repair of equipment and services necessary to provide trash
collection service herein and for salaries or other expenses related to trash
collection services.



   (E)   Enforcement and remedies for non-payment of trash pick-up
service charge.  Charges for trash collection shall be due and payable on or
before the due dates shown on the bill.  Any collection charge not paid by
the due date shall be considered delinquent and shall be collectible, with
any applied penalty, as hereinafter set forth:



      (1)   The city shall have the right to bring a civil action to
recover any delinquent charges together with a penalty of 10% and a
reasonable attorney’s fee;



      (2)   The city may discontinue service to delinquent
accounts.  The owner, occupant or tenant shall be responsible for the
removal of the trash and failure to keep the premises in a sanitary and clean
condition may be enforced by other ordinances and statutes providing
penalties for maintaining unsanitary premises or keeping an unreasonable
amount of trash on the premises;



      (3)   The city may use all other applicable ordinances of
Indiana statutes to collect delinquent fees.



      (4)   Water meter and sewage deposits shall be applied to
unpaid trash collection charges for the subject service address as provided
for in §§ 50.096 and 51.16.



      (5)   For governmental entities and public school systems, the
collection deferred payment or penalty charge shall be assessed only if the
payment is not paid within 60 days from the due date thereof.



   (F)   Private collection.



      (1)   Nothing in this section shall be construed so as to
prevent a private rubbish hauler from contracting with any residential,
commercial, or multiple dwelling unit for trash collection so long as the
private trash collection does not constitute a public nuisance.



      (2)   If a owner, tenant or occupant employees alternative
private trash collection, the owner, tenant or occupant will be required to
show proof of private trash collection.  Example:  receipt of payment, etc.



   (G)   Once an account of the Street Department (trash collection
fees) is turned over to the collection agency, any payment made on that
account must be paid to the collection agency.  If available, self-
addressed envelopes to the collection agency shall be available at the Water
Department Office for customers who desire to make payment.  The customer is
responsible for mailing the payment.



(Ord. 90-27, passed 9-13-90; Am. Ord. 90-39, passed 11-26-90; Am. Ord. 91-24,
passed 7-22-91; Am. Res. 92-06, passed 4-13-92; Am. Ord. 95-23, passed
10-9-95; Am. Ord. 97-44, passed 11-24-97; Am. Ord. 08-32, passed 11-24-08;
Am. Ord. 13-30, passed 10-17-13)



§ 52.99  PENALTY.



   Persons violating the provisions of this chapter shall pay a fine of
not more than $2,500 plus costs.  Each day that any person shall violate the
provisions of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense.



(Ord. 1329, passed 5-22-72)



CHAPTER 53:  CROSS-CONNECTION



Section



   53.01   Definition



   53.02   Cross-connection prohibited



   53.03   Inspection



   53.04   Entry of premises



   53.05   Discontinuance of water service



   53.06   Backflow preventer required



   53.07   Supplementing other legislature



§ 53.01  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CROSS-CONNECTION. Any physical connection or arrangement between two
otherwise separate systems, one of which contains potable water from the city
water system, and the other, water from a private source, water of unknown or
questionable safety, or steam, gases, or chemicals, whereby there may be a
flow from one system to the other, the direction of flow depending on the
pressure differential between the two systems.



(Ord. 90-4, passed 4-9-90)



§ 53.02  CROSS-CONNECTION PROHIBITED.



   No person, firm, or corporation shall establish or permit to be
established or maintain or permit to be maintained any cross-connection.  No
interconnection shall be established whereby potable water from a private,
auxiliary, or emergency water supply other than the regular public water
supply of the city may enter the supply or distribution system of the
municipality, unless such private, auxiliary, or emergency water supply and
the method of connection and use of such supply shall have been approved by
the City Water Utility and by the Environmental Management Board in
accordance with Rule 320 IAC 3-9.



(Ord. 90-4, passed 4-9-90)



§ 53.03  INSPECTION.



   It shall be the duty of the County Department of Health to cause
inspections to be made of all properties served by the public water system
where cross-connections with the public water system is deemed possible. 
The frequency of inspections and reinspections based on potential health
involved shall be as established by the County Department of Health.



(Ord. 90-4, passed 4-9-90)



§ 53.04  ENTRY OF PREMISES.



   Upon presentation of credentials, the representative of the County
Department of Health shall have the right to request entry at any
reasonable  time to  examine any property served by a connection to the 
public water system of the city for cross-connections.  On request, the
owner, lessee or occupant of any property so served shall furnish to the
inspection agency any pertinent information regarding the piping system or
systems on such property.  The refusal of access or refusal of requested
pertinent information shall be deemed evidence of the presence of
cross-connections.



(Ord. 90-4, passed 4-9-90)



§ 53.05  DISCONTINUANCE OF WATER SERVICE.



   The City Water Utility is authorized and directed to discontinue water
service to any property wherein any connection in violation of this
subchapter exists, and to take such other precautionary measures deemed
necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of the public water
system.  Water service shall be discontinued only after reasonable notice is
served on the owner, lessee, or occupants of the property or premises where a
violation is found or suspected to exist.  Water service to such property
shall not be restored until the cross-connection has been eliminated in
compliance with the provisions of this subchapter.  If it is deemed by the
City Water Utility that a cross-connection or an emergency endangers public
health, safety, or welfare and requires immediate action, and a written
finding to that effect is filed with the City Clerk and delivered to the
consumer’s premises, service may be immediately discontinued.  The
consumer shall have an opportunity for hearing within ten days of such
emergency discontinuance.



(Ord. 90-4, passed 4-9-90)



§ 53.06  BACKFLOW PREVENTER REQUIRED.



   All consumers using toxic or hazardous liquids, all hospitals,
mortuaries, wastewater treatment plants, laboratories, and all other
hazardous users shall install and maintain a reduced-pressure-principle
backflow preventer in the main water line serving each building on the
premises.  The backflow preventer must be installed in an easily accessible
location not subject to flooding or freezing.



(Ord. 90-4, passed 4-9-90)



§ 53.07  SUPPLEMENTING OTHER LEGISLATURE.



   This chapter does not supersede the State Uniform Plumbing Code or the
City of Mt. Vernon Construction Standards for Potable Water, dated October
24, 1988, but is supplemental to them.



(Ord. 90-4, passed 4-9-90)



TITLE VII:  TRAFFIC CODE



   Chapter



      70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



      71.   TRAFFIC RULES



      72.   STOPPING, STANDING, AND PARKING



      73.   RAILROADS



      74.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES



      75.   PARKING SCHEDULES



CHAPTER 70:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



General Provisions



   70.01   Definitions



   70.02   Authority of police to enforce code



   70.03   Obedience to Police and Fire Departments, adult crossing
guards, and school safety patrol members



   70.04   Emergency vehicles; exception



   70.05   Signs in the right-of-way



   70.06   Vehicle seat belt policy



   70.07   Transportation and hauling of overweight vehicles and loads
over public rights-of-way



   70.08   Skateboards and related equipment



Traffic-Control Devices



   70.15   Obedience to official traffic-control devices



   70.16   Authority to install traffic-control devices



   70.17   Manual and specifications for traffic-control devices



   70.18   Traffic lanes



Accidents



   70.25   Copies of accident reports; fee



   70.26   Conformance with state law



Vehicle Inspections



   70.35   Vehicle inspection fee; receipt



 



   70.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 70.01  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   Terms used in this traffic code shall have the meanings
prescribed for those terms by state law, unless otherwise specifically
defined as a part of this chapter.



   (B)   For the purpose of this title the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PERSON. Any natural individual, firm, trust, partnership, association,
or corporation.  Whenever the word PERSON is used in any section of this
traffic code prescribing a penalty or fine as applied to partnerships or
associations, the word includes the partners or members thereof, and as
applied to corporations includes officers, agents, or employees thereof who
are responsible for any violations of the section.



   POLICE OFFICER.  Every officer of the city and any other duly
constituted law officer who may be aiding the police force of the city at any
time, including state and county officers.



   STREETS. Any reference in this traffic code to a specific street,
avenue, or drive shall be deemed to be a reference to the exact and correct
name of that street so long as the first part of the name before the word
street, avenue, or drive, as the case may be, is correctly stated.



   TIME STANDARD. All reference to time contained in this traffic code
shall be the time standard that is used by the city at any given time and
which may change periodically.



   TRAFFIC CODE. The Mt. Vernon Traffic Code.



   TRUCK.  A motor vehicle that has more than two rear wheels, more than
one rear axle, or has an empty vehicle weight of more than 5,000 pounds.



(Ord. 81-25, passed 8-24-81)



§ 70.02  AUTHORITY OF POLICE TO ENFORCE CODE.



   (A)   It is the duty of the Police Department to enforce the
provisions of this traffic code.  Officers of the Police Department are
authorized to direct all traffic either in person or by means of visible or
audible signal in conformance with the provisions of this chapter.  In the
event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard
pedestrians, officers of the Police or Fire Departments may direct traffic as
conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   The Police Department is empowered to make and enforce
regulations necessary to make effective the provisions of this traffic code
and to make and enforce temporary regulations to cover emergencies.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse or fail to
comply with any lawful order, signal, or direction of a police officer.



(Ord. 81-25, passed 8-24-81)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.03  OBEDIENCE TO POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENTS, ADULT CROSSING GUARDS,
AND SCHOOL SAFETY PATROL MEMBERS.



   No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful
order or direction of a police officer, Fire Department official, adult
school crossing guard, or member of a school safety patrol while the adult
crossing guard or school safety patrol member is engaged in controlling
traffic at a school crossing and while the adult crossing guard or safety
patrol member is wearing the authorized insignia or uniform of the adult
crossing guards or school safety patrol.



(Ord. 1150, passed 12-26-67)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.04  EMERGENCY VEHICLES; EXCEPTION.



   (A)   The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle when responding
to an emergency call or when in the pursuit of an actual suspected violator 
of the law or when responding to but not  upon returning from a fire alarm,
may disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning in
specified directions as required by this section.



   (B)   The exemption herein granted to the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle shall apply only when the driver of the vehicle while in
motion sounds an audible signal by bell, siren, or exhaust whistle as may be
reasonably necessary, and when the vehicle is equipped with at least one
lighted lamp displaying a red light visible under normal atmospheric
conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of the vehicle. 
However, an authorized emergency vehicle operated as a police vehicle need
not be equipped with or display a red light visible from in front of the
vehicle.



   (C)   The foregoing provisions shall not relieve the driver of an
authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the
safety of all persons, nor shall these provisions protect the driver from the
consequences of his reckless disregard for the safety of others.



(Ord. 81-25, passed 8-24-81)



§ 70.05  SIGNS IN THE RIGHT-OF-WAY.



   (A)   Applicability. This section pertains to signs in the right-of-
way and is not intended to diminish, replace or modify regulations on private
or public property found in I.C. 9-21 or in Chapter 153, the Mt. Vernon
Zoning Code.



   (B)   Definitions. The following definitions shall apply to this
section unless another meaning is dearly intended.



      CURB LINE.  The outer edge of a curb which is the farthest
distance from the center line of a street.



      FIRST AMENDMENT SIGN.  Any sign promoting any cause, political
party, candidate, idea or concept; except, it does not include advertising
signs advertising any business or sale of a product or service by a business.



      GARAGE SALE or YARD SALE.  The selling of used items of personal
property for a length of time not to exceed three consecutive days and not
more that two times in any calendar year.



      OWNER.  The fee owner or any person having a present possessory
interest in the real estate.



      RIGHT-OF-WAY.  Any street or alley right-of-way dedicated for
public use and used as a street, public sidewalk, or alley under the
jurisdiction of the Board of Public Works and Safety. It shall include the
entire width between the boundary lines of said street or alley. It shall not
include a HIGHWAY as that term is defined in I.C. 9-21-4-6.



   (C)   Purpose and policy.  It is the purpose of this section to
outline and provide a policy and procedure for the regulation of signs
attached directly or indirectly (e.g. attached to a post, tree or other
apparatus) to the right-of-way of the city or located in the right-of-way.
This section does not apply to signs on vehicles within the right-of-way or
signs that are carried in some manner by an individual. The proliferation of
signs within the right-of-way creates a blight upon the community and may
distract a driver from the traffic control signage that provides protection
to drivers and pedestrians. Signage may also provide obstructions to sight
distance of vehicular traffic or pedestrians. The provisions of this section
shall not abrogate any applicable state or federal laws or local ordinances
that are more restrictive, and in such event, the strictest provisions shall
apply. This section shall not apply to the right-of-way of the State of
Indiana, which solely controls that property, unless the state and the city
enter into an agreement for the removal of signs from state right-of-way.



   (D)   Prohibitions and violations.



      (1)   No person shall place or maintain a sign in, on or over
the area of the street between the curb lines or in any alley right-of-way in
the city.



      (2)   No person shall place or maintain a sign in, on, or over
the grassy area of any boulevard.



      (3)   No person shall place any sign in, on, or over the
grassy area between the curb and the public sidewalk.



      (4)   No person shall place any sign in, on or over any public
sidewalk.



      (5)   No person shall damage the pavement, curb, or sidewalk
in the installation of any sign or place any writing or markings on any
pavement, sidewalk, curb or city-installed sign. The abutting property owner
may have the numerical address of the abutting property placed upon the curb.



      (6)   No person shall place or maintain a sign in, on or over
the traveled (i.e. paved) portion of a street except as provided herein.



      (7)   No person shall place or attach any sign to a street
light pole, utility pole, or tree within the right-of-way except a
city-installed sign, or other apparatus authorized to be in a city
right-of-way.



      (8)   No person shall place a sign advertising any business or
sale of a product or service by a business in the right-of-way.



      (9)   No person shall place or maintain a sign in any place or
manner which obstructs or tends to obstruct the view of drivers of vehicles
or pedestrians.



   (E)   Exceptions.



      (1)   This section shall not prevent warning or informational
signage or markings placed by utilities or other owners of authorized
installations within the right-of-way.



      (2)   This section shall not apply to any city employee,
agent, or contractor of the city undertaking work authorized by a department,
board or agency of the city. Also, it shall not prevent any utility, any
contractor authorized to do work in the right-of-way or any emergency service
from warning the public of any construction or traffic hazard in the
right-of-way.



      (3)   This section shall not apply to signs on vehicles or
signs carried in any manner by any individual.



      (4)   So long as a property owner is in compliance with the
Mt. Vernon Zoning Code, a property owner may place a temporary sign
approximately six square feet in size in his yard, or if he has no yard, and
the house or principal building abuts the public sidewalk, then in the grassy
area between the sidewalk and the curb or street pavement, notifying the
public of a garage sale or yard sale taking place on that parcel of property
so long as placement of the sign does not constitute a sight distance problem
for vehicular traffic. The sign may be installed the day before the yard sale
and shall be removed at the conclusion of the yard sale. No off-premises yard
sale or garage sale signs shall be allowed in the right- of-way.



      (5)   In the situation where the house or principal building
abuts a public sidewalk,  a person may place a temporary "For Sale", "For
Rent" or "For Lease" sign approximately six square feet in area, in the
grassy area, if any, between the curb and the sidewalk in front of the
property during the time period said property, or a portion thereof is for
sale or lease, so long as the placement of the sign does not present a sight
problem for vehicular traffic.



      (6)   In situations where the right-of-way extends into the
yard of the property owner beyond the sidewalk, the property owner may place
a temporary "For Sale", "For Rent" or "For Lease" sign in the right-of-way
outside (on the house or principal building side) of the sidewalk in the
yard. If there is no public sidewalk, then such sign may be placed on the
house or principal building side of a curb or street pavement.



      (7)   First Amendment signs may be placed in the right-of-way
so long as they do not lie between the outside (house or principal building
side) of the public sidewalk and the paved portion of the street or in any
boulevard or area mowed by the city or its contractor, and the person placing
the sign has the consent of the property owner in front of whose property the
sign is to be placed. Said First Amendment signs may not be placed on or over
any paved portion of street or sidewalk or on any tree, street light pole,
utility pole, sign or apparatus placed or authorized by the city to be in the
right-of-way. If there is no public sidewalk, then such sign may be placed on
the house or building side of a curb or street pavement.  No First Amendment
sign shall be placed in any location that presents a sight distance problem
for vehicular traffic.



   (F)   Removal of signs. 



      (1)   Signs found in violation of this section may be removed
by any police officer of the Police Department or code enforcement officer or
other city employee acting within the scope of his or her duties. Any signs
removed shall be deposited at a drop-off site location designated by the
Board of Public Works.



      (2)   The Board of Public Works shall designate a drop-off
location for the deposit of removed signs. For any signs received by the
Board of Public Works, the office shall attempt to contact the owner or
person whose name appears on the sign by telephone, if a telephone number is
on the sign or can be determined from information on the sign; or by letter
if there is no telephone number but there is an address on the sign to inform
the owner that the sign has been removed, that the sign will be disposed of
in three business days if not picked up by the owner or his agent, and the
times and location that the sign may be reclaimed by the owner. If the
owner's address or telephone number cannot be determined from the information
contained on the sign or if the sign is not picked up within three business
days of notification to the owner, the sign will be presumed to be abandoned
and worthless property and disposed of by the city.



      (3)   As an alternative to picking up the signs, the city,
through any authorized agent, may contact the owner and notify the owner, in
the same manner as provided above, of the block and street wherein a sign is
located in violation of this section and state that if said sign is not
removed within three business days, the sign will be disposed of as abandoned
and worthless property.



(Ord. 05-33, passed 10-24-05)



§ 70.06  VEHICLE SEAT BELT POLICY.



   (A)   Each front seat occupant in a municipal-owned or passenger
motor vehicle, or in a personal passenger motor vehicle being used for, or in
the course of, municipal business, that is equipped with a safety belt
meeting the standards stated in the Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard
Number 208 (49 CFR 571.208) shall have a safety belt properly fastened about
the occupant's body at all times when the vehicle is in forward motion.



   (B)   For purposes of this policy, PASSENGER MOTOR VEHICLE shall be
defined by I.C. 9-13-2-123, including any amendment thereto.



   (C)   Violation of this policy by an employee (full-time or
part-time) of the city, its departments or utilities, may result in
discipline under § 34.60 as a minor infraction.



(Ord. 06-28, passed 11-27-06)



§ 70.07  TRANSPORTATION AND HAULING OF OVERWEIGHT VEHICLES AND LOADS OVER
PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY.



   (A)   For purposes of this section, PERMIT shall mean a special
permit issued pursuant to I.C. 9-20-6-2 and this section, as provided herein.



   (B)   Subject to the provisions of this section, the Board may grant
a heavy hauling permit (“permit”) for transporting heavy vehicles and
loads or other objects over city rights-of-way otherwise prohibited by I.C.
Art. 9-20 et seq.



   (C)   Upon written application by a form prescribed by the Board,
and upon good cause shown, the Board may issue a permit if the Board finds
that (a) the applicant has complied with the provisions of this section; and
(b) other traffic will not be seriously affected and the highway and
underground infrastructure improvements will not be seriously damaged.



   (D)   In the event a permit is issued by the Board, such permit
shall authorize the operation of a tractor-semitrailer and load that exceeds
the maximum length limitation under this chapter and is subject to regulation
under this chapter no earlier than one-half hour before sunrise to no later
than one-half hour after sunset.



   (E)   A permit may be issued under this section for a single trip or
for a one year period.



   (F)   A permit may designate the route to be traversed and contain
any other restrictions or conditions necessary for the proper protection of
the traffic, highway, or bridge.



   (G)   Before a permit is issued under this section, an applicant
must furnish satisfactory bond or other security to the satisfaction of the
Board or otherwise satisfy the Board of the applicant’s responsibility to
reimburse the Board and city for any damage to the street improvements and
underground infrastructure.



   (H)   A permit shall be carried in or on the vehicle or other object
to which the permit refers and be open to inspection by a police officer.



   (I)   A person shall not violate the terms or conditions of a
special permit, a permit may not be construed as protection to or as a
defense by a holder of a permit if the restrictions and rules to which the
permit is subject are violated. A permit does not relieve the responsibility
for damages to any highway, bridge, underground infrastructure, or other
improvements or property.



   (J)   Upon submission of an application for a permit, the applicant
shall pay the following non-refundable application fee, payable to the
city:  (a) for a single trip, $50; or (b) for a one year period, $150.



(Ord. 10-08, passed 5-24-10)



§ 70.08  SKATEBOARDS AND RELATED EQUIPMENT.



   (A)   Definition. For the purpose of this section, the following
definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      SKATEBOARD. An item consisting of a short, oblong board, not
exclusive to wood, with a pair of small wheels at each end, ridden on a hard
surface such as a floor, sidewalk, street, and the like. For purposes of this
section, SKATEBOARD shall also include non-motorized coasters, scooters,
roller-blade, in-line skate, roller skate, or similar wheeled toy vehicles or
devices.



   (B)   Compliance required. No person shall ride a skateboard within
the city without complying with this section and any and all other applicable
ordinances and statutes.



      (1)   Yielding to pedestrians. Whenever any person is riding a
skateboard upon a sidewalk or other paved surface intended for use by
pedestrians, such person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and
shall not approach, overtake or pass such pedestrian in a reckless or
careless manner, nor pass such pedestrian except in a single file if such
person is riding a skateboard with other such riders.



      (2)   Riding on certain devices or structures. No person shall
skateboard on any public bench, table, step, retaining wall, plateau, planter
wall, playground equipment, picnic tables, or other device or structure which
is not intended for pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or jump or step on or
off such devices or structures in the process of riding a skateboard. No
person shall skateboard on any steps or handicapped ramps.



      (3)   Reckless or dangerous riding. No person shall skateboard
on any sidewalk or other paved surface intended for pedestrian use or for the
parking of vehicles in a reckless or careless manner, nor in a manner which
is likely to result in injury or harm to any person or property.



      (4)   Riding on private property without permission. No person
shall ride a skateboard on private property without first obtaining
permission of the owner of the property to allow such skating or riding.



      (5)   Riding while attached to vehicle. No person shall ride a
skateboard while either the skateboard or the person is attached to any
vehicle.



      (6)   Prohibitions on public streets and in the downtown area.



         (a)   No person shall ride a skateboard on public
streets except at cross walks.



         (b)   No person shall ride a skateboard in the downtown
area of the city. The downtown area is defined for the purpose of this
section as the area south of Sixth Street, north of the Ohio River, east of
College Avenue, and west of Locust Street.



      (7)   Restrictions on use. No person shall ride a skateboard
in any position other than standing on the board.



      (8)   Prohibitions on ramps and incline devices. No person
shall construct, establish, maintain, use or place a ramp or other incline
device to be used for skateboarding upon any public sidewalk or roadway in
the city.



   (C)   Penalty for violation.



      (1)   Any person who violates any provision of this section
shall be fined not less than $10 for the first offense; not less than $100
for the second offense; and not less than $200 for the third or subsequent
offenses. Any person who violates any provision of this section may also have
their skateboard impounded by a police officer, Park and Recreation official,
or the Code Enforcement Official. Upon impoundment of any skateboard as
provided herein, the owner or operator of such device shall be issued a
receipt. The receipt shall state the hours, location, time frame and manner
for claiming the impounded skateboard as provided in divisions (C)(2) and (3)
of this section.



      (2)   Upon presentation of the receipt, the owner may claim
the impounded skateboard at the City Police Department or the Mt.
Vernon/Black Township Park and Recreation Department during normal business
hours. If the owner is a minor, such owner may only claim the impounded
skateboard if accompanied by a parent or guardian.



      (3)   The impounded skateboard may be held by the city for a
period of 72 hours before it is released to the owner. If the impounded
skateboard is not claimed within 60 days after the date of impoundment, the
city may dispose of the item(s) as abandoned items in the manner provided for
by statute.



      (4)   The city is authorized to post signs as may be
appropriate, however, signs are not required for enforcement of this section.



(Ord. 10-17, passed 10-13-10)



TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES



§ 70.15  OBEDIENCE TO OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.



   The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official
traffic-control device applicable thereto placed in accordance with the
provisions of this code, unless otherwise directed by a police officer,
subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency
vehicle in § 70.04 above.



(Ord. 81-25, passed 8-24-81)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.16  AUTHORITY TO INSTALL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.



   The city shall place and maintain official traffic-control devices when
and as required under this traffic code to make effective the provisions of
this traffic code, and may place and maintain any additional official
traffic-control devices as it may deem necessary to regulate, warn, or guide
traffic under the traffic ordinances of this city or under state law.



(Ord. 81-25, passed 8-24-81)



§ 70.17  MANUAL AND SPECIFICATIONS FOR TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.



   All traffic-control signs, signals, and devices shall conform to the
state manual approved by the State Department of Highways.  All signs and
signals required hereunder for the particular purpose shall so far as
practicable be uniform as to type and location throughout the city.  All
traffic-control devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions
of state law or this traffic code shall be official traffic-control devices.



(Ord. 81-25, passed 8-24-81)



§ 70.18  TRAFFIC LANES.



   The city is authorized to mark traffic lanes upon the roadway of any
street or highway where a regular alignment of traffic is necessary.



(Ord. 81-25, passed 8-24-81)



ACCIDENTS



§ 70.25  COPIES OF ACCIDENT REPORTS; FEE.



   (A)   No person shall be furnished a copy of the Indiana Officer's
Standard Accident Report on file with the city Police Department without
payment to the city of a fee of $5 for that copy. 



   (B)   Amounts collected for copies of accident reports shall be
deposited into the Local Law Enforcement Continuing Education Fund as
established pursuant to § 35.06.



(Ord. 85-49, passed 10-28-85; Ord. 94-11, passed 7-11-94; Am. Ord. 06-29,
passed 11-27-06)



§ 70.26  CONFORMANCE WITH STATE LAW.



   The fees collected and reports furnished pursuant to § 70.25 and §
70.35 shall be controlled by the provisions of state law.



(Ord. 85-49, passed 10-28-85; Am. Ord. 06-29, passed 11-27-06)



VEHICLE INSPECTIONS



§ 70.35  VEHICLE INSPECTION FEE; RECEIPT.



   (A)   The Police Department of the city may perform vehicle
inspections pursuant to I.C. 9-17-2-12.



   (B)   The fee for said inspection shall be $5.



   (C)   The fees collected for such inspections shall be deposited
into the Local Law Enforcement Continuing Education Fund as established
pursuant to § 35.06.



(Ord. 88-17, passed 7-11-88; Am. Ord. 95-3, passed 4-10-95; Am. Ord. 06-29,
passed 11-27-06)



§ 70.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Every person convicted of a violation of any of the provisions
of this title for which another penalty is not provided shall for the
conviction thereof be punished by a fine of not more than $100.



   (B)   Any person who places, maintains or displays a sign in
violation of § 70.05 or any person who places a mark or wording on a
city-installed sign or upon a sidewalk, curb or pavement in violation of §
70.05 shall be subject to a fine of $25 per violation. If any such city sign,
sidewalk, curb or pavement must be repaired or replaced because of a
violation of § 70.05, then cost of such repair or replacement shall be added
to the fine imposed in this division. Each day such a sign is maintained in
violation of this division shall be a separate offense.



(Ord. 81-25, passed 8-24-81; Am. Ord. 05-33, passed 10-24-05)



CHAPTER 71:  TRAFFIC RULES



Section



General Provisions



   71.01  Driver not to obstruct traffic



Speed Regulations



   71.15  State speed laws applicable



Funerals or Other Processions



   71.25  Drivers in procession



   71.26  Funeral processions to be identified



Cross-reference:



   Operation of vehicles within public parks, see § 96.01



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 71.01  DRIVER NOT TO OBSTRUCT TRAFFIC.



   No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless
there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk
to accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of
other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic-control signal
indication to proceed.



(Ord. 81-25, passed 8-24-81)  Penalty, see § 70.99



SPEED REGULATIONS



§ 71.15  STATE SPEED LAWS APPLICABLE.



   The state motor vehicle laws regulating the speed of vehicles shall be
applicable upon the streets within this city except as the city, as
authorized by state law, declares and determines upon the basis of an
engineering and traffic investigation that certain speed regulations shall be
applicable upon specified streets or in certain areas.  In that event, it
shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle at a speed in excess of
any speed so declared in this traffic code when signs are in place giving
notice thereof.



(Ord. 81-25, passed 8-24-81)  Penalty, see § 70.99



Cross-reference:



   Speed limits, see Ch. 74, Sch. VI



FUNERALS OR OTHER PROCESSIONS



§ 71.25  DRIVERS IN PROCESSION.



   Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the
right-hand edge of the roadway as practicable and shall follow the vehicle
ahead as close as is practicable and safe.



(Ord. 81-25, passed 8-24-81)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.26  FUNERAL PROCESSIONS TO BE IDENTIFIED.



   A funeral composed of a procession of vehicles shall be identified as
such by the display upon the outside of each vehicle of a pennant or other
identifying insignia or by any other method as may be determined and
designated by the Police Chief.



(Ord. 81-25, passed 8-24-81)  Penalty, see § 70.99



CHAPTER 72:  STOPPING, STANDING, AND PARKING



Section



   72.01   No parking on pavement



   72.02   Private parking signs



   72.03   Alley parking



   72.04   Loading zones



   72.05   Stopping in front of certain buildings during loading and
unloading



   72.06   Bus and taxi zones



   72.07   Handicapped parking



   72.08   Certain areas where only passenger vehicles are permitted to
park



   72.09   Residential parking only



 



   72.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Parking of railroad cars on tracks in city streets, see § 73.02



   Use of alcohol in parked motor vehicles on certain public property
prohibited, see § 111.01



§ 72.01  NO PARKING ON PAVEMENT.



   Upon any street where the cross section of the street does not include
curbs, no person shall park or leave standing any vehicle, whether attended
or unattended, upon the paved or main traveled part of the street.  The
streets described are designated no parking on pavement zones.  Appropriate
signs need be erected only at such time as the Police Chief deems necessary.



(Ord. 81-25, passed 8-24-81)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.02  PRIVATE PARKING SIGNS.



   No person shall place any sign along or on any street or alley or
designate any place thereon with the intent to regulate or prevent the
parking of vehicles on any street or alley.



(Ord. 81-25, passed 8-24-81)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.03  ALLEY PARKING.



   No person shall park any vehicle in any alley except for a period not
exceeding 30 minutes while loading or unloading the vehicle.



(Ord. 81-25, passed 8-24-81)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.04  LOADING ZONES.



   When appropriate signs conforming to the requirements of this traffic
code are erected, no person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle for a longer
period of time than is necessary for the expeditious loading or unloading of
passengers, or for the loading, unloading, delivery, or pickup of materials
or merchandise, in any place designated and marked as a loading zone.  In no
case shall the stop for loading and unloading of materials exceed a total of
15 minutes.



(Ord. 81-25, passed 8-24-81)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.05  STOPPING IN FRONT OF CERTAIN BUILDINGS DURING LOADING AND
UNLOADING.



   No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle in any of the following
places at any time except temporarily during the actual loading or unloading
of passengers or when necessary in obedience to traffic regulations or
traffic signs or signals, or the directions of a police officer:  Within a
space of 25 feet immediately in front of the entrance of any church, school,
hotel, theater, motion-picture house, hospital, steam railway station, bus or
inter-urban station, public meeting place, or public meeting hall.



(Ord. 81-25, passed 8-24-81)  Penalty, see § 72.99



Cross-reference:



   Loading zone, see Ch. 75, Sched. VII



§ 72.06  BUS AND TAXI ZONES.



   When appropriate signs conforming to the requirements of this traffic
code are erected, no person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle other than a
bus in a bus zone or a taxi in a taxi zone as so designated in Chapter 75,
Schedule VIII.



(Ord. 81-25, passed 8-24-81)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.07  HANDICAPPED PARKING.



   (A)   For the purpose of this section, a PHYSICALLY HANDICAPPED
PERSON is one who qualifies as a handicapped person under state law for a
handicapped motor vehicle registration plate.



   (B)   No person shall park a motor vehicle in or otherwise obstruct
a  parking space  reserved for use by the physically handicapped unless the
motor vehicle has a current handicapped registration plate issued by the
state or another state and unless a physically handicapped person entitled to
the registration plate was the driver or an occupant of the vehicle at the
time it was parked.



(Ord. 83-9, passed 3-14-83)  Penalty, see § 72.99



Cross-reference:



   Handicapped parking, see Ch. 75, Sched. VI



§ 72.08  CERTAIN AREAS WHERE ONLY PASSENGER VEHICLES ARE PERMITTED TO PARK.



   Parking of all buses, pickup trucks, vans, and all other trucks are
prohibited on the east side of Main Street from one-half block north of Sixth
Street to one-half block south of Sixth Street. Passenger car- type vehicles
only shall be parked in this area.



(Ord. 81-25, passed 8-24-81)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.09  RESIDENTIAL PARKING ONLY.



   (A)   The parking spaces described in Ch. 75, Sch. IX are designated
as parking spaces reserved for residential use only during the hours
indicated.  Applicable time limits and other regulations in this traffic
code shall otherwise apply to such spaces.



   (B)   No person shall park a motor vehicle (including a car, truck,
trailer, motorcycle, motor home or any other motor vehicle) in or otherwise
obstruct parking spaces reserved for use by the residents living in the area,
as indicated by proper signs, unless the motor vehicle has a current decal
attached to the vehicle designating that motor vehicle as belonging to a
resident of that area.  All unauthorized motor vehicles shall be towed at
the owner's expense.



   (C)   Parking decals shall be issued to resident in the residential
parking area upon verification and registration of the number of decals
required by each home by officials of the city.  Resident shall then display
the decal in their vehicle or in the car of a guest visiting the resident
during school hours.  Said decals shall be issued by the city and it shall
be a violation of this section to duplicate, in any manner, the residential
parking decal or to use said decal for any purpose other than for residential
parking as described in this section.



(Ord. 92-35, passed 10-12-92)



§ 72.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Fines.  Every person convicted of a violation of any of the
provisions  of this chapter  for which another  penalty is not provided 
shall for the conviction thereof be punished by a fine of not more than $100.



   (B)   Removal of vehicle.  In addition to the foregoing penalty,
any police officer, upon discovering any vehicle parked or stopped in
violation of this traffic code, may remove the vehicle or cause the same to
be removed by private towing contractors approved by the Board of Public
Works and Safety to an appropriate vehicle impoundment site where the vehicle
shall be released only upon payment for the cost of towing the vehicle away
from the place where it was illegally parked or stopped, together with the
cost to store it.



(Ord. 81-25, passed 8-24-81; Am. Ord. 84-14, passed 6-25-84; Am. Ord. 97-36,
passed 9-29-97; Am. Ord. 05-22, passed 7-25-05)



CHAPTER 73:  RAILROADS



Section



   73.01  Speed limits within city



   73.02  Parking of railroad cars on tracks in city streets



 



   73.99  Penalty



§ 73.01  SPEED LIMITS WITHIN CITY.



   No person may operate or cause to be operated any train or other
vehicle at a speed greater than 40 miles per hour along railroad tracks
within the city.



(Ord. 78-43, passed 10-23-78)  Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.02  PARKING OF RAILROAD CARS ON TRACKS IN CITY STREETS.



   No rail cars or locomotives shall be parked or permitted to stand or
occupy tracks in the paved or platted portion of West Water Street between
Mann and Barter Streets or in the paved or platted portion of West Water
Street between Vine and Pearl Streets except during switching operations.



(Ord. 76-12, passed 4-26-76)  Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.99  PENALTY.



   Any person violating the provisions of this chapter may be fined not
less than $l nor more than $100 for each violation.



CHAPTER 74:  TRAFFIC SCHEDULES



Schedule



   I.   Stop intersections



   II.   Yield intersections



   III.   Signalized intersections



   IV.   One-way streets



   V.   Restricted turns



   VI.   Speed limits



   VII.   Truck and weight regulations



SCHEDULE I.  STOP INTERSECTIONS.



   (A)   The intersections set forth as follows are designated as stop
intersections.  When appropriate signs conforming to the requirements of
this traffic code are erected at the entrances of these intersections, the
operator of a vehicle approaching any of the streets where a sign has been
erected shall bring the vehicle to a full and complete stop before entering
the intersection, except when directed by a police officer to do otherwise.



 

TRAFFIC ON
 
SHALL STOP FOR TRAFFIC ON




Allyn Dr.
 
Lower New Harmony Rd.


Audubon Dr.
 
Lower New Harmony Rd.


Audubon Dr.
 
Jefferson Dr.


Barbee St.
 
5th St.


Barbee St.
 
4th St.


Barter St.
 
4th St.


Barter St.
 
3rd St.


Blue Bonnet St.
 
Smith Rd.


Bluff Rd. (southeast bound)
 
Kimball St.


Bob O Link Rd.
 
Tanglewood Dr.


Brown St.
 
Main St.


Brown St.
 
Lower New Harmony Rd.


Byrd St.
 
6th St.


Byrd St.
 
5th St.


Byrd St.
 
4th St.


Byrd St.
 
Sherman St.


Canal St
 
Water St.


Canal St.
 
3rd St.


Canal St.
 
4th St.


Canal St.
 
8th St.


Canal St.
 
10th St.


Canal St.
 
Grant St.


Canal St.
 
Lincoln Ave.


Canal St.
 
Sherman Street


Cardinal Dr.
 
Tile Factory Rd.


Cherry Hills Dr.
 
Tam O Shanter Dr.


Cherry Hills Dr.
 
Tanglewood Dr.


Cherry Lane
 
Roosevelt Dr.


Chestnut St.
 
3rd St.


Chestnut St.
 
2nd St.


Chestnut St.
 
4th St.


Clover St.
 
Smith Rd.


College Ave.
 
4th St.


College Ave.
 
2nd St.


College Ave.
 
8th St.


Coronado Dr.
 
Lower New Harmony Rd.


Coronado Dr.
 
Jefferson Dr.


Country Club Rd.
 
Western Hills Dr.


Country Club Rd.
 
4th St.


C.R. 650 S.
 
Lower New Harmony Rd.


Davis Dr.
 
Harriet St.


Dereham Dr.
 
Sherman St.


Dereham Dr.
 
Grant St.


Dogwood Pl.
 
Lakeview Dr.


Edson St.
 
Bluff Rd.


Edson St.
 
4th St.


Edson St.
 
2nd St.


Elk St.
 
Lincoln Ave.


Elm St.
 
2nd St.


Elm  St.
 
3rd St.


Elm St.
 
Sycamore St.


Elm St.
 
Water St.


Elm St.
 
4th St.


Emmick St.
 
Lower New Harmony Rd.


Emmick St.
 
Jefferson Dr.


Estate Dr.
 
Main St.


Estate Dr.
 
Hereford Dr.


Everett St.
 
6th St.


Everett St.
 
5th St.


Everett St.
 
4th St.


Evergreen Dr.
 
Harriet St.


Fairview Ln.
 
Davis Dr.


Fairview Ln.
 
Lincoln Ave.


Fairview Ln.
 
Sherman St.


Gleneagles St.
 
Bob O Link Rd.


Gleneagles St.
 
Pleasant Valley


Grant St.
 
Lower New Harmony Rd.


Grant St.
 
Main St.


Grant St.
 
Mulberry St.


Green Valley Dr.
 
Intersection of Harrison Dr. and Davis Dr.


Greenbriar Cir.
 
Greenbriar Dr.


Greenbriar Ct.
 
Greenbriar Dr.


Greenbriar Dr. (North Fork)
 
Greenbriar Dr. and
Pleasant Valley Rd.


Greenbriar Dr. (South Fork)
 
Greenbriar Dr. and
Pleasant Valley Rd.


Grenada St.
 
Coronado Dr.


Grenada St.
 
Roosevelt Dr.


Harriet St. (southbound)
 
10th St.


Harriet St.
 
4th St.


Harriet St. (southbound)
 
Evergreen Dr.


Hawthorne Dr.
 
Park Ridge Dr.


Hawthorne Dr.
 
Smith Rd.


James St.
 
6th St.


James St.
 
7th St.


Jefferson Dr.
 
Vista Dr.


Jefferson Dr.
 
Grant St.


Jefferson Dr.
 
Roosevelt Dr.


Kennedy Dr.
 
Allyn Dr.


Kennedy Dr.
 
Grenada St.


Kennedy Dr.
 
Jefferson Dr.


Lakeview Dr.
 
Highway 62


Lark Ln.
 
Mockingbird Ln.


Lark Ln.
 
Cardinal Dr.


Lawrence Dr.
 
Lower New Harmony Rd.


Lawrence Dr.
 
Grenada St.


Lawrence Dr.
 
Jefferson Dr.


Lawrence Dr.
 
Main St.


Lincoln Ave.
 
Byrd St.


Lincoln Ave.
 
Lower New Harmony Rd.


Lincoln Ave.
 
Jefferson Dr.


Lincoln Ave.
 
Main St.


Lincoln Ave.
 
Harriet St.


Locust St.
 
Grant St.


Locust St.
 
Lincoln Ave.


Locust St.
 
Water St.


Locust St.
 
3rd St.


Locust St.
 
6th St.


Locust St.
 
5th St.


Locust St.
 
4th St.


Magnolia Ct.
 
Magnolia Dr.


Magnolia Dr.
 
Park Ridge Dr.


Magnolia Dr.
 
Hawthorne Dr.


Mann St.
 
4th St.


Mann St.
 
2nd St.


Mann St.
 
3rd St.


Maple St.
 
Sycamore St.


Maple St.
 
Water St.


Maple St.
 
3rd St.


Maple St.
 
2nd St.


Melody Ln.
 
Westwood Dr.


Melody Ln.
 
Allyn Dr.


Mill St.
 
Brown St.


Mill St.
 
2nd St.


Mill St.
 
4th St.


Mockingbird Ln.
 
Tile Factory Rd.


Mulberry St.
 
Lincoln Ave.


Mulberry St.
 
Sherman St.


Mulberry St.
 
6th St.


Mulberry St.
 
2nd St.


Mulberry St.
 
3rd St.


Mulberry St.
 
Water St.


Mulberry St.
 
4th St.


Munchoff St.
 
2nd St.


Munchoff St.
 
4th St.


Munchoff St.
 
8th St.


Nettleton St.
 
First alley north of 8th St.


Nettleton St.
 
2nd St.


Nettleton St.
 
3rd St.


Nettleton St.
 
4th St.


Nettleton St.
 
8th St.


O'Donnell Rd.
 
8th St.


Ohio St.
 
Barter St.


Ohio St.
 
Maple St.


Ohio St.
 
Kimball St.


Old Orchard Pl.
 
Lakeview Dr.


Oriole Cir.
 
Lark Ln.


Owen St.
 
6th St.


Owen St.
 
2nd St.


Owen St.
 
Water St.


Owen St.
 
4th St.


Owen St.
 
5th St.


Park Ridge Dr.
 
Country Club Rd.


Park Ridge Dr.
 
Smith Rd.


Parke St.
 
2nd St.


Pearl St.
 
3rd St.


Pearl St.
 
6th St.


Pearl St.
 
2nd St.


Pearl St.
 
4th St.


Pinhurst Dr.
 
Tam O Shanter Dr.


Pleasant Valley Road
 
Smith Road


Raintree Cir.
 
Raintree Dr.


Raintree Dr.
 
Park Ridge Dr.


Raintree Dr.
 
Smith Rd.


Riviera Dr.
 
Lower New Harmony Rd.


Riviera Dr.
 
Jefferson Dr.


Robin Ln.
 
Mockingbird Ln.


Robin Ln.
 
Cardinal Dr.


Roosevelt Dr.
 
Allyn Dr.


Roosevelt Dr.
 
Grenada St.


Sawmill St.
 
Water St.


Sawmill St.
 
3rd St.


Sawmill St.
 
4th St.


Sherman St.
 
Lower New Harmony Rd.


Sherman St.
 
Jefferson Dr.


Sherman St.
 
Main St.


Sherman St.
 
Tile Factory Rd.


Sherman St. (eastbound)
 
Harriet St.


Short Sycamore St.
 
Canal St.


Short Sycamore St.
 
Sawmill St.


Smith Rd.
 
Country Club Rd.


Southwind Ave.
 
Allyn Dr.


Southwind Dr.
 
Jefferson Dr.


Southwind Dr.
 
Grenada Dr.


Sunset Dr.
 
Allyn Dr.


Sunset Dr.
 
Grenada St.


Sunset Dr.
 
Jefferson St.


Sycamore St.
 
Edson St.


Sycamore St.
 
Sawmill St.


Sycamore St.
 
Kimball St.


Tam O Shanter Dr.
 
Tanglewood Dr.


Tanglewood Dr.
 
Pleasant Valley Rd.


Terrace Dr.
 
Magnolia Dr.


Venice Ave.
 
4th St.


Venice Ave.
 
5th


Vine St.
 
6th St.


Vine St.
 
7th St.


Vine St.
 
4th St.


Vine St.
 
3rd St.


Vine St.
 
2nd St.


Vista Dr.
 
Lower New Harmony Rd.


Vista Dr.
 
Main St.


Walnut St.
 
10th St.


Walnut St.
 
6th St.


Walnut St.
 
2nd St.


Walnut St.
 
Water St.


Walnut St.
 
Main St.


Washington Ave.
 
Allyn Dr.


Washington Ave.
 
Grenada St.


Washington Ave.
 
Jefferson Dr.


Water St.
 
Barter St.


Water St.
 
Mann St.


Water St.
 
Kimball St.


Water St.
 
Edson St.


Westwood Dr.
 
Lower New Harmony Rd.


Williams Dr.
 
8th St.


Wolflin St.
 
3rd St.


Wolflin St.
 
2nd St.


Wolflin St.
 
4th St.


Wood St.
 
3rd St.


Wood St.
 
6th St.


Wood St.
 
Water St.


Wood St.
 
2nd St.


Wood St.
 
Short Sycamore St.


Wood St.
 
4th St.


Wood St.
 
5th St.


3rd St.
 
College Ave.


3rd St.
 
Kimball St.


3rd St.
 
Main St.


3rd St.
 
Mill St.


3rd St.
 
Parke St.


3rd St.
 
State St.


3rd St.
 
Walnut St.


5th St.
 
Canal St.


5th St.
 
College Ave.


5th St.
 
Harriet Ave.


5th St.
 
Main St.


5th St.
 
Mill St.


5th St.
 
Mulberry St.


5th St.
 
Munchoff St.


5th St.
 
Pearl St.


5th St.
 
Tile Factory Rd.


5th St.
 
Vine St.


5th St.
 
Walnut St.


5th St.
 
Wolflin St.


6th St.
 
College Ave.


6th St.
 
Harriet St.


6th St.
 
Main St.


6th St.
 
Mill St.


6th St.
 
Munchoff St.


6th St.
 
Tile Factory Rd.


7th St.
 
College Ave.


7th St.
 
First alley east of Munchoff St.


7th St.
 
Main St.


7th St.
 
Mill St.


7th St.
 
Mulberry St.


7th St.
 
Munchoff St.


7th St.
 
Nettleton St.


7th St.
 
Walnut St.


8th St.
 
Harriet St.


8th St.
 
Main St.


8th St.
 
Mulberry St.


8th St.
 
Walnut St.


9th St.
 
Canal St.


9th St.
 
First alley west of Mulberry St.


9th St.
 
Harriet St.


9th St.
 
Main St.


9th St.
 
Mulberry St.


10th St.
 
Main St.


10th St.
 
Mill St.


223 Edson St.
 
East Third St.




 



   (B)   Multi-stop intersections.  The intersections set forth as
follows are designated as multi-stop intersections, which may include a
four-way stop, a three-way stop, or an all-way stop.  When appropriate signs
conforming to the requirements of this traffic code are erected at the
entrance to these intersections, the operator of a vehicle entering any of
the streets shall bring such vehicle to a full and complete stop before
entering the intersection, except when directed by a police officer to do
otherwise.



 

INTERSECTIONS
 
TYPE OF STOPS




Barbee St. and 6th St.
 
3-way


Barter St. and 2nd St.
 
4-way


Bluff Rd. and Kimball St.
 
3-way


Canal St. and 2nd St.
 
4-way


Canal St. and 6th St.
 
3-way


Greenbrier Dr. and Smith Rd.
 
3-way


Harrison St. and Lincoln Ave.
 
4-way


Harrison St. and Sherman St.
 
4-way


James St. and 8th St.
 
4-way


James St. and 9th St.
 
3-way


Kimball St. and 2nd St.
 
4-way


Locust St. and 8th St.
 
4-way


Locust St. and Sherman St.
 
4-way


Lower New Harmony Rd., Mill St., and 9th St.
 
All-way


Main St. and 2nd St.
 
4-way


Main St. and Water St.
 
3-way


Mill St. and 8th St.
 
4-way


Mulberry St. and 10th St.
 
4-way


Owen St. and 3rd St.
 
4-way


Park Ridge Dr. and Terrace Dr.
 
3-way


Pinehurst Dr. and Tanglewood Dr.
 
4-way


Sawmill St. and Second St.
 
4-way


3rd St. and Munchoff St.
 
4-way


7th St. and Locust St
 
4-way


10th St. and Locust St.
 
4-way




 



(Ord. 81-25, passed 8-24-81; Am. Ord. 84-26, passed 9-24-84; Am. Ord. 86-12,
passed 6-9-86; Am. Ord. 86-25, passed 9-8-86; Am. Ord. 81-1, passed 1-11-88;
Am. Ord. 88-10, passed 5-9-88; Am. Ord. 89-22, passed 8-14-89; Am. Ord. 91-3,
passed 2-11-91; Am. Ord. 92-25, passed 7-27-92; Am. Ord. 92-36, passed
10-12-92; Am. Ord. 95-1, passed 2-27-95; Am. Ord. 96-2, passed 2-26-96; Am.
Ord. 96-38, passed 10-18-96; Am. Ord. 97-45, passed 11-24-97; Am. Ord. 99-18,
passed 10-25-99; Am. Ord. 00-08, passed 4-24-00; Am. Ord. 01-21, passed
11-26-01; Am. Ord. 03-03,  passed 4-14-03; Am. Ord. 05-05, passed 5-9-05;
Am. Ord. 05-26, passed 9-6-05; Am. Ord. 05-39, passed 11-28-05; Am. Ord.
06-24, passed 10-10-06; Am. Ord. 07-12, passed 7-30-07; Am. Ord. 09-12,
passed 6-8-09; Am. Ord. 09-16, passed 7-13-09; Am. Ord. 10-09, passed
6-14-10; Am. Ord. 2015-8, passed 2-19-15)  Penalty, see § 70.99



SCHEDULE II.  YIELD INTERSECTIONS.



   The intersections described in this Schedule are designated as yield
intersections.  When appropriate signs conforming to the requirements of
this traffic code are erected at the entrance to these intersections, the
operator of a vehicle approaching any of the streets where a sign has been
erected shall slow down and yield the right-of-way to any vehicle on the
cross street, except when directed by a police officer to do otherwise.



 

TRAFFIC ON
 
SHALL YIELD TO TRAFFIC ON




Canal St.
 
Water St.


Edson St.
 
Bluff Rd.


Elm St.
 
3rd St.


Elm St.
 
Water St.


Grenada St.
 
Roosevelt Dr.


Jefferson Dr.
 
Roosevelt Dr.


Lincoln Ave.
 
Byrd St.


Maple St.
 
Water St.


Maple St.
 
Sycamore St.


Mulberry St.
 
Sherman St.


Pearl St.
 
3rd St.


Sawmill St.
 
Water St.


Sycamore St.
 
Edson St.


Vine St.
 
6th St.


Wood St.
 
3rd St.


3rd St.
 
State St.


7th St.
 
Walnut St.


8th St.
 
Walnut St.


9th St.
 
Harriet St.




 



(Ord. 81-25, passed 8-24-81; Am. Ord. 84-26, passed 9-24-84; Am. Ord. 86-12,
passed 6-9-86; Am. Ord. 88-1, passed 1-11-88; Am. Ord. 87-41, passed 11-9-87;
Am. Ord. 92-25, passed 7-27-92; Am. Ord. 96-2, passed 2-26-96; Am. Ord.
96-38, passed 10-28-96; Am. Ord. 97-45, passed 11-24-97; Am. Ord. 99-18,
passed 10-25-99; Am. Ord. 03-03, passed 4-14-03)



Penalty, see § 70.99



SCHEDULE III.  SIGNALIZED INTERSECTIONS.



   The intersections described in this Schedule are designated as
signalized intersections.  When appropriate traffic-control signals
conforming to the requirements of this traffic code are installed at each
intersection, the operator of a vehicle entering the intersections shall obey
the signal displayed as the driver approaches the intersection, except when
directed by a police officer to do otherwise.



   INTERSECTIONS



   Kimball St. and Tile Factory Rd. and 4th St.



   Main St. and 4th St.



   Parke St. and 4th St.



   Plaza Dr. and 4th St. and Highway 62E



   State and 4th St.



   Walnut St. and 4th St.



(Ord. 81-25, passed 8-24-81; Am. Ord. 09-12, passed 6-8-09)  Penalty, see §
70.99



Cross-reference



   Parking time limits, see § 72.29



SCHEDULE IV:  ONE-WAY STREETS.



   Upon those streets and parts of streets and in those alleys described
in this Schedule, vehicular traffic shall move only in the indicated
direction, when signs indicating the appropriate direction of traffic are
erected and maintained, at every intersection where movement in the opposite
direction is prohibited.



 

STREET
 
FROM
 
TO
 
DIRECTION OF TRAVEL




Alley between Main St. and Walnut St.
 
2nd St.
 
3rd St.
 
Westbound


North/south alley between Main St. and College St., bordered by 4th and 5th
Streets
 
4th St.
 
The east/west alley intersection (1/2 block)
 
Northbound


Alley between Mill St. and Mill St. and Mill Creek
 
Alley between 3rd St. and 4th St.
 
3rd St.
 
Southbound


East/west alley between 2nd St. and 3rd St., bordered by Main and College
Streets
 
Main St.
 
The north/south alley intersection (1/2 block)
 
Westbound


Alley between 2nd St. and  3rd St.
 
Walnut St.
 
Main St.
 
Westbound


Alley between 3rd. St. and 4th St.
 
Mill St.
 
Mill Creek
 
Westbound


East/west alley between 4th St. and 5th St.,  bordered by Main and College
Streets
 
Main St.
 
The north/south alley intersection (1/2 block)
 
Westbound


Alley by West School
 
Barter St.
 
Wolflin St.
 
Eastbound


Canal St.
 
6th St.
 
7th St.
 
Northbound


Sherbourne Park Dr.
 
Main St.
 
Water St.
 
Westbound


Venice Ave.
 
4th St.
 
Wolflin St.
 
South


Walnut St.
 
4th St.
 
10th St.
 
Northbound


5th St.
 
 
Vine St.
 
Chestnut St.Westbound


7th St.
 
 
Locust St.
 
Canal St.Westbound




 



(Ord. 81-25, passed 8-24-81; Am. Ord. 83-15, passed 4-25-83; Am. Ord. 87-15,
passed 4-13-87; Am. Ord. 01-13, passed 8-13-01; Am. Ord. 07-14, passed
9-10-07; Am. Ord. 09-12, passed 6-8-09; Am. Ord. 09-16, passed 7-13-09)



Penalty, see § 70.99



SCHEDULE V:  RESTRICTED TURNS.



   The intersections described as follows shall have certain turning
movements restricted.  When appropriate signs conforming to the requirements
of this traffic code are erected indicating that no right, left, or U turn is
permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the direction of that sign.



 

INTERSECTION
 
RESTRICTED TURN
 
FROM
 
TO
 
TIME


Walnut St. and 10th St
 
Left
 
Westbound
 
Southbound
 
Anytime



 



Ord. 81-25, passed 8-24-81)  Penalty, see § 70.99



SCHEDULE VI.  SPEED LIMITS.



   (A)   Increasing or decreasing state speed limits.  It is
determined upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that
the speed permitted by state law upon the streets listed below is greater or
less than is necessary for the reasonable or safe operation of vehicles
thereon.  It is therefore hereby declared that the maximum speed limit shall
be as herein designated when signs are erected giving notice thereof.



 

STREET
 
FROM
 
TO
 
POSTED SPEED MILES PER HOUR




College Ave.
 
2nd St.
 
Water St.
 
20


Main St.
 
Water St.
 
6th St.
 
20


Main St.
 
Grant St.
 
150 feet south of Vista Dr.
 
40


Main St.
 
6th St.
 
Seibert Ln.
 
30


Main St.
 
150 feet south
 
C.R. 600 South of Vista Dr.
 
45


Walnut St.
 
Water St.
 
4th St.
 
20


Water St.
 
College Ave.
 
Mulberry St.
 
20


2nd St.
 
College Ave.
 
Walnut St.
 
20


3rd St.
 
College Ave.
 
Walnut St.
 
20


4th St.
 
Tile Factory Rd.
 
East corporation limit
 
45


4th St.
 
College Ave.
 
Walnut St.
 
20


4th St.
 
West corporation limit
 
710 feet west of Country Club Rd.
 
55


4th St.
 
710 feet west of
 
110 feet west of Country Club Rd.Parke St.
 
45




 



   (B)   School speed zones.  It is determined that school speed zones
shall be established as set forth below.  A street or portion of a street
lies within a school speed zone if it is specifically listed below.  When
appropriate signs are erected on the streets within the school speed zones
described below, and conforming to the requirements of this traffic code, no
person shall drive a vehicle at a speed greater than 20 miles per hour. 
However, the time of the reduced speed limit shall be confined to periods
when children are present.



 

STREET
 
FROM
 
TO




Walnut St.
 
4th St.
 
6th St.


Mulberry St.
 
4h St.
 
10th St.


Locust St.
 
5th St.
 
10th St.


Canal St.
 
5th St.
 
10th St.


Wood St.
 
5th St.
 
6th St.


Owen St.
 
5th St.
 
6th St.


Harriet St.
 
5th St.
 
Evergreen Dr.


Byrd St.
 
5th St.
 
6th St.


Barbee St.
 
5th St.
 
6th St.


Everett St.
 
5th St.
 
6th St.


5th St.
 
Walnut St.
 
Tile Factory Rd.


6th St.
 
Walnut St.
 
Tile Factory Rd.


8th St.
 
Mulberry St.
 
Harriet St.


9th St.
 
Mulberry St.
 
Harriet St.


10th St.
 
Mulberry St.
 
Harriet St.


Wolflin St.
 
4th St.
 
1200 feet north of  West 5th St.


West 5th St.
 
Wolflin St.
 
West School




 



   (C)   Park and playground speed zones.  It is determined that park
and playground speed zones shall be established as listed below.  When
appropriate signs are erected on these streets conforming to the requirements
of this traffic code, no person shall drive a vehicle at a speed greater than
20 miles per hour.  However, the time of the reduced speed limits shall be
confined to periods when children are present.



 

STREET
 
FROM
 
TO


O'Donnell Rd.
 
Smith Rd.
 
C. & E.I. Railroad


Smith Rd.
 
O'Donnell Rd.
 
1200 feet south of
O'Donnell Rd.



 



(Ord. 81-25, passed 8-24-81; Am. Ord. 99-07, passed 5-10-99; Am. Ord. 04-29,
passed 9-7-04)  Penalty, see § 70.99



Cross-reference:



   General speed limit regulations, see § 71.15



SCHEDULE VII.  TRUCK AND WEIGHT REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Definitions.  Terms used in this schedule have the following
meanings:



      SEMI-TRAILER.  A trailer of more than 30 feet in length, which
has no front wheels, four or more rear wheels and which is designed to be
moved by being attached to and pulled by a truck or road tractor.



   (B)   Truck traffic regulations.  Except for the purpose of loading
or unloading cargo or crossing at an intersection, no truck pulling a
semi-trailer shall be operated on those streets described in this schedule.



   (C)   Weight regulations.  No motor vehicle exceeding the weight
limit designated below shall be operated, for any reason, on the streets
described below, except that police and fire vehicles providing emergency
services and city utility and department vehicles providing municipal
services or public utility vehicles providing emergency utility services are
exempt from this section.



Truck Traffic Regulations



 


Street

 
From
 
To
 
Time of Restriction


Second St.
 
Kimball St.
 
State St.
 
All times


State St.
 
Second St.
 
Third St.
 
All times


Third St.
 
Kimball St.
 
State St.
 
All times



 



Weight Regulations



 


Street

 
From
 
To
 
Weight Limit
 
Time of Restriction


Allyn Dr.
 
L. New Harmony
 
Entire distance
 
10,000 lbs. (5T)
 
All times


Audubon
 
Lower New Harmony Road
 
Jefferson
 
10,000 lbs. (5T)
 
All times


Cherry Lane
 
Roosevelt
 
To Dead End
 
10,000 lbs. (5T)
 
All times


Coronado
 
Lower New Harmony Road
 
Jefferson
 
10,000 lbs. (5T)
 
All times


E. Water St.
 
Kimball St.
 
Edson St.
 
10,000 lbs. (5T)
 
All times


Edson St.
 
4th St.
 
Bluff Rd.
 
10,000 lbs. (5T)
 
All times



 



 


Street

 
From
 
To
 
Weight Limit
 
Time of Restriction




Emmick
 
Jefferson
 
L. New Harmony
 
10,000 lbs. (5T)
 
All times


Grenada
 
Coronado
 
Southwind
 
10,000 lbs. (5T)
 
All times


Kennedy
 
Lower New Harmony Road
 
Jefferson
 
10,000 lbs. (5T)
 
All times


Kimball
 
Fourth St.
 
Bluff St.
 
10,000 lbs. (5T)
 
All times*


Lawrence Dr.
 
Hwy 69
 
L. New Harmony
 
10,000 lbs. (5T)
 
All times


Lincoln Ave.
 
Hwy 69
 
L. New Harmony
 
10,000 lbs. (5T)
 
All times


Main St.
 
Water St.
 
4th St.
 
10,000 lbs. (5T)
 
All times


Mulberry St.
 
10th St.
 
Grant St.
 
7,000 lbs.
 
All times


Roosevelt Dr.
 
Hwy 69
 
Allyn Dr.
 
10,000 lbs. (5T)
 
All times


Sherman St.
 
Hwy 69
 
Jefferson Dr.
 
10,000 lbs. (5T)
 
All times


Southwind
 
Allyn Drive
 
Cherry Lane
 
10,000 lbs. (5T)
 
All times


Smith Rd.
 
Country Club Rd.
 
N. City Limits
 
10,000 lbs. (5T)
 
All times


Sunset
 
300 and 400 Block
 
Westwood
 
10,000 lbs. (5T)
 
All times


The Riviera
 
Lower New Harmony Road
 
Jefferson
 
10,000 lbs. (5T)
 
All times


Vista Dr.
 
Hwy 69
 
L. New Harmony
 
10,000 lbs. (5T)
 
All times


Westwood
 
Lower New Harmony Road
 
Entire Distance
 
10,000 lbs (5T)
 
All times




 



* This section shall not restrict the operation of vehicles in the regular
course of business for a business with a principal place of business within
the restricted area which have no other ingress or egress to their business
except for the restricted street.



(Ord. 89-17, passed 6-26-89; Am. Ord. 89-18, passed 7-10-89; Am. Ord. 93-6,
passed 6-28-93; Am. Ord. 94-10, passed 7-11-94; Am. Ord. 08-04, passed
4-14-08; Am. Ord. 09-37, passed 12-28-09; Am. Ord. 2015-4, passed 2-5-15; Am.
Ord. 2015-15, passed 5-28-15)



CHAPTER 75:  PARKING SCHEDULES



Schedule



   I.   No parking zones



   II.   Limited parking zones



   III.   Reserved



   IV.   No truck or camper parking



   V.   Angle parking



   VI.   Handicapped parking



   VII.   Loading zones



   VIII.   Bus and taxi zones



   IX.   Residential parking zones only



   X.   Single space vehicle parking only



   XI.   Compact vehicle parking only



SCHEDULE I.  NO PARKING ZONES.



   The streets described in this Schedule are designated as no parking
zones.  When appropriate signs conforming to the requirements of this
traffic code are erected, no person shall park a vehicle on the side of the
street at the times designated in this schedule.



 

STREET
 
FROM
 
TO
 
SIDE OF STREET
 
TIME OF RESTRICTION




Canal St.
 
6th St.
 
80 feet south of 6th St.
 
West
 
6:30 a.m. to 8:30 a.m.,  2:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.


Canal St.
 
6th St.
 
80 feet south of 6th St.
 
East
 
6:30 a.m. to 8:30 a.m.,  2:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.


Canal St.
 
210 feet north of 6th St.
 
7th St.
 
West
 
7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. school days


Canal St.
 
210 feet north of 6th St.
 
7th St.
 
East
 
7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. school days


Canal St.
 
E/W alley between 4th St. and 3rd St.
 
60 feet south of said alley
 
East
 
Any time


College Ave.
 
The south side of the east/west alley between Water and 2nd Streets exiting
onto College Ave.
 
Extending south for 78 feet from said alley
 
West
 
Any time


College Ave.
 
4th St.
 
120 feet north of 4th St.
 
East
 
Any time


Grant
 
Lower new Harmony Road
 
140 feet east of Lower New Harmony Road
 
North
 
Any time


Harriet St.
 
6th St.
 
8th St.
 
West
 
7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. School days


Harriet St.
 
6th St.
 
10th St.
 
East
 
7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. school days


Lincoln Ave.
 
Main St.
 
Harrison St.
 
South
 
Any time


Locust St.
 
Canal St.
 
Eighth St.
 
East
 
7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.


Locust St. (north)
 
4th St.
 
Alley
 
West
 
Any time


Locust St. (north)
 
4th St.
 
Alley
 
East
 
Any time


Main St.
 
E/W alley between 3rd & 4th (all parking spaces north of the E/W alley)
 
4th St.
 
West
 
All times


Main St.
 
E/W alley between 5th & 6th
 
6th St.
 
East
 
Any time


Main St.
 
4th St. north
 
First alley
 
East
 
Any time


Main St.
 
4th St. north
 
First alley
 
West
 
Any time


Main St.
 
5th St.
 
Grant St.
 
West
 
Any time


Main St.
 
Grant St.
 
8th St.
 
East
 
Any time


Main St.
 
5th St.
 
First alley south of 5th St.
 
West
 
Any time


Main St.
 
6th St.
 
8th St.
 
East
 
Any time


Mill St.
 
4th St.
 
220 feet north of 4th St.
 
East
 
Any time


Mill St.
 
3rd St.
 
4th St.
 
West
 
Any time


Mulberry St.
 
4th St.
 
5th St.
 
West
 
7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. School days


O'Donnell Rd.
 
900 feet east of Smith Rd.
 
1350 feet east of Smith Rd.
 
North
 
Any time


O'Donnell Rd.
 
900 feet east of Smith Rd.
 
1350 feet east of Smith Rd.
 
South
 
Any time


Sherbourne Park Dr.
 
Entrance from Main St. and Water St.
 
Exit onto Water and College Sts.
 
North
 
Anytime


Sherman St.
 
Mulberry St
 
Harrison St.
 
North
 
Any time


Sherman St.
 
Mulberry St
 
Harrison St.
 
South
 
Any time


W. Sherman St.
 
Main St.
 
140 ft. west of Main St.
 
South
 
Any time


Tile Factory Road
 
4th St.
 
Northern city limits
 
Both
 
Anytime


Walnut St.
 
4th St.
 
25 feet south of 4th. St.
 
West
 
All times


Walnut St.
 
4th St. curb line
 
65 feet south of 4th St.
 
East
 
All times


2nd St.
 
Nettleton St.
 
College Ave.
 
South
 
Any time


3rd St.
 
The first parking space immediately west of the exit drive from the Posey
County Courthouse
 
North
 
All times


4th St.
 
Park St.
 
Tile Factory Rd.
 
North
 
Any time


4th St.
 
Park St.
 
Tile Factory Rd.
 
South
 
Any time


5th St.
 
Main St.
 
College Ave.
 
North
 
All times


5th St.
 
Locust St.
 
Canal St.
 
South
 
Any time


E. 6th St.
 
Owen St.
 
Harriet
 
North
 
7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. school days


E. 6th St.
 
Harriet
 
Tile Factory
 
South
 
Anytime


E. 6th St.
 
Harriet
 
Tile Factory
 
North
 
Anytime


7th St.
 
Locust St.
 
Canal St.
 
South
 
7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.  School days


7th St.
 
Locust St.
 
Canal St.
 
North
 
7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. School days


8th St.
 
Canal St.
 
150 feet west of Canal St.
 
South
 
Any time


8th St.
 
Locust St. East
 
465 ft.
 
South
 
7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. School days


8th St.
 
Main St.
 
Locust St.
 
South
 
Any time


8th St.
 
Main St.
 
Locust St.
 
North
 
Any time


9th St.
 
James St.
 
Lower New Harmony Rd.
 
North
 
Any time


10th St.
 
Locust St.
 
Canal St.
 
South
 
7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. School days


10th St.
 
Main St.
 
Walnut St.
 
South
 
Any time


10th St.
 
Main St.
 
120 feet west of Main St.
 
North
 
Any time


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 




 



(Ord. 81-25, passed 8-24-81; Am. Ord. 83-34, passed 11-14-83; Am. Ord. 85-42,
passed 10-15-85; Am. Ord. 87-3, passed 2-9-87; Am. Ord. 88-32,  passed
11-28-88; Am. Ord. 92-10, passed 4-27-92; Am. Ord. 92-36, passed 10-12-92;
Am. Ord. 92-46, passed 11-23-92; Am. Ord. 93-1, passed 1-11-93; Am. Ord.
94-10, passed 7-11-94; Am. Ord. 96-42, passed 11-25-96; Am. Ord. 97-15,
passed 4-14-97; Am. Ord. 97-39, passed 9-29-97; Am. Ord. 02-02, passed
2-11-02; Am. Ord. 02-15, passed 7-22-02; Am. Ord. 02-22, passed 8-26-02; Am.
Ord. 03-24, passed 12-8-03; Am. Ord. 05-23, passed 7-25-05; Am. Ord. 12-13,
passed 6-25-12; Am. Ord. 14-18, passed 9-18-14; Am. Ord. 2016-18, passed
9-1-16; Am. Ord. 2016-24, passed 9-8-16)  Penalty, see § 72.99



SCHEDULE II.  LIMITED PARKING ZONES.



   The streets described in this Schedule are designated as limited
parking zones.  When appropriate signs conforming to the requirements of
this traffic code are erected, no person shall park a vehicle on the side of
the street or for any continuous period of time longer than designated in
this Schedule.  The limited parking zones may or may not be regulated by
parking meters as designated in this Schedule.



 

STREET
 
FROM
 
TO
 
SIDE OF STREET
 
LIMIT
 
METER


Sherbourne Park Dr.
 
The east end of Sherburne Park Dr.
 
The west end of Sherburne Park Dr.
 
South
 
Two hours
 
No


Walnut St.
 
3rd St.
 
Alley between 3rd St. and 4th St.
 
East
 
15 minutes
8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. except Sun. and holidays
 
No


Walnut St.
 
3rd St.
 
Alley between 3rd St. and 4th St.
 
West
 
15 minutes
8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. except Sun. and holidays
 
No



 



(Ord. 81-25, passed 8-24-81; Am. Ord. 83-18, passed 5-9-83; Am. Ord. 83-35
passed 11-28-83; Am Ord. 88-28, passed 10-10-88; Am. Ord. 14-18, passed
9-18-14)   Penalty, see § 72.99



SCHEDULE III.  RESERVED.



SCHEDULE IV.  NO TRUCK OR CAMPER PARKING.



   The streets described in this Schedule are designated as no truck or
camper parking zones.  When appropriate signs conforming to the requirements
of this traffic code are erected, no person shall park a truck or camper on
the side of the street indicated below.



 

STREET
 
FROM
 
TO
 
SIDE OF STREET


College Ave.
 
3rd St.
 
200 feet south of 3rd St.
 
West


Main St.
 
5th St.
 
7th St.
 
East


Mill St.
 
4th St.
 
200 feet south of 4th St.
 
East


 
 
 



 



(Ord. 81-25, passed 8-24-81)  Penalty, see § 72.99



SCHEDULE V.  ANGLE PARKING.



   Vehicles may be parked at an angle to the curb as marked on the
roadway, on those streets listed below:



 

STREET
 
FROM
 
TO
 
SIDE OF STREET




Brown St.
 
A point 42 feet west from North Main St.
 
111 feet west from North Main St.
 
South


Byrd St.
 
East 4th St.
 
109 feet north to alley
 
West


Everett St.
 
4th St./north side
 
142 feet north to alley
 
West


Main St.
 
4th St.
 
3rd St.
 
West


Mann St.
 
West 4th St.
 
140 feet south to alley
 
West


Mill St.
 
A point 42 feet from north edge of 4th St.
 
92 feet from north edge of 4th St.
 
West


Munchoff St.
 
W. 4th St. (West)
 
Alley
 
East


Owen St.
 
East 4th St./southside
 
Alley
 
East


Pearl St.
 
W. 4th St. (North)
 
Alley
 
East


Sherbourne Park Dr.
 
Main St.
 
West 250 feet
 
South


Vine St.
 
Alley
 
North to 5th St. 126 feet
 
East


Water St.
 
Main St.
 
College Ave.
 
South


Wolflin St.
 
West 3rd St./southside
 
140 feet south to alley
 
West


3rd St.
 
Walnut St.*
 
Main St.
 
North


W. 5th St.
 
Main St. (West)
 
200 ft.
 
North


 
 
 
 
 
 
 




 



*   There shall be parallel parking only in the space between the entrance
and exit drives from the Posey County Courthouse.



(Ord. 81-25, passed 8-24-81; Am. Ord. 87-12, passed 3-23-87; Am. Ord. 06-34,
passed 12-11-06; Am. Ord. 10-18, passed 10-13-10; Am. Ord. 12-13, passed
6-25-12)  Penalty, see § 72.99



SCHEDULE VI.  HANDICAPPED PARKING.



   The parking spaces described below are designated as parking spaces
reserved for use by physically handicapped persons.  Applicable time limits
and other regulations in this traffic code (see especially § 72.07) shall
otherwise apply to these spaces.



 

STREET
 
AREA
 
SIDE OF STREET





Main St.

 

First available parallel parking space north of 3rd Street

 

West




Mulberry St.

 

First 25-foot parking space on Mulberry Street north of Fourth Street

 

East




Mulberry St.

 

First available parking space north of 6th Street

 

East




Mulberry St.

 

First standard sized parking space north of the intersection of Sixth Street
and Mulberry Street

 

East




Second St.

 

First available parking space to the east of alley running between Main
Street  and Walnut Street

 

North




Second St.

 

First available parking space to the west of alley running between Main
Street and Walnut Street

 

North




Second St.

 

First standard sized parking space east of the alley between Main and College

 

South




Walnut St.

 

First three standard sized parking spaces north of the east/west vacated
alley between Walnut and Mulberry Streets and Fourth and Fifth Streets

 

East




Walnut St.

 

First available parking space to the north of Second Street on Walnut Street

 

West




Walnut St.

 

Second and third standard sized parking spaces north of the intersection of
Walnut and 4th Streets

 

West




E. 3rd St.

 

First standard sized parking space east of Main St. (metered)

 

North




5th St.

 

Second standard sized parking space east of the north/south alley between
Walnut and Mulberry Streets

 

North




6th St.

 

Forty feet of parking space measured at the corner of 6th Street and Harriet
Street, and heading west

 





6th St.

 

First available parking space east of Mulberry Street

 

North




8th St.

 

Forty feet of parking space beginning 95 feet from the crosswalk at the
corner of 8th Street and Canal Street and heading east

 





City Lot (metered lot at Second and Main)

 

First two standard sized parking spaces in the northeast corner of the city
parking lot located at the southeast corner of the Second and Main
intersection

 





City Lot (free lot off of College between Second and Third Streets)

 

First two standard sized parking spaces in northeast corner of lot

 





City Lot (metered lot located mid-block on Main Street between Second and
Third Streets)

 

First two standard sized parking spaces, southeast corner of lot

 





City Lot (free lot located off  of College Avenue between Fourth and Fifth
Streets)

 

First standard sized parking space, Southeast corner of lot

 






 


 






 



(Ord. 83-9, passed 3-14-83; Am. Ord. 87-27, passed 7-9-87; Am. Ord. 00-08,
passed 4-24-00; Am. Ord. 01-10, passed 6-11-01; Am. Ord. 02-23, passed
8-26-02; Am. Ord. 02-25, passed 9-23-02; Am. Ord. 02-28, passed 10-14-02; Am.
Ord. 05-06, passed 5-9-05; Am. Ord. 05-15, passed 6-27-05; Am. Ord. 07-04,
passed 2-26-07; Am. Ord. 10-22, passed 11-22-10; Am. Ord. 2016-3, passed
1-21-16; Am. Ord. 2016-4, passed 1-21-16; Am. Ord. 2018-18, passed 8-16-18) 
Penalty, see § 72.99



SCHEDULE VII.  LOADING ZONES



   The streets described in this Schedule are designated as loading zones.



 

STREET
 
FROM
 
TO
 
SIDE OF STREET
 
PERMITTED TIMES 


Canal St.
 
L&N St.
 
Railroad tracks/alley
 
West
 
6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. Monday to Friday


5th St.
 
First standard sized parking space east of the north/south alley between
Walnut and Mulberry Streets
 
 
 
North
 
All


E. 6th St.
 
Harriett
 
Barbee
 
North
 
7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. school days


Owen St.
 
4th St.
 
Half a block north to the east/west alley between 4th and 5th Streets
 
East
 
All


City lot (free lot located off of College Avenue between Second Street and
Third Street
 
A 20-foot wide loading zone in the northern most row of parking spaces
beginning 82 feet east of the eastern edge of College Avenue (approximately
the eighth and ninth parking spaces in the north row east of College Avenue)
 
 
 
N/A
 
All


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 



(Ord. 92-36, passed 10-12-92; Am. Ord. 97-01, passed 1-13-97; Am. Ord. 02-25,
passed 9-23-02; Am. Ord. 02-28, passed 10-14-02; Am. Ord. 02-30, passed
11-25-02; Am. Ord. 15-20, passed 8-6-15)



Cross-reference:



   For general loading zone regulations, see §§ 72.04 and 72.05



SCHEDULE VIII.  BUS AND TAXI ZONES.



   The streets described in this Schedule are designated as either a bus
zone or a taxi zone.



 

STREET
 
FROM
 
TO
 
SIDE OF STREET
 
TYPE
 
TIME


Harriett
 
E. 6th
 
E. 10th
 
East
 
Bus
 
7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. school days


 
 
 
 
 



 



(Ord. 81-25, passed 8-24-81; Am. Ord. 92-36, passed 10-12-92)



Cross-reference:



   For general regulations as to bus and taxicab zones, see § 72.06



SCHEDULE IX.  RESIDENTIAL PARKING ZONES ONLY.



 

STREET
 
FROM
 
TO
 
SIDE OF STREET




E. 10th
 
200' west of Harriett
 
Harriett
 
North and south


E. 9th
 
Williams St.
 
Harriett
 
North and south


E. 8th
 
Locust St.
 
Harriett
 
North


E. 6th
 
Owen
 
Harriett
 
South


E. 5th
 
Owen
 
Tile Factory Rd.
 
North and south


Harriett
 
5th
 
6th
 
West and east


Harriett
 
8th
 
North to the south side of railroad tracks
 
West


Byrd
 
5th
 
6th
 
West and east


Barbee
 
5th
 
6th
 
West and east


Canal
 
8th
 
9th
 
East and west


Everett
 
5th
 
6th
 
West and east


Evergreen
 
200 feet west of Harriett St.
 
Harriett St.
 
North and south


 
 
 
 
 
 
 




 



(Ord. 92-35, passed 10-12-92; Am. Ord. 93-21, passed 10-25-93; Am. Ord.
93-24, passed 12-13-93; Am. Ord. 08-27, passed 10-27-08)



SCHEDULE X.  SINGLE SPACE VEHICLE PARKING ONLY.



   The streets described in this schedule are designated as single space
vehicle parking only. No person shall park a vehicle or other implement which
occupies more than one parking space and no trailer, container, storage unit,
camper, or other towed implement which is not operable as a vehicle, may be
parked or unhitched, in a single parking space on the side of the street
indicated:



 


STREET

 

FROM

 

TO

 

SIDE OF STREET

 

TIME OF RESTRICTION




Water

 

College

 

Locust

 

North

 

All times




Main

 

Water

 

Second

 

Both

 

All times




 



(Ord. 15-19, passed 7-9-15)



SCHEDULE XI. COMPACT VEHICLE PARKING ONLY.



   (A)   Definitions. Terms used in this schedule have the following
meanings:



      COMPACT VEHICLE. A compact vehicle is a vehicle with an exterior
bumper-to-bumper length of 175 inches (14.58 feet) or less.



   (B)   The parking spaces described below are designated as parking
spaces for compact vehicles only. Applicable time limits and other
regulations in this traffic code shall otherwise apply to these spaces, as
applicable.



 


STREET

 

SIDE OF STREET

 

SPACES

 

TIME OF RESTRICTION



Water
 
North
 
First two spaces immediately west of the Water Street/Walnut Street
intersection
 
All times



 



(Ord. 2017-19, passed 10-26-17)



TITLE IX:  GENERAL REGULATIONS



   Chapter



      90.   ABANDONED VEHICLES



      91.   ANIMAL CONTROL



      92.   CEMETERIES



      93.   FAIR HOUSING PRACTICES



      94.   FIRE PREVENTION



      95.   NOISE CONTROL



      96.   PARKS AND RECREATION



      97.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



      98.   WEEDS



      99.   TIRE DISPOSAL



      100.   ALARMS



CHAPTER 90:  ABANDONED VEHICLES



Section



   90.01   State law adopted by reference



   90.02   Towing and storage charges



   90.03   Disposal of abandoned vehicles



   90.04   Abandoned Vehicle Account established



   90.05   Enforcement



§ 90.01  STATE LAW ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   The chapter of Indiana Statute entitled "Removal and Disposal of
Abandoned Vehicles" (I.C. 9-22-1 et seq. and as it may hereafter be amended)
is hereby adopted for application in the city.



(Ord. 88-3, passed 1-11-88)



§ 90.02  TOWING AND STORAGE CHARGES.



   (A)   The charges for towing abandoned vehicles in the city shall be
not more than $35 per tow.



   (B)   The storage charges for abandoned vehicles shall be not more
than $4 per day.



   (C)   The Board of Public Works and Safety shall have the authority
to amend the towing and storage charges from time to time and shall notify
the Bureau of Motor Vehicles of such amendments.



(Ord. 88-3, passed 1-11-88)



§ 90.03  DISPOSAL OF ABANDONED VEHICLES.



   The city may dispose of the abandoned vehicles or parts pursuant to the
provisions of I.C.9-22-1-21 through 9-22-1-23.



(Ord. 88-3, passed 1-11-88)



Editor’s note:



   This section references I.C. 9-22-1-21 through 9-22-1-23.  I.C.
9-22-1-22 was repealed in 2007.



§ 90.04  ABANDONED VEHICLE ACCOUNT ESTABLISHED.



   An account to be known as the Abandoned Vehicle Account is hereby
established in accordance with I.C. 9-22-1-27 to be funded and used according
to that section.



(Ord. 88-3, passed 1-11-88)



§ 90.05  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Any regular member of the Police Department may enforce the
provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   In addition, the city hereby designates the Code Enforcement
Officer as an officer authorized to enforce this chapter pursuant to I.C.
9-22-1-2(5).



(Ord. 04-21, passed 7-12-04)



CHAPTER 91:  ANIMALS



Section



General Provisions



   91.01   Definitions



   91.02   Agreements and enforcement



   91.03   Keeping animals or livestock



   91.04   Animal care and treatment



   91.05   Sale of animals as novelty



   91.06   Disposal of dead animals



   91.07   Animal waste



   91.08   Authorization to kill domestic animals



   91.09   Animal which is a public nuisance



   91.10   Cruel treatment or neglect of animals prohibited



   91.11   Animal fighting and exhibition fighting prohibited



   91.12   Abandonment



Control of Dogs, Cats or Other Animals



   91.25   Running at large prohibited



   91.26   Vicious or ferocious animals



   91.27   Noisy animals or birds



   91.28   Use of sidewalks



   91.29   Classification as kennel; license required



   91.30   Rabies control; vaccination



   91.31   Disposition of impounded dogs



   91.32   Destruction of dogs



   91.33   Diseased dogs observed



   91.34   Animal control officers



 



   91.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 91.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ANIMAL.  Any living, nonhuman vertebrate creature.



   ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER.  Any person designated by the Mayor to enforce
the terms and provisions of this chapter; or any law enforcement officer of
the State of Indiana.



   APPROVED RABIES VACCINE.  Any vaccine for protecting an animal from
contracting rabies approved as effective by the Indiana State Board of Animal
Health (BOAH) and by the National Association of State Public Health
Veterinarians, Inc. (NASPHV) in the most current version of the annual
Compendium of Animal Rabies Prevention and Control.



   AT LARGE.  Off the premises of the owner and not under the control of
the owner or a member of his or her immediate family, either by leash, cord,
chain, or other restraint.



   CAT.  Both male and female members of the feline species.



   CITY.  City of Mt. Vernon, Indiana.



   DANGEROUS ANIMAL.  Any animal which, unprovoked, commits an attack
upon, harms or kills a person or another domestic animal. A DANGEROUS ANIMAL
shall also include any mammal for which there is no approved rabies vaccine.



   DOG.  Both male and female members of the canine species.



   ENFORCEMENT AGENT.  Any person designated by the city to enforce the
provisions of this chapter.



   HARBOR.  To suffer or permit any animal to frequent or remain on or
within a house, building, premises, or enclosure.



   KENNEL.  Any facility wherein any person engages in the business of
boarding, breeding, buying, letting for hire, training for a fee, or selling
dogs or cats.



   LIVESTOCK.  Any animal raised for, or used in agriculture, including,
but not limited to sheep, rams, ewes, lambs, bulls, cows, steers, heifers,
calves, swine, boars, sows, piglets, goats, bucks, does, kids, horses,
stallions, mares, foals, mules, jacks, jennets, donkeys, burros, llamas,
alpaca, buffalo, deer, elk, ostrich, emu, or any other animals of the bovine,
equine, ovine, porcine, lagomorphs, caprine species, as well as poultry,
ratites and cervine, that are privately owned and raised in a confined area
for breeding stock, food, fiber, and other products.



   NUISANCE.  Any act of an animal or its owner that irritates, perturbs
or damages rights and privileges common to the enjoyment of public or private
property or indirectly injures or threatens the safety of a member of the
general public. By way of examples and not of limitation, the commissions on
the following acts or actions by an animal or by its owner or possessor may
hereby being declared a NUISANCE:



      (1)   Allowing or permitting an animal to habitually bark,
whine, howl, mew, crow or cackle in an excessive or continual fashion or make
other noise in such a manner so as to result in a serious annoyance or
interference with the reasonable use and enjoyment of neighboring premises;



      (2)   Allowing or permitting an animal to damage the property
of any person other than its owner or caretaker, including to, but not
limited to getting into or turning garbage containers or damaging gardens,
flowers, plants or other real or personal property or leaving fecal material
on the property of another person;



      (3)   Allowing or permitting an animal to molest, chase, snap
at, attack or attempt to attack passers-by, vehicles, other domestic animals
or livestock;



      (4)   Allowing or permitting an animal to habitually or
continually roam or be found on property of other than its owners of
caretakers, trespassing school grounds, parks or the property of any person;



      (5)   Allowing or permitting an animal to be housed or
restrained within reach of a public street, road, sidewalk or access and, in
the discretion of the Animal Control Officer, poses a threat to the general
public safety, health and welfare of the general public; and



      (6)   Allowing or permitting an area to be maintained in an
unsanitary condition by the accumulation of animals and/or animal waste so as
to be offensive to sight or smell.



   OWNER.  Any person keeping, owning, or harboring an animal.



   POULTRY.  All domesticated fowl and all game birds which are legally
kept in captivity, including, but not limited to chickens, ducks, guinea
fowl, turkeys, geese, peacocks.



   RESTRAINT FOR ALL ANIMALS.



      (1)   For all animals, RESTRAINT shall mean confined to the
premises of the owner or, if off of the premises of the owner, under
restraint by means of a lead or leash and under the control of a responsible
person.



      (2)   Any tethering system employed in place of a fence shall
not allow the animal to leave the owner’s property. The chain or tether
must not be made of rope, twine, cord or similar material that can easily be
cut or chewed through. Any tethering system shall not be acceptable for any
animal declared dangerous.



      (3)   No chain or tether shall weigh more than 1/8 of the
animal’s body weight.



      (4)   Any chain or tether must be attached to a properly
fitting collar or harness worn by the animal as defined in this chapter. A
chain, choke, pinch collar or head halter shall not be utilized for tethering
purposes. The use of properly fitted head halters shall not apply to
livestock.



      (5)   No dog shall be chained or tethered that has not been
spayed or neutered. The dog must be restrained in a protected area.



      (6)   Spayed or neutered dogs may not be chained or tethered
for more than ten continuous hours in any 24-hour period.



   RUNNING AT-LARGE.  Any animal, not located on the real property of its
owner, shall be deemed RUNNING AT-LARGE if it is not under restraint as
defined in this chapter.



   SCRATCH.  Any injury caused by the tearing, puncturing or cutting of
the skin caused by nails or claws.



   SERVICE ANIMAL.  Any animal that is individually trained to perform
tasks for a person with a disability such as, but not limited to, guiding
people who are blind, alerting people who are deaf, people in wheelchairs,
alerting and protecting an individual who is having a seizure, or performing
other special tasks. SERVICE ANIMALS are working animals. Any animal employed
as a therapy and/or companionship animal shall not be considered as a SERVICE
ANIMAL.



(Ord. 12-24, passed 11-15-12)



§ 91.02  AGREEMENTS AND ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   The city is authorized to enter into any necessary and proper
agreements for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this chapter.
Any such agreement shall be recorded in writing with the City Clerk-Treasurer
and available for inspection by the public.



   (B)   The Police Department and its’ Animal Control Officer shall
enforce the provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 12-24, passed 11-15-12)



§ 91.03  KEEPING ANIMALS OR LIVESTOCK.



   (A)   No person shall keep or maintain any animal in the city in
such a manner so as to become a public nuisance or to disturb the peace,
comfort, or health of any person residing within the city. The keeping of all
animals within the city shall be subject to all pertinent health regulations.



   (B)   This section does not apply to duly licensed poultry dealers
under and pursuant to the laws of the state and applicable zoning regulations.



   (C)   No person shall keep livestock within the City of Mt. Vernon,
Indiana. This section shall not apply to pot-bellied pigs.



   (D)   No person shall keep or maintain any poisonous reptile or
dangerous animal.



(Ord. 12-24, passed 11-15-12)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.04  ANIMAL CARE AND TREATMENT.



   (A)   Every person keeping an animal, that is allowed in the city,
shall see that such animal:



      (1)   Is kept in a clean, sanitary and healthy manner and is
not confined as to be forced to stand, sit or lie in its own excrement. The
person(s) responsible for the animal(s) shall regularly, and as often as
necessary to prevent odor or health and sanitation problems, maintain all
animal areas or areas of animal contact;



      (2)   Has food that is appropriate for the species in adequate
amounts to maintain good health, fresh potable drinking water where
appropriate, shelter and ventilation, including quarters that are protected
from excessive heat and cold and are of sufficient size to permit the animal
to move about freely;



      (3)   Shall not be tethered by use of a choke collar, or on
any collar too small for the size and age of the animal, nor by any rope,
chain or cord directly attached to the animal’s neck, nor by a leash less
than 12 feet in length or of such unreasonable weight as to prevent the
animal from moving about freely;



      (4)   Is protected against abuse, cruelty, neglect, torment,
overload, overwork or any other mistreatment;



      (5)   Shall provide the reasonably necessary medical care, in
addition to the required rabies vaccination which shall include recommended
vaccinations as required by accepted veterinary standards and if diseased or
injured or exhibiting symptoms of disease, receives proper care and is
segregated from other animals so as to prevent transmittal of the disease; and



      (6)   Is maintained in compliance with all applicable federal,
state and local laws and all regulations respecting animal care and control
as are adopted by the City and in effect from time to time.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for a person to beat, starve or otherwise
mistreat any animal in the City, or to fail to comply with any requirement of
division (A) of this section.



   (C)   In the discretion of the Animal Control officer, a person who
violates any provision of this section for the first time may be given
written notice of the practices or conditions which constitute the violation
and the enforcement authority shall in such instance direct remedies to such
person where appropriate and provide a time period of no longer than 30 days
within which to correct the violation(s). Failure of the person to correct
the violations within the specified time period shall constitute evidence of
a prima facie violation of this section. At any time, the Animal Control
Officer may make a report to the County Prosecuting Attorney for violations
of this section, or state laws, regarding the care and treatment of animals.



(Ord. 12-24, passed 11-15-12)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.05  SALE OF ANIMALS AS NOVELTY.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, barter, or
give away chicks, goslings, ducklings, or other fowl as pets or novelties.
This section shall not be construed to prohibit the sale or display of
natural chicks or ducklings in proper brooder facilities by hatcheries or
stores engaged in the business of selling them to be raised for commercial
purposes.



(Ord. 12-24, passed 11-15-12)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.06  DISPOSAL OF DEAD ANIMALS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of or throw away any
carcass, animal, animal blood, or parts of any carcass upon any street,
alley, public place, or lot within the city.



(Ord. 12-24, passed 11-15-12)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.07  ANIMAL WASTE.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any owner or any person exerting
control of any animal to permit such animal to defecate or leave its waste on
any public or private property other than the private property of its owner.



   (B)   Any person who permits any animal to defecate or leave its
waste upon an unauthorized place shall be required to immediately remove such
excrement and shall be subject to penalties authorized by this Chapter.



(Ord. 12-24, passed 11-15-12)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.08  AUTHORITY TO KILL DOMESTIC ANIMALS.



   Animal Control Officers are authorized to kill any domestic animals of
any kind when it is necessary to do so for the protection of any person or
property.



(Ord. 12-24, passed 11-15-12)



§ 91.09  ANIMAL WHICH IS A PUBLIC NUISANCE.



   No owner shall permit an animal to participate in any of the following
activities: excessive, continuous, or habitual barking or howling, molesting
of passerby; chasing of vehicles; attacking of other animals; trespassing on
public or private property; or damaging property of another.



(Ord. 12-24, passed 11-15-12)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.10  CRUEL TREATMENT OR NEGLECT OF ANIMALS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   For purposes of this chapter, cruelty means any act prohibited
by this section. No person shall cause infliction of pain, any form of bodily
injury or death to an animal by:



      (1)   Striking, beating, dropping, throwing, kicking,
dragging, choking, or by the use of an object or weapon;



      (2)   Means of caustic, flammable, chemical, boiling, or
heated substances; causing suffering, any form of bodily injury or death by
suffocation or drowning;



      (3)   Failing to provide adequate food, water and shelter; or



      (4)   Failing to detect the need for or withholding veterinary
care, including care and maintenance of skin and coat, creating or allowing
unhealthy living conditions whether by intentionally or by severe omission.



   (B)   No person shall engage, participate or be present in any acts
or actions as defined as cruelty in this chapter. No person shall cruelly
treat or torment any animal.



   (C)   In the event there is a reasonable cause to suspect that an
animal is being a victim of cruelty or neglect, custody of such animal may be
taken by an Animal Control Officer and impounded. If claimed by its owner
within the time limit as defined in this chapter, the animal may be held as
evidence and confined in a humane manner. Upon a court finding that the
animal has been a victim of cruelty, the owner(s) shall forfeit ownership of
the animal. Any owner or caretaker shall be responsible for all fees
associated with the impoundment, care, and treatment of the animal.



(Ord. 12-24, passed 11-15-12)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.11  ANIMAL FIGHTING AND EXHIBITION FIGHTING PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No person shall cause or permit any dogfight, cockfight or
other combat between animals. In the event there is a reasonable cause to
suspect that an animal is involved in a dogfight, cockfight or other combat,
custody of such animal and all animals of the same species on the same
property may be taken by an Animal Control Officer and impounded at the
animal shelter. The animal may be held as evidence and confined in a humane
manner. Upon finding by a court that the animal was involved in a dogfight,
cockfight or other combat between animals, the animal shall be forfeited by
the owner and the owner shall be responsible for all fees associated with the
impoundment, care, and treatment of the animal.



   (B)   No person shall own, possess, keep, train, exercise, breed or
raise any dog or other carnivore, bird or animal with the intent that such
dog or other carnivore, bird or animal be utilized, sold, given or leased for
fighting and/or engaged in an exhibition of fighting. In the event that a
person owns, possesses, keeps, trains, exercises, breeds or raises any dog or
other carnivore, bird or animal and/or engages in an exhibition of fighting
or selling, leasing or giving such animals for fighting, such person shall be
liable for citation for violation of this chapter.



   (C)   No person shall be present at any dogfight, cockfight, animal
fighting, or combat between animals. In the event that a person is present at
a dogfight, cockfight, animal fighting or combat between animals, such person
shall be liable for citation for violation of this chapter.



   (D)   Any person who is found present at a dogfight, cockfight, or
combat between animals, and who is charged with being a spectator in
violation of this chapter, and who is in possession of and/or is the owner of
an animal of the same species as that involved in the animal fight, shall be
charged with intent to engage in an exhibition of fighting in violation of
this chapter. Any animal shall be seized and impounded as defined in this
chapter if found on the premises or in the immediate area of the dogfight,
cockfight, or combat between animals.



   (E)   No person may own, possess, keep or utilize any animal
fighting paraphernalia utilized to train and/or fight such animal.



(Ord. 12-24, passed 11-15-12)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.12  ABANDONMENT.



   (A)   No person shall abandon any animal. Abandonment consists of
leaving an animal for a period in excess of 24 hours, without providing and
checking on the animal’s condition, or failure to contact Animal Control if
a request to contact is left on the property where the animal is. No owner
shall leave an animal by a roadside or other area, or leave such animal on
either public or private property, without the property owner’s consent. In
the event that an animal is found so abandoned, such animal may be taken by
an Animal Control Officer and impounded and confined in a humane manner. Such
animal, if taken from private property, shall be kept for not less than the
prescribed period in accordance with the procedures set forth in section §
91.26. When a caregiver is mandated by the owner of such and the animal is so
abandoned, the caregiver may be subject to a citation for violation of this
section and all fees associated with the impoundment, care, and treatment of
the animal.



   (B)   Any Animal Control Officer is authorized to impound such
animal if the Animal Control Officer deems that the condition of the animal
requires immediate care or veterinary treatment and/or upon finding
reasonable suspicion of abandonment and/or believe such animal needs to be
removed for humane reasons. The Animal Control Officer is authorized to go on
and about private property to investigate any abandonment to establish or not
reasonable suspicion of abandonment.



(Ord. 12-24, passed 11-15-12)  Penalty, see § 91.99



CONTROL OF DOGS, CATS OR OTHER ANIMALS



§ 91.25  RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to permit animals kept,
possessed, or owned by the person to run at large upon any street, alley, or
public place within the city.



   (B)   No owner or keeper of any dog or cat shall permit the dog or
cat to run at large within the city.



(Ord. 12-24, passed 11-15-12)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.26  VICIOUS OR FEROCIOUS ANIMALS.



   It is unlawful to harbor or keep any vicious, poisonous reptile, or
ferocious animal or fowl within the city.



(Ord. 12-24, passed 11-15-12)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.27  NOISY ANIMALS OR BIRD.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any animal or bird
which, by odor or frequent or continued noises, shall disturb the comfort or
repose of persons in any dwelling or apartment house or residence.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep or harbor any
dog or cat which by loud and frequent barking, howling or yelping shall cause
annoyance or disturbance to any of the citizens of the city.



(Ord. 12-24, passed 11-15-12)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.28  USE OF SIDEWALKS.



   Pedestrians and pedestrians with service animals shall have the
right-of-way in the use of sidewalks, and the preference shall be granted
them by owners or keepers of the dogs or cats on leashes.



(Ord. 12-24, passed 11-15-12)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.29  CLASSIFICATION AS KENNEL; LICENSE REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain a kennel except
as authorized by Chapter 153 (the Zoning Ordinance).



(Ord. 12-24, passed 11-15-12)  Penalty, see § 91.99 and penalties available
under the Zoning Chapter.



§ 91.30  RABIES CONTROL; VACCINATION.



   (A)   When it becomes necessary to safeguard the public from the
dangers of hydrophobia, the County Health Officer or the Mayor, if he or she
deems it necessary, shall issue a proclamation ordering every person owning
or keeping a dog or cat to confine it securely on his or her premises. These
proclamations shall remain effective until revoked by the County Health
Officer or Mayor.



   (B)   If a dog or cat is believed to have rabies, or has been bitten
by the dog or cat suspected of having rabies, the dog or cat shall be
confined under observation of a veterinarian at the expense of the owner for
a period of ten days, and if necessary may be thereafter destroyed.



      (1)   The owner shall notify the Animal Control Officer of the
fact that his or her dog or cat has been exposed to rabies, and at its
discretion the Animal Control Officer is empowered to have the dog or cat
removed from the owner’s premises to a veterinary hospital and there placed
under observation for a period often days at the expense of the owner.



      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person knowing or
suspecting a dog or cat of having rabies to allow the dog or cat to be
removed from the town, without the written permission of the Animal Control
Officer.



      (3)   Every owner or other person, upon ascertaining a dog or
cat is rabid, shall immediately notify Animal Control Officer or a police
officer.



   (C)   All dogs and cats must be vaccinated against rabies by the age
of six months. The rabies vaccination of a dog or cat shall be maintained by
ongoing revaccination of the animal as follows:



      (1)   Dogs and cats that are vaccinated with a rabies vaccine
whose label recommends annual boosters shall be revaccinated within 12 months
of the prior vaccination.



      (2)   Dogs and cats that are vaccinated with a rabies vaccine
whose label recommends a booster one year later and triennially thereafter
shall be revaccinated within 12 months of the first vaccination and shall be
revaccinated within 36 months of each vaccination thereafter.



      (3)   Dogs and cats that are vaccinated with a rabies vaccine
whose label recommends a booster triennially shall be revaccinated within 36
months of the prior vaccination.



   (D)   The owner of the animal is responsible for procuring the
vaccinations required by this section.



(Ord. 12-24, passed 11-15-12)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.31  DISPOSITION OF IMPOUNDED DOGS.



   (A)   The owner or person entitled to the custody of any impounded
dog, except a dog impounded by § 91.33, may redeem the same at any time
before it has been disposed of, as is this subchapter provided, and by having
said dog vaccinated for rabies as is hereinafter provided if such dog has not
been properly vaccinated, and by paying to the City Clerk-Treasurer a fee of
$5 and a maintenance fee of $15 for each day including any fractional day
which said dog may have been impounded.



   (B)   The owner or person having custody of any dog impounded
pursuant to § 91.33 may redeem that dog not less than ten days after its
impoundment upon compliance with the requirements for redemption set out in
division (A) above.



   (C)   (1)   Any dog which at the time of its impoundment was
wearing a tag and which remains in the pound for five days or more after
notice to its owner; or



      (2)   Any dog impounded pursuant to § 91.33 which remains in
the pound for more than ten days and which is found not to be diseased; or



      (3)   Any other dog remaining in the pound for more than five
days shall be deemed to be abandoned.



   (D)   After a dog is deemed abandoned, the Animal Control Officer
may dispose of that dog by:



      (1)   Releasing that dog to a person other than the former
owner upon compliance by that person with the requirements of division (A)
above; or



      (2)   Destroying the dog by any humane method.



   (E)   Animal Control Officers shall maintain records indicating date
of impounding to insure no animal is destroyed or adopted before five days.



   (F)   Due to financial and manpower constraints, notwithstanding §
91.30 or a matter of public safety, the only animal which will be impounded
under this chapter is a dog.



(Ord. 12-24, passed 11-15-12)



§ 91.32  DESTRUCTION OF DOGS.



   All dogs which have bitten any person or persons shall be deemed to be
vicious and dangerous and are subject to destruction after a ten-day
impoundment.



(Ord. 12-24, passed 11-15-12)



§ 91.33  DISEASED DOGS OBSERVED.



   All dogs which are known to have been exposed to or have been bitten by
a rabid animal shall be impounded under control of the Animal Control Officer
for observation for a period of not less than ten days. All fees and charges
for the care and keeping of such dogs shall be paid before such dogs may be
released and upon the failure of the owner or keeper to make such payment,
such dogs shall be disposed of as provided in this subchapter in the case of
unredeemed stray dogs.



(Ord. 12-24, passed 11-15-12)



§ 91.34  ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICERS.



   The Mayor may appoint Animal Control Officers as necessary to take dogs
into custody and to administer the provisions of this subchapter. Animal
Control Officers shall, at all times while on duty, wear a suitable badge and
are hereby empowered to issue written notices and file charges in the Posey
Superior Court for violations of the provisions of this subchapter. It shall
be unlawful for any person to resist or obstruct Animal Control Officers in
the exercise or discharge of their respective duties under this subchapter.
The police will assist Animal Control Officers when necessary. The Animal
Control Officer reports to the Chief of Police and the Mayor, as directed.



(Ord. 12-24, passed 11-15-12)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which no
penalty is specified shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to those
penalties as are contained in § 10.99.



   (B)   Any person violating §§ 91.03, 91.04, 91.09, 91.10, 91.12,
91.25, 91.26, 91.27, and 91.30 shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined any
sum not more than $300. This subchapter shall not be construed to prevent the
prosecution of any person under the provision of I.C. 15-5-9-13 or any other
statute or ordinance of the state or city.



(Ord. 12-24, passed 11-15-12)



CHAPTER 92:  CEMETERIES



Section



   92.01   Prohibiting further interment within corporate limits



 



   92.99   Penalty



§ 92.01  PROHIBITING FURTHER INTERMENT WITHIN CORPORATE LIMITS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to
bury or assist in burying, or to cause to be buried, any dead body in either
of the cemeteries known as the Leonard Cemetery, the North Cemetery, or the
Maple Grove Cemetery or any tract heretofore used for cemetery or burial
purposes adjacent thereto or elsewhere within the corporate limits of the
city.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to
bury, assist in burying, or to cause to be buried, the dead body of any human
being or the dead body of any animal of any kind at any place within the
corporate limits of the city.



(Ord. passed 4-29-07)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.99  PENALTY.



   Any person violating any of the provisions of § 92.01 shall, upon
conviction, be fined in any sum not more than $2,500.



(Ord. passed 4-29-07)



CHAPTER 93:  FAIR HOUSING PRACTICES



Section



   93.01   Policy statement



   93.02   Definitions



   93.03   Unlawful acts



   93.04   Limitations and permissible acts



   93.05   Duties of Commission in relation to this chapter



   93.06   Enforcement procedure



   93.07   Exemptions



 



   93.99   Penalty



§ 93.01  POLICY STATEMENT.



   It shall be the policy of the City of Mt. Vernon, Indiana, to provide,
within constitutional limitation, for fair housing throughout its corporate
limits as provided for under the federal Civil Rights Act of 1968, as
amended, the Federal Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, as
amended, and I.C. 22-9.5-1 et seq.



(Ord. 12-27, passed 12-27-12)



§ 93.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AGGRIEVED PERSON.  Includes any person who (I.C. 22-9.5-2-2):



      (1)   Claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing
practice; or



      (2)   Believes that such person will be injured by a
discriminatory housing practice that is about to occur.



   AUTHORITY.  The City of Mount Vernon, Indiana Housing Authority.



   COMMISSION (I.C. 22-9.5-2-3).  The Indiana Civil Rights Commission
created pursuant to I.C. 22-9-1-4 et seq.



   COMPLAINANT (I.C. 22-9.5-2-4).  A person, including the Commission,
who files a complaint under I.C. 22-9.5-6.



   DISCRIMINATORY HOUSING PRACTICE.  An act that is unlawful under this
chapter or I.C. 22-9.5-5.



   DWELLING.  Any building, structure, or part of a building or structure
that is occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as, a residence by
one or more families; or any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease
for the construction or location of a building, structure, or part of a
building or structure that is occupied as, or designed or intended for
occupancy as a residence by one or more families (I.C. 22-9.5-2-8).



   FAMILIAL STATUS.



      (1)   One or more individuals who have not attained the age of
18 years being domiciled with a parent or another person having legal custody
of such individual or the written permission of such parent or other person.



      (2)   The protections afforded against discrimination on the
basis of familial status shall apply to any person who is pregnant or is in
the process of securing legal custody of any individual who has not attained
the age of 18 years.



   FAMILY.  Includes a single individual (I.C. 22-9.5-2-9), with the
status of such family being further defined above in this section (familial
status). Also, pursuant to 24 C.F.R. Part 5, the definition of FAMILY is
revised to include families regardless of the actual or perceived sexual
orientation, gender identity, or marital status of its members.



   HANDICAP. 



      (1)   With respect to a person:



         (a)   A physical or mental impairment which
substantially limits one or more of such person’s major life activities;



         (b)   A record of having such an impairment;



         (c)   Being regarded as having such an impairment;



         (d)   An impairment described or defined pursuant to the
federal Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990; or



         (e)   Any other impairment defined under I.C.
22-9.5-2-10.



      (2)   The term HANDICAP shall not include current illegal use
of or addictions to a controlled substance as defined in 21 U.S.C. § 802
(I.C. 22-9.5-2-10(b)); nor does the term HANDICAP include an individual
solely because that individual is a transvestite (I.C. 22-9.5-2-10(c)).



   PERSON (I.C. 22-9.5-2-11).  Includes one or more individuals,
corporations, partnerships, associations, labor organizations, legal
representatives, mutual companies, joint-stock companies, trusts,
non-incorporated organizations, trustees, trustees in cases under Title 11 of
the United States Code, receivers, and fiduciaries.



   TO RENT (I.C. 22-9.5-2-13).  Includes to lease, to sublease, to let
and otherwise to grant for a consideration the rights to occupy the premises
owned by the occupant.



(Ord. 12-27, passed 12-27-12)



§ 93.03  UNLAWFUL ACTS.



   (A)   Discrimination in the sale or rental of housing. As made
applicable by § 93.04 and except as exempted by §§ 93.04 (B) and 93.07, it
shall be unlawful:



      (1)   To refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona
fide offer, or to refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise
make unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any person because of race, color,
religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national origin;



      (2)   To discriminate against any person in the terms,
conditions, or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling or in the provision
of services of facilities in connection therewith, because of race, color,
religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national origin;



      (3)   To make, print, or publish, or cause to be made,
printed, or published any notice, statement or advertisement, with respect to
the sale or rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation,
or discrimination based on race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial
status or national origin, or an intention to make any such preference,
limitation or discrimination.



      (4)   To represent to any person because of race, color,
religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national origin that any dwelling
is not available for inspection, sale or rental when such dwelling is in fact
so available;



      (5)   For profit, to induce or attempt to induct any person to
sell or rent any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or
perspective entry into the neighborhood of a person or persons of a
particular race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national
origin;



      (6)   To discriminate in the sale or rental, or to otherwise
make unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any buyer or renter because of a
handicap of:



         (a)   That buyer or renter; or



         (b)   A person residing in or intending to reside in
that dwelling after it is so sold, rented, or made available;



      (7)   To discriminate against any person in the terms,
conditions, or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the
provision of services or facilities in connection with such dwelling, because
of a handicap of:



         (a)   That person; or



         (b)   A person residing in or intending to reside in
that dwelling after it is so sold, rented, or made available; or



      (8)   For purposes of this subsection, discrimination includes:



         (a)   A refusal to permit, at the expense of the
handicapped person, reasonable modifications of existing premises occupied or
to be occupied by such person if such modifications may be necessary to
afford such person full enjoyment of the premises except that, in the case of
a rental, the landlord may where it is reasonable to do so condition
permission for a modification on the renter agreeing to restore the interior
of the premises to the condition that existed before the modifications,
reasonable wear and tear excepted;



         (b)   A refusal to make reasonable accommodations in
rules, policies, practices, or services when such accommodations may be
necessary to afford such person equal opportunity to use and enjoy a
dwelling; or



         (c)   In connection with the design and construction of
covered multi-family dwellings for first occupancy after the date that is 30
months after September 13, 1998, a failure to design and construct those
dwellings in such a manner that;



            1.   The public use and common use portions of
such dwellings are readily accessible to and usable by handicapped persons;



            2.   All the doors designed to allow passage into
and within all premises within such dwellings are sufficiently wide to allow
passage by handicapped persons in wheelchairs; and



            3.   All premises within such dwellings contain
the following features of adaptive design:



               (i)   An accessible route into and through
the dwelling;



               (ii)   Light switches, electrical outlets,
thermostats, and other environmental controls in accessible locations;



               (iii)   Reinforcements in bathrooms such
that an individual in a wheelchair can maneuver about the space.



      (9)   Compliance with the appropriate requirement Americans
with Disabilities Act of 1990 and of the American National Standard for
Buildings and Facilities providing accessibility an usability for physically
handicapped people (commonly cited as ANSI A117.1) suffices to satisfy the
requirements of this section.



      (10)   Nothing in this division requires that a dwelling be
made available to an individual whose tenancy would constitute a direct
threat to the health of safety of other individuals of whose tenancy would
result in substantial physical damage to the property of others.



   (B)   Discrimination in residential real estate-related transactions.



      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person or other entity
whose business includes engaging in residential real estate-related
transactions to discriminate against any person in making available such a
transaction, or in the terms or conditions of such a transaction, because of
race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin.



      (2)   As used in this section, the term RESIDENTIAL REAL
ESTATE-RELATED TRANSACTION means any of the following:



         (a)   The making or purchasing of loans or providing
other financial assistance:



            1.   For purchasing, constructing, improving,
repairing, or maintaining a dwelling; or



            2.   Secured by residential real estate; or



         (b)   The selling, brokering, or appraising of
residential real property.



      (3)   Nothing in this subchapter prohibits a person engaged in
the business of furnishing appraisals of real property to take into
consideration factors other than race, color, religion, national origin, sex,
handicap, or familial status.



   (C)   Discrimination in the provision of brokerage service. It shall
be unlawful to deny any person access to or membership or participation in
any multiple-listing service, real estate brokers’ organization or other
service, organization, or facility relating to the business of selling or
renting dwellings, or to discriminate against him in the terms or conditions
of such access, membership, or participation, on account of race, color,
religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national origin.



   (D)   Interference, coercion, or intimidation. It shall be unlawful
to coerce, intimidate, threaten, or interfere with any person in the exercise
or enjoyment of, or on account of his having exercised or enjoyed, or on
account of his having aided or encouraged any other person in the exercise or
enjoyment of, any right granted or protected by §§ 93.03 and 93.04(A)
through (D).



   (E)   Prevention of intimidation in fair housing cases. Whoever,
whether or not acting under code or law, by force or threat of force
willfully injures, intimidates or interferes with, or attempt to injure,
intimidate or interfere with:



      (1)   Any person because of his or her race, color, religion,
sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin and because he or she is
or has been selling, purchasing, renting, financing, occupying, or
contracting or negotiating for the sale, purchase, rental, financing or
occupation of any dwelling, or applying for or participating in any service,
organization, or facility relating to the business of selling or renting
dwellings; or



      (2)   Any person because he or she is or has been, or in order
to intimidate such person or any other person or any class of persons from:



         (a)   Participating, without discrimination on account
of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin,
in any of the activities, services, organizations or facilities described in
division (A) of this section; or



         (b)   Affording another person or class of persons
opportunity or protection so to participate; or



      (3)   Any citizen because he or she is or has been, or in
order to discourage such citizen or any other citizen from lawfully aiding or
encouraging other persons to participate, without discrimination on account
of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin,
in any of the activities, services, organizations or facilities described in
division (A) of this section, or participating lawfully in speech or peaceful
assembly opposing any denial of the opportunity to participate shall be fined
or otherwise penalized according to local, state and federal law.



(Ord. 12-27, passed 12-27-12)



§ 93.04  LIMITATIONS AND PERMISSIBLE ACTS.



   Subject to the provisions of division (B) of this section, § 93.07 and
I.C. 22-9.5-3, the prohibitions against discrimination in the sale or rental
of housing set forth I.C. 22-9.5-5-1 and in § 93.03(A) shall apply to:



   (A)   All dwellings except as exempted by division (B) of this
section and I.C. 22-9.5-3.



   (B)   Other than the provisions of division (C) of this section,
nothing in § 93.03(A) shall apply to:



      (1)   Any single-family house sold or rented by an owner where
the private individual owner does not own more than three such single-family
houses at any one time; provided that in the sale of such single family house
by a private individual owner not residing in the house at the time of sale
or exemption shall apply only to one such sale within any 24 month period.
The private individual owner may not own any interest in, nor have owned or
reserved on his behalf, title to or any right to all or a portion of the
proceeds from the sale or rental of more than three such single-family houses
at any one time. The sale or rental of any such single family house shall be
exempted from application of this section only if such house is sold or
rented:



         (a)   Without the use in any manner of the sales or
rental facilities or services of any real estate broker, agent or salesman,
or any person in the business of selling or renting dwellings, or of any
employee or agent of any such broker, agent or salesman, or person; and



         (b)   Without the publication, posting or mailing, after
notice of advertisement or written notice in violation of § 93.03(A)(3), but
noting in this provision shall prohibit the use of attorneys, escrow agents,
abstracters, title companies and other such professional assistance as
necessary to perfect or transfer this title; or



      (2)   Rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters
occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than four families living
independently of each other, if the owner actually maintains and occupies one
of such living quarters as his or her residence.



   (C)   For the purposes of division (B) of this section, a person
shall be deemed to be in the business of selling or renting dwellings if:



      (1)   They have, within the preceding 12 months, participated
as principal in three or more transactions involving the sale or rental of
any dwelling or any interest therein; or



      (2)   They have, within the preceding 12 months, participated
as agent, other than in the sale of his or her own personal residence, in
providing sales or rental facilities or services in two or more transactions
involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein; or



      (3)   They are the owner of any dwelling unit designed or
intended for occupancy by, or occupied by, five or more families.



(Ord. 12-27, passed 12-27-12)



§ 93.05  DUTIES OF THE AUTHORITY IN RELATION TO THIS CHAPTER.



   The authority is empowered to carry out the functions and duties so
designated under the provision of this chapter and it shall be the duty of
the authority to:



   (A)   Receive, record and investigate complaints charging any
unlawful housing practice.



   (B)   Seek conciliation of parties involved in such complaints by
conciliation, conferences, holding hearings where necessary, make findings of
fact, issue recommendations and orders, including orders rejecting any claims
that may be, in the opinion of the authority without merit, and publish its
findings in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 93-29, passed 12-27-93)



§ 93.06  ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURE.



   (A)   The Mount Vernon Housing Authority shall adopt such rules and
regulations as may be necessary to carry out the purpose and provisions of
this chapter.



   (B)   Any person aggrieved by any violation of any provision of the
above chapter may file a written complaint under oath, setting forth his
grievance with the Mount Vernon Housing Authority. Said complaint shall state
the name and address of the complainant and of the person against whom the
complaint is brought and shall also state the alleged facts surrounding the
alleged violation of this chapter.  Complaints must be filed alleging
violations of this chapter to the authority within 30 days after the date of
the alleged violation.



   (C)   On receipt of any complaint involving a discriminatory
practice, the authority shall determine the facts, and if there appears to be
probable cause for complaint the authority shall use its office to attempt an
adjustment by education, conciliation and conference.  No more than 90 days
shall be allowed for this purpose.



   (D)   If in the opinion of a majority of the authority the efforts
to settle any complaint by the above enumerated means have not adjusted the
specific complaint, the authority shall cause a public hearing to be held. 
A notice of such hearing, including the particulars of the complaint, shall
be sent to the respondent by registered mail not less than ten days prior to
the date set for hearing.  The hearing may be conducted before the authority
at a duly held meeting of not less than a quorum of the authority, or such
hearing may be conducted before a hearing officer appointed by the authority,
which hearing officer shall be a member of the authority.  Hearings
conducted before the authority, or a hearing officer, shall be conducted in
an informal manner and without  recourse to the  courts, and such manner of
proof and decision of all questions of fact, if substantial, reliable and
probative evidence supports such authority's determination.  The authority
shall, as a matter of policy, provide for the exclusion of irrelevant,
immaterial or unduly repetitious evidence.  Every person who is a part of
such proceedings shall have the right to appear in person or by counsel, to
submit evidence in open hearing and shall have the right of
cross-examination.  Such hearings shall be held in the City Hall of the city.



   (E)   In the event of such hearing before a hearing officer, as
herein set forth, the recommendation of such hearing officer, together with
the complete file, shall be submitted to, and filed with, the authority. 
The authority may hear additional evidence or refer it back to the hearing
officer to hear such additional evidence.  The authority may adopt the
recommendations of the hearing officer, amend or modify the same, or may make
such order or determination as is proper on the record.



   (F)   The respondent shall have the right to file an answer to the
complaint and appear at such hearing to testify in his own behalf, or to be
represented by counsel or otherwise, and to examine and cross-examine
witnesses.



   (G)   If upon all the evidence taken, no unlawful practice is found
to have been committed, the case shall be dismissed and the parties involved
so notified.



   (H)   If upon all the evidence taken, the authority by a majority
vote shall determine that the respondent, committed the discriminatory
practice set forth in the complaint, the authority may issue an order
directing the respondent to cease and desist such discriminatory practice so
found to be engaged in.



   (I)   The authority may certify the case and the entire records of
its proceedings to the City Department of Law, which shall invoke the aid of
an appropriate court to impose the penalties provided.



(Ord. 93-29, passed 12-27-93)



§ 93.07  EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   Exemptions defined or set forth under I.C. 22-9.5-3 et seq.
shall be exempt from the provisions of this subchapter to include those
activities or organizations set forth under divisions (B) and (C) of this
section.



   (B)   Nothing in this subchapter shall prohibit a religious
organization, association, or society, or any nonprofit institution or
organization operated, supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a
religious organization, association, or society, from limiting the sale,
rental or occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates for other than a
commercial purpose to persons of the same religion, or from giving preference
to such persons, unless membership in such religion is restricted on account
of race, color or national origin. Nor shall anything in this subchapter
prohibit a private club not in fact open to the public, which as an incident
to its primary purpose or purposes provides lodgings which it owns or
operates for other than a commercial purpose, from limiting the rental or
occupancy of such lodging to its members or from giving preference to its
members.



   (C)   Nothing in this subchapter regarding familial status shall
apply with respect to housing for older persons. As used in this section,
HOUSING FOR OLDER PERSONS means housing:



      (1)   Provided under any state or federal program that the
Secretary of the Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development or the
state civil rights commission determines is specifically designed and
operated to assist elderly person (as defined in the state or federal
program);



      (2)   Intended for, and solely occupied by, person 62 years of
age or older; or



      (3)   Intended and operated for occupancy by at least one
person 55 years of age or older per unit.



(Ord. 12-27, passed 12-27-12)



§ 93.99  PENALTY.



   Any owner and/or agent for owner, or any other person who shall violate
any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a fine not less
than $100 or not more than $300.



(Ord. 93-29, passed 12-27-93)



CHAPTER 94:  FIRE PREVENTION



Section



General Provisions



   94.01   Open burning prohibited



   94.02   Exemptions



   94.03   Preservation of reflective tape on fire hydrants



Fire Prevention Code



   94.15   Adoption by reference



   94.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 94.01  OPEN BURNING PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No person shall open burn any material except as provided in
§ 94.02.



   (B)   Any person who allows the accumulation or existence of
combustible material which constitutes or contributes to a fire causing air
pollution may not refute liability for violation of this chapter or 326 IAC
4-1 on the basis that said fire was set by vandals, accident, or an act of
God.



   (C)   326 IAC 4-1, as amended, is incorporated herein by reference.



(Ord. 93-20, passed 10-11-93)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.02  EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   The following types of fires are permitted:



      (1)   Fires celebrating Twelfth Night Ceremonies.



      (2)   Fires celebrating school pep rallies.



      (3)   Fires celebrating scouting activities.



      (4)   Fires used for recreational and cooking purposes, that
is, camp fires.



      (5)   Farm burning; wood products derived from the following
farm maintenance operations:



         (a)   Burning of fence rows and fields or materials
derived therefrom.



         (b)   Burning of natural growth derived from clearing a
drainage ditch.



         (c)   Burning of limbs, but only if so diseased or
infected as to present a contamination problem.



      (6)   Waste oil burning as prescribed by the Indiana
Department of Natural Resources, Department of Natural Resources burning or
United States Department of the Interior burning, all as prescribed and set
forth in 326 IAC 4-1-3(a) (7, 8 and 9).



      (7)   By variance obtained from the Indiana Air Pollution
Control Board Commissioner, or the Commissioner's designated agent.



      (8)   An owner or operator of an air curtain destructor as
provided in 326 IAC 4-1-6.



   (B)   Exemptions (1) through (6) above shall be subject to the
following:



      (1)   Only wood products shall be burned unless otherwise
stated.



      (2)   Fires shall be attended at all times until completely
extinguished.



      (3)   If the fire creates a nuisance or a fire hazard, the
fire shall be immediately extinguished.



      (4)   All farm and waste oil burning shall occur only during
the hours between 7:00 a.m. Central Standard Time and 4:00 p.m. Central
Standard Time or 5:00 p.m. Central Daylight Time.  All burning material must
be consumed during these hours and the fire extinguished.



      (5)   No burning shall be conducted during unfavorable
meteorological conditions such as temperature inversions, high winds, air
stagnation, and the like.



(Ord. 93-20, passed 10-11-93)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.03  PRESERVATION OF REFLECTIVE TAPE ON FIRE HYDRANTS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, or entity to
remove, paint over, partially or completely cover, or otherwise disturb any
3M reflective tape placed on any fire hydrant in the city, without first
obtaining the permission of the Fire Chief.



(Ord. 04-27, passed 8-23-04)  Penalty, see §94.99



FIRE PREVENTION CODE



§ 94.15  ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.



   The City Fire Prevention Code is hereby adopted by reference as if set
out fully at length herein.  The City Clerk-Treasurer is authorized to keep
this Code in a file so marked.



(Ord. 1202, passed 3-10-69)



§ 94.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any of the provisions of § 94.01 and/or
§ 94.02 shall be fined any sum not more than $2,500 for each offense. 
Every day any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense.



   (B)   Any person violating § 94.03 shall be fined not more than
$300 for each day that the violation takes place.



(Ord. 1029, passed 6-15-64; Am. Ord. 93-20, passed 10-11-93; Am. Ord. 04-27,
passed 8-23-04)



CHAPTER 95:  NOISE CONTROL



Section



   95.01   Definitions



   95.02   Loud or annoying noises prohibited



   95.03   Radios, amplifiers, lawnmowers, and the like



   95.04   Horns or audible signalling devices



   95.05   Parties and gatherings



   95.06   Animals



   95.07   Quantitative limits



   95.08   Permits



   95.09   Use of engine or transmission braking devices prohibited



   95.10   Exemptions



 



   95.99   Penalty



   Appendix:   Octave-band breakdowns of DBA limits



§ 95.01  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



   (B)   All terminology used in this chapter shall be in conformance
with applicable publications of the American National Standards Institute
(ANSI) or its successor body.



   A-WEIGHTED SOUND LEVEL.  The sound pressure level of a sound measured
through an A-weighting filter network.  The level read is designated DB(A)
or DBA.



   COMMERCIAL ZONE.  Business District zones as established by the zoning
code, as amended.



   DECIBEL (DB).  The unit used for comparing the sound pressure level of
a sound to the sound pressure level of a reference sound having a sound
pressure of 20 micropascals.



   FREQUENCY. The number of periodic oscillations, vibrations, or waves
per unit time (usually one second).



   HERTZ (HZ).  The unit used for measuring the frequency of a sound. 
The number of hertz is a number of cycles per second of a periodic sound
pressure wave.



   INDUSTRIAL ZONE. Manufacturing District zones as established by the
zoning code, as amended.



   LIGHT MOTOR VEHICLE.  Any motorized vehicle with gross vehicular
weight less than 8,000 pounds including automobiles, vans, motorcycles,
motor-driven cycles, motor scooters, dune buggies, snowmobiles, all-terrain
vehicles, go karts, minibikes, trail bikes, and light trucks.



   MODIFIED EXHAUST SYSTEM. Any exhaust system in which the original noise
abatement devices have been removed, altered, or replaced to produce more
noise.



   NOISE.  Any unwanted sound.



   OCTAVE BAND.  A portion of the entire sound frequency spectrum
contained between two frequencies A and B such that A=2B.



   PERSON. Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company, or organization of any kind.



   PLAINLY AUDIBLE.  Any noise for which the information content is
unambiguously communicated to the listener, including understandable spoken
speech, comprehension of whether a voice is raised (agitated) or normal or
comprehensible musical rhythms.



   RESIDENTIAL ZONES.  Residential District zones as established by the
zoning code, as amended.



   SOUND LEVEL METER.  An instrument designed to measure sound pressure
levels.



   SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL.  Twenty times the logarithm (Base 10) of the
ratio of the measured sound pressure to a referenced pressure of 20
micropascals.  The sound pressure level is expressed in decibels (DB).



         SPL = 20 LOG 10      Sound Pressure A
                     Sound Pressure B



            Sound Pressure A = Measured sound pressure
            Sound Pressure B = Referenced sound pressure
                     (20 Micropascals)



(Ord. 82-7, passed 3-8-82)



§ 95.02  LOUD OR ANNOYING NOISES PROHIBITED.



   No person shall make or cause to be made any noise that unreasonably
annoys, disturbs, injures, or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace,
safety, or welfare of any person or precludes their enjoyment of property or
affects their property's value.  This general prohibition is not limited by
the specific restrictions listed in the following sections of this chapter.



(Ord. 82-7, passed 3-8-82)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.03  RADIOS, AMPLIFIERS, LAWNMOWERS, AND THE LIKE.



   No person shall operate or permit the use or operation of radios,
television sets, musical instruments, tape or record players, amplifiers,
mechanically powered saw, drill, sander, grinder, lawn or garden tool,
lawnmower, snowblower, or any other noise-producing device between the hours
of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. (prevailing local time) in such a manner as to be
plainly audible across property boundaries or through partitions common to
two or more persons within a building.



(Ord. 82-7, passed 3-8-82)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.04  HORNS OR AUDIBLE SIGNALLING DEVICES.



   No person shall operate a horn or other audible signalling device on
any motor vehicle except in an emergency or when required by law.



(Ord. 82-7, passed 3-8-82)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.05  PARTIES AND GATHERINGS.



   No person shall participate in any party or gathering between the hours
of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. (prevailing local time) giving rise to noise that
is plainly audible across property boundaries or between partitions common to
two or more persons within a building.



(Ord. 82-7, passed 3-8-82)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.06  ANIMALS.



   No person shall harbor or keep any animal which by causing frequent or
long continued noise shall disturb or annoy any reasonable person nearby.



(Ord. 82-7, passed 3-8-82)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.07  QUANTITATIVE LIMITS.



   (A)   Motor vehicles.



      (l)   It shall be unlawful for any person to cause the sound
pressure level of the noise emitted during the operation of a light motor
vehicle to exceed 80 DBA in speed zones of 35 miles per hour or less within
the corporate limits of the city.  The sound pressure level measurement
shall be made at a distance of not less than 15 feet from the edge of the
lane of travel of the violator.



      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a light
motor vehicle which causes excessive noise as a result of a defective or
modified exhaust system or as a result of an unnecessary rapid acceleration,
de-acceleration, engine revving, or tire squealing.



   (B)   Stationary source.



      (l)   It shall be unlawful for any person to cause the sound
pressure level to exceed the limits listed below (within the octave-band
breakdown listed in the Appendix) at any point on the boundary of the
property where the person is located.



         (a)   If the person is located within a residential
zone:  55 DBA between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. (prevailing
local time).



         (b)   If the person is located within a commercial
zone:  64 DBA at all times.



         (c)   If the person is located within an industrial
zone:  66 DBA at all times.



      (2)   If the property boundary lies between two zones, the
lower limit shall apply regardless of the zone in which the person creating
the noise is located.



      (3)   In addition to the above, no person within a residential
or a commercial zone shall make or cause to be made any earth-shaking
vibrations perceptible without the aid of instruments beyond the property
boundary of the vibration source.  No person within the industrial zone
shall make or cause to be made any earth-shaking vibrations perceptible with
the aid of instruments beyond the zone boundary of the zone in which the
vibration source is located.



(Ord. 82-7, passed 3-8-82)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.08  PERMITS.



   (A)   The Chief of Police shall have authority to issue permits for:



      (1)   Holidays, celebrations, concerts, parades, or other
special events (public or personal).



      (2)   Persons who demonstrate that bringing the source of
sound or activity for which the permit is sought into compliance with the
provisions of this chapter would constitute an unreasonable hardship on the
applicant, the community, or other persons and that the adverse impact on the
health, safety, and welfare of persons affected by the permit has been
outweighed by the hardship.  Permits may contain any conditions (including a
time limit) that are necessary to limit the adverse impact of the activity.



   (B)   Noncompliance with any condition of the permit shall terminate
it and subject the person holding it to the provisions of this chapter.



   (C)   The Board of Public Works and Safety may issue guidelines
defining the procedures to be followed in applying for a permit and the
specific criteria to be considered in deciding whether to issue a permit.



(Ord. 82-7, passed 3-8-82)



§ 95.09 USE OF ENGINE OR TRANSMISSION BRAKING DEVICES PROHIBITED.



   (A)   The city finds that the use of engine or transmission braking
devices or methods (a/k/a “jake braking” or “dynamic braking”) within
the city limits creates unusual and excessive noise that unreasonably
disturbs and annoys residents.  The prohibition of such devices and methods
is necessary to protect the health, safety and public welfare.



   (B)   No person may slow a vehicle by a device, method or practice
known as engine braking or transmission braking, also referred to as “jake
braking” or “dynamic braking,” whereby rapid downshifting of the
vehicle's engine or a compression release device is used in lieu of applying
a vehicle's wheel brakes, causing loud noises to emit from the vehicle's
engine and exhaust system.  Such braking by any motor vehicle on any public
highway, street, parking lot or alley within the city is declared to be a
public nuisance and is prohibited.



   (C)   The foregoing provision does not apply to emergency vehicles.



(Ord. 02-31, passed 11-25-02)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.10  EXEMPTIONS.



   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the emission of sound
for the purpose of alerting persons to the existence of an emergency or the
emission of sound in the performance of work to prevent or alleviate physical
or property damage threatened or caused by a public calamity or other
emergency.



(Ord. 82-7, passed 3-8-82)



§ 95.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person found in violation of the motor vehicle noise
limits set forth in this chapter shall be fined not less than $10 nor more
than $250.



   (B)   Any person found in violation of any other provision of this
chapter shall be fined not less than $l for the first offense; not less than
$25 for the second offense; and not less than $100 for the third or
subsequent offenses.



   (C)   Each day that a violation is in effect shall constitute a
separate offense.



   (D)   During any trial concerning the provisions of this chapter the
court may admit evidence of the sound pressure level as tested by a sound
level meter which meets or exceeds ANSI specifications for type II equipment.



(Ord. 82-7, passed 3-8-82)



   APPENDIX: OCTAVE-BAND BREAKDOWNS OF DBA LIMITS



   The octave-band breakdowns of the DBA limits used in this chapter shall
be:



   (A)   For a residential zone:  (55 DBA)



 

Octave-Band Center Frequency (HZ)
 
Maximum Boundary SPL (DB)




31.5
 
72


63
 
71


125
 
65


250
 
57


500
 
51


1000
 
45


2000
 
39


4000
 
34


8000
 
32




 



   (B)   For a commercial zone:  (64) DBA



 

Octave-Band Center Frequency (HZ)
 
Maximum Boundary SPL (DB)




31.5
 
79


63
 
78


125
 
73


250
 
67


500
 
61


1000
 
55


2000
 
50


4000
 
46


8000
 
43




 



   (C)   For an industrial zone:  (66 DBA)



 

Octave-Band Center Frequency (HZ)
 
Maximum Boundary SPL (DB)




31.5
 
80


63
 
79


125
 
74


250
 
69


500
 
63


1000
 
57


2000
 
52


4000
 
48


8000
 
45




 



(Ord. 82-7, passed 3-8-82)



CHAPTER 96:  PARKS AND RECREATION



Section



General Provisions



   96.01   Operation of vehicles within public parks



   96.02   Use of alcoholic beverages in city parks



Park District



   96.15   Established



Docks and Boats



   96.25   Docking and tying boats at certain locations prohibited



   96.26   Buildings for cleaning and selling fish prohibited on levee



Brittlebank Park



   96.40   Deposit prohibited



   96.41   Golf prohibited



 



   96.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Joint City-Black Township Park Board, see § 33.085



   Park and Recreation Department, see § 30.02 (B)(2)



   Special Nonreverting Operating Fund for sports, recreation  programs,
and recreational classes and instructions, see § 35.02



   Street and park festivals, see § 97.16



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 96.01  OPERATION OF VEHICLES WITHIN PUBLIC PARKS.



   (A)   The operation of any unlicensed motor vehicle in the public
parks of the city is prohibited.



   (B)   The operation of licensed vehicles in the public parks of the
city is restricted to designated paths, roads, streets, and parking areas.



(Ord. 1300, passed 9-27-71)  Penalty, see § 96.99



Cross-reference:



   Traffic code, see Title VII



§ 96.02  USE OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES IN CITY PARKS.



   No person may have in his possession, or in the passenger compartment
of any motor vehicle he occupies, any alcoholic beverage in an open container
or in a container on which the seal has been broken if that person is:



   (A)   On any parks and recreation facilities (park grounds) operated
by Mount Vernon-Black Township Park and Recreation Board (hereinafter
referred to as Parks Board), within the corporate limits of the city, with
the exception of property leased to a non-municipal entity, or division (B)
of this section. This prohibition does not include persons actively loading
or unloading a boat at the boat ramp at Sherburne Park.



   (B)   (1)   There may be drinking of alcoholic beverages on park
grounds during “permitted events”, which “permitted event” is an
event where alcohol will be sold or otherwise provided under a temporary beer
and wine permit issued by the Indiana Alcohol and Tobacco Commission (IATC)
and when such event has been authorized by the City of Mount Vernon Board of
Public Works and Safety prior to the event.



      (2)   In the event alcohol will be supplied or sold at the
permitted event by a person/entity, at least five business days prior to a
permitted event, the person/entity responsible for the event shall submit a
list of the names and addresses of each person serving alcohol and must also
provide a copy of their license to serve alcohol, as well as the hosting
entity’s temporary permit from 1ATC. Additionally, the person/entity
responsible for the permitted event at which alcoholic beverages will be
served shall provide the city with proof of insurance for public liability
and liquor liability coverage, which shall include proof of both public
liability insurance and liquor liability insurance in an amount not less than
$1,000,000 each, wherein the city/Parks Board are additional named insureds.
The hosting entity shall also provide proof of insurance from any vendor
selling alcohol at the permitted event of liquor liability insurance coverage
naming the city/Parks Board as an additional insured. Any person/entity who
is responsible for the permitted event agrees to indemnify and hold the city
and Parks Board harmless from any loss, damage, or injury of any nature
arising out of or from for their use of the grounds. Use of the grounds, park
and recreation facilities is subject to completion of all other rental/use
forms required by the Parks Board or the Board of Public Works and Safety.
The serving and use of alcohol is subject to Indiana state law and any misuse
shall be prosecuted accordingly. In addition, persons or entities who violate
this section shall be subject to the penalty provisions of § 96.99.



(Ord. 14-16, passed 8-21-14)  Penalty, see § 96.99



PARK DISTRICT



§ 96.15  ESTABLISHED.



   The Common Council hereby establishes a Park District for the city, its
boundaries coinciding with the legal boundaries of the city.



(Res. 679, passed 2-28-49)



DOCKS AND BOATS



§ 96.25  DOCKING AND TYING BOATS AT CERTAIN LOCATIONS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No person, firm, individual, association, or corporation,
shall own, maintain, manage, or use any boat or dock of any kind or
description, used in the catching and cleaning of fish, or the selling of the
same, shall dock or tie a boat at a point nearer than 400 feet downstream
from the intake of the city water works system located in the Ohio River.



   (B)   No person, firm, individual, association, or corporation,
shall own, maintain, manage, or use any boat or dock of any kind or
description, used in the catching and cleaning of fish, or the selling of the
same, shall dock or tie a boat permanently or temporarily at a point nearer
than 1200 feet upstream from the intake of the city water works system
located in the Ohio River.



(Ord. 657, passed 8-11-47)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.26  BUILDINGS FOR CLEANING AND SELLING FISH PROHIBITED ON LEVEE.



   No person, firm, individual, association, or corporation, shall own,
maintain, manage, or use any buildings of any kind or description on the
levee in the city, for the use of cleaning and selling fish, or any other
article of any other kind or description.



(Ord. 657, passed 8-11-47)  Penalty, see § 96.99



BRITTLEBANK PARK



§ 96.40  DEPOSIT PROHIBITED.



   No person shall cause to be intentionally deposited on the grounds
within the boundaries if Brittlebank Park in the city any object which could
cause a hazard during maintenance and/or mowing of the park.



(Ord. 96-3, passed 2-26-96)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.41  GOLF PROHIBITED.



   No person shall use the premises of Brittlebank Park for the purposes
of playing or practicing golf.



(Ord. 96-3, passed 2-26-96)



§ 96.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provision of §
96.01 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and be punished by a fine of not less
than $1 and no more than $10. 



(Ord. 1300, passed 9-27-71)



   (B)   Any person, firm, individual, association, or corporation
violating any of the provisions of §§ 96.25 and 96.26 shall be found guilty
thereof, and shall forfeit and pay a penalty in a sum of not less than $1 or
more than $10. 



(Ord. 657, passed 8-11-47)



   (C)   A person who violates §§ 96.02, 96.40, or 96.41 may be fined
an amount not to exceed $100 per offense.



(Ord. 96-3, passed 2-26-96; Am. Ord. 96-17, passed 7-8-96; Am. Ord. 14-16,
passed 8-21-14)



CHAPTER 97:  STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



Section



General Provisions



   97.01   Removing sod or earth



   97.02   Hauling loose material; removal of debris on street



   97.03   Removal of foreign substances from city right-of-way



   97.04   Removal of snow and ice



   97.05   Throwing injurious material on streets and sidewalks



   97.06   Injury to sidewalk or driveway



   97.07   Transporting petroleum or chemicals



   97.08   Vehicles with lugs



   97.09   Obstructing alleys



   97.10   Littering



   97.11   Dragging



   97.12   Throwing slippery substances on sidewalk



   97.13   Fuel on street



   97.14   Slop water or waste



   97.15   Manure



   97.16   Festivals



   97.17   Repair and maintenance of sidewalks



   97.18   Obstruction of sidewalks, exceptions



Excavations



   97.25   Application for required permit; authority



   97.26   Fee



   97.27   Public safety



   97.28   Backfill and repair



   97.29   Emergency cuts



   97.30   Indemnification



   97.31   Remedy for failure to repair



   97.32   Approved applications



   97.33   Disbursement of fee



Sewer Line Trenches



   97.40   Replacing dirt in trenches after connections required



   97.41   Responsibility for work done



Vacating Streets and Public Ways



   97.50   Expenses to be paid by petitioner



   97.51   Reserving easements



   97.52   Determination of charge for improvements



   97.53   Warranty



Parades



   97.60   Notifying Chief of Police of pertinent information



   97.61   Throwing or distributing from moving vehicles



   97.62   Discharging or detonating firearms or explosives



 



   97.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Street and alley vacations, see T.S.O. VIII



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 97.01  REMOVING SOD OR EARTH.



   No person shall dig, cut or remove any sod or earth from any street or
alley or other public place within the city without permission of the Board
of Public Works and Safety, or from any premises not his own without the
consent of the owner thereof.



(Ord. 75-25, passed 7-28-75)  Penalty, see § 97.99



Cross-reference:



   Excavations, see §§ 97.25 through 97.33



§ 97.02  HAULING LOOSE MATERIAL; REMOVAL OF DEBRIS ON STREET.



   All persons hauling dirt, sand, gravel, rubbish, or loose material of
any kind through streets or alleys shall haul the same in vehicles provided
with tight boxes or beds so constructed as to prevent the same from falling
on or becoming scattered on the streets or alleys.  Any materials which
shall fall from any vehicle or which shall be deposited on the street or
alley in any manner shall be removed immediately by the person in charge of
that vehicle.



(Ord. 75-25, passed 7-28-75)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.03  REMOVAL OF FOREIGN SUBSTANCES FROM CITY RIGHT-OF-WAY.



   No landowner, contractor, tenant, or other person owning or having
possession or control of real estate shall permit dirt, mud, rock,
vegetation, or other material or substance from real estate he owns or which
is in his possession to remain on the right-of-way for a public street or
alley in the city or on property owned by the city for more than 24 hours
after he has received notice from a city police officer or other authorized
city official to remove the dirt or material or substance from the
right-of-way or city property.



(Ord. 79-44, passed 10-15-79)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.04  REMOVAL OF SNOW AND ICE.



   (A)   For the purpose of this section, OCCUPANT shall mean the
person occupying for business, residence, or other purposes the first floor
of any building situated on the premises so occupied, and if the first floor
of any building is not occupied then the premises shall be deemed to be
unoccupied and the owners thereof shall be required to remove snow and ice.



   (B)   The occupant of premises or the owners of unoccupied premises
abutting upon any public sidewalk shall remove the snow or ice from that
sidewalk in front of those premises.



   (C)   In case the snow and ice on the sidewalk shall be frozen so
hard that it cannot be removed without injury to the pavement or in case the
weather conditions are such that cleaning of the sidewalk at such time is not
practicable, the occupant of premises and the owner of unoccupied premises
shall within a reasonable time cause the sidewalk abutting such premises to
be sprinkled with ashes, salt, sand, sawdust, or other similar suitable
material so as to render such sidewalk safe for travel and shall, as soon
thereafter as the weather may permit, thoroughly clean the sidewalk.



(Ord. 75-25, passed 7-28-75)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.05  THROWING INJURIOUS MATERIAL ON STREETS AND SIDEWALKS.



   (A)   No person shall throw or deposit any tacks, glass, or rubbish
of any kind or character upon any street, sidewalk, alley, or other public
place.



   (B)   No person shall throw any stone or other hard substance along,
across, over, or upon any street or alley in the city.



(Ord. 75-25, passed 7-28-75)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.06  INJURY TO SIDEWALK OR DRIVEWAY.



   No person shall break or otherwise injure any sidewalk or driveway
except as otherwise provided by this chapter.



(Ord. 75-25, passed 7-28-75)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.07  TRANSPORTING PETROLEUM OR CHEMICALS.



   No person shall transport or cause to be transported any liquid
products, petroleum, or any chemical in any manner other than in tight
packages, vessels, or tanks along or across any asphalt, concrete, or any
other improved street or alley within the city or drain any tank or vessel
into a can, bucket, or other vessel upon any street or alley or place any
lime mortar or mortar box, or to spill, throw, or place any injurious
chemical upon, along, or across any street or alley.



(Ord. 75-25, passed 7-28-75)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.08  VEHICLES WITH LUGS.



   (A)   No person shall propel, haul, or draw or cause to be
propelled, hauled, or drawn any portable traction engine or any other heavy
conveyance on wheels having cleats, lugs, spikes, or other device projecting
therefrom upon, over, across, or along any improved street or alley in the
city.



   (B)   Any person having charge of any vehicle of that kind may cross
any street or alley at any of its intersections if the person shall first
place or cause to be placed on the surface of the street wooden boards at
least two inches in thickness and of a width equal to the width of the wheels
of the vehicle.  The boards shall be laid at the expense of the person and
shall be removed immediately after being used for that purpose.



(Ord. 75-25, passed 7-28-75)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.09  OBSTRUCTING ALLEYS.



   No person shall place, keep, or cause to be placed or kept any ash
barrel, box, bin, pit, coal, wood, or other article in or upon any alley in a
manner as to obstruct the same.



(Ord. 75-25, passed 7-28-75)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.10  LITTERING.



   N person shall put, throw, dump, leave, or deposit, or cause to by put,
thrown, dumped, left, or deposited, any paper, boxes, tin cans, brush, brick,
wood, glass, dirt, sand, gravel, grass, leaves, or debris or rubbish of any
kind or character whatsoever, in or upon or within the limits of any street,
alley, sidewalk, thoroughfare, or public way in the city.



(Ord. 75-25, passed 7-28-75)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.11  DRAGGING.



   No person shall drag or cause or permit to be dragged over or upon any
street or alley any substance or thing whatsoever, or allow any load or bed
of any vehicle to rub upon, touch, or drag on the street or alley.



(Ord. 75-25, passed 7-28-75)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.12  THROWING SLIPPERY SUBSTANCES ON SIDEWALK.



   No person shall throw, deposit, or cause to be thrown or deposited,
upon any sidewalk any orange or banana peel, skin or rind or any fruit or
vegetable peel, skin, rind, or any other slippery thing or substance.



(Ord. 75-25, passed 7-28-75)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.13  FUEL ON STREET.



   No person shall place or deposit or allow to be placed or deposited,
any coal, firewood, or other fuel upon any street, sidewalk, or alley of the
city or permit the same to remain upon such street, sidewalk, or alley more
than 48 hours from the time of its deposit.  When the same is allowed to
remain upon such street, sidewalk, or alley at night, warning lights shall be
placed thereon from one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before
sunrise.



(Ord. 75-25, passed 7-28-75)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.14  SLOP WATER OR WASTE.



   Slop water, wash water, waste water, or filth or garbage of any kind
whatever which shall be caused or permitted to flow from any house or
premises into or upon any street, sidewalk, alley, or gutter and all slop
water, wash water, waste water, or filth, offal, or garbage of any kind
whatever which shall be thrown or placed in or upon any street, sidewalk,
alley, or gutter are declared nuisances.  All persons having such
accumulations shall deposit the same either in proper sinks constructed upon
the premises or by causing all such accumulations to be kept in casks or
other vessels and deposited in a suitable place outside of the city.



(Ord. 75-25, passed 7-28-75)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.15  MANURE.



   No person shall place, or cause to be placed, any manure in or upon any
open alley or space adjoining or near any street, sidewalk, or alley 
without confining such manure in a manner so as to prevent the same from
falling into or upon or being scattered or thrown into or upon such street,
sidewalk, or alley.  Every person keeping or harboring any horse, mule, cow,
fowl, or animal of any kind whatever shall keep or cause to be kept all
manure which shall accumulate from such animal securely and closely confined
in such manner as will prevent it from being scattered from such place of
deposit into or upon any street, sidewalk, alley, or gutter.



(Ord. 75-25, passed 7-28-75)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.16  FESTIVALS.



   (A)   When the Board of Public Works and Safety designates an area
for use for a festival or celebration, the following rules shall apply within
the designated area:



      (1)   No bicycles, skateboards, coasters, scooters, motorized
toy vehicles, or similar devices shall be operated in the streets, upon the
sidewalks, or in any place within the area designated as being reserved for
the event, unless the device is a registered entrant in an authorized parade
or a mobility device needed by a disabled person.



      (2)   No animals or reptiles shall be permitted within the
designated area, whether or not on a leash, unless the animal is a registered
entrant in an authorized parade or exhibit, or unless the animal is a guide
or service animal for a visually or hearing impaired person.



   (B)   The area designated for the event shall be clearly marked with
barricades, ropes, snow fences, or other barriers so that it is clear that
the area is set aside for the event.



   (C)   If a person is asked to cease performance of any of the
conduct enumerated in division (A) above by any official of the organization
sponsoring the event, the person shall be required to comply with such
request or leave the designated area.  If the person refuses to cease the
conduct and refuses to leave the area, law enforcement officials shall, upon
request, remove the person from the designated area, and that person shall
not be permitted to return to the designated area without the permission of
the event sponsors for the duration of the event and will be subject to the
fines set forth in § 97.99.



   (D)   Officials of the sponsoring event shall be clearly identified
by distinctive shirts, badges, hats, or other means of identification if the
official acts in a supervisory capacity within the designated area.



(Ord. 09-22, passed 8-10-09)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.17  REPAIR AND MAINTENANCE OF SIDEWALKS.



   (A)   Repairs and replacements. Every owner or occupant of any house
or other building, and any owner of any vacant lot within the city, shall
maintain and keep the sidewalks in front of such house, building or vacant
lot in good repair. Replacement of a damaged or defective sidewalk shall be
the responsibility of the owner or occupant of any house or other building or
the owner of any vacant lot within the city.



   (B)   Penalty. Any person or entity neglecting or refusing to comply
with the provisions of this section, or neglecting or refusing to put the
sidewalk in front of any house, building or vacant lot owned or occupied by
him or her in repair after having received notice from the Building
Commissioner to do so, shall be subject to general penalty provisions of this
code in § 97.99.



(Ord. 10-03, passed 2-22-10)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.18  OBSTRUCTION OF SIDEWALKS, EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   Obstructions shall be unlawful. It shall be unlawful for any
person to obstruct any sidewalk by placing thereon or permitting to remain
thereon or therein anything which will obstruct free use thereof by
pedestrians.



   (B)   Merchant regulations. Notwithstanding division (A) above, it
shall not be a violation of said section for a merchant to display his or her
wares on the sidewalk immediately in front of his or her place of business
located within the business section of the city so long as there remains at
least six feet in even width parallel to the street unobstructed for
pedestrian movement along the sidewalk and at least three feet in even width
every ten feet perpendicular to the street unobstructed for pedestrian
movement across the sidewalk from the street. However, no obstruction may
exist within three feet of the curb line of the street.



   (C)   Not-for-profit fund-raising. Notwithstanding division (A)
above, any social, educational, charitable, religious or other not-for-profit
organization may conduct fund-raising sales and other activities which do not
violate the restrictions of division (B), provided that they obtain the
consent of any place of business in front of whose business such activity
will be conducted and that such activity shall be conducted during normal
business hours.



   (D)   Barricaded sidewalks for special events. The prohibitions and
requirements of this section shall not apply to the use of sidewalks by
vendors, displayers, other persons or organizations during special events for
which the Board of Public Works and Safety has authorized the barricade of
the sidewalk for the special event. During such special event, the vendor,
displayer, person or organization using the sidewalk shall not block a
business entrance or exit.



   (E)   Penalty. Any person neglecting or refusing to comply with the
provisions of this section shall be subject to general penalty provisions of
this code in § 97.99.



(Ord. 10-03, passed 2-22-10)  Penalty, see § 97.99



EXCAVATIONS



§ 97.25  APPLICATION FOR REQUIRED PERMIT; AUTHORITY.



   (A)   Any person, firm, or corporation desiring to cut or excavate
the surface of any public street, alley, or parking lot in the city shall
first obtain a permit from the city.



   (B)   In the case of an emergency, approval can be given by the
Street Commissioner after the proper application has been completed and the
fee is paid.  The emergency application would be presented to the Board of
Public Works and Safety at the next regularly scheduled meeting for
acknowledgment.  EMERGENCY is defined in § 97.29.



   (C)   Application for a permit shall be made not less than ten
working days before the proposed cut or excavation is to be made. The
application shall include a sketch or drawing showing the location,
dimensions of the cut or excavation, and a statement of the estimated length
of time required for completion of the work.



   (D)   The Board of Public Works and Safety of the city shall have
the authority to:



      (1)   Issue street cutting permits on behalf of the city to
persons, firms, or corporations requesting permission to cut or excavate
public streets, alleys, parking lots, or public right-of-way.



      (2)   Establish forms for applications and permits and may
establish any additional requirements it finds desirable for the protection
of the city or its residents, provided that the application and requirements
established by the Board may not reduce the requirements of this subchapter.



      (3)   Require the person, firm, or corporation making the
application to meet and consult with the Board, or a representative of its
departments or utilities, on all matters relating to the proposed cut or
excavation.



(Ord. 96-13, passed 5-13-96)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.26  FEE.



   Any person, firm, or corporation desiring to cut or excavate the
surface of any public street, alley, parking lot, or public right-of-way of
the city shall pay a fee of $50, plus $5 per linear foot 24 wide or less, or
$5 per square yard with each application for permit. Each separate cut or
excavation shall require a separate permit and fee.  Any department of the
city shall not be required to pay the fee required under this section but
shall be required to abide by all other terms of this subchapter.



(Ord. 96-13, passed 5-13-96)



§ 97.27  PUBLIC SAFETY.



   Any cut or excavation of the surface of any public street, alley,
parking lot, or public right-of-way shall be performed in a responsible
manner with the proper barricades and warning lights as is necessary to warn
travelers upon or users of those public streets, alleys, parking lots, or
rights-of-way of the presence or location of any cuts or excavations.  The
applicant shall be responsible for these warnings.



(Ord. 96-13, passed 5-13-96)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.28  BACKFILL AND REPAIR.



   (A)   All cuts or excavations shall immediately be properly
back-filled with granular or equivalent materials and compacted to prevent
settling.



   (B)   All asphalted, chip and seal, or concrete surfaces shall be
restored to their condition prior to any cuts or excavations (pre-existing
condition) within seven working days after completion of work. 
Consideration may be given for inclement weather conditions.



   (C)   Each person, firm, or corporation making any cut or excavation
shall be responsible for the backfill and repairs to that cut or excavation
for a period of three years after the repair is completed.  The applicant
shall perform all work necessary to continuously maintain the cut or
excavation in its preexisting condition during the three-year repair period.



   (D)   All cuts or excavations, and the backfill and repair, shall be
subject to inspection by the city.



   (E)   The applicant shall contact the appropriate city department
head prior to backfill for inspection.



(Ord. 96-13, passed 5-13-96)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.29  EMERGENCY CUTS.



   (A)   An emergency cut or excavation for purposes of this subchapter
is a cut or excavation made necessary by reason of or resulting from some
accident or unforeseen cause or event requiring immediate repairs or work to
be performed upon facilities located in, under, or upon a public street,
alley, parking lot, or public right-of-way in order to avoid a health hazard
or damage or injury to life or property.



   (B)   Any person, firm, or corporation making any emergency cut or
excavation shall give the Street Commissioner the most practicable notice of
the emergency and their intent to make any proposed cut or excavation of any
emergency nature and shall give, as soon as practicable, to the
Clerk-Treasurer a written list of cuts or excavations made or to be made
along with a sketch or drawing and permit fee for each cut or excavation.



   (C)   Except as to the ten-day notice requirement set forth in §
97.25, any person, firm, or corporation making any emergency cut or
excavation shall comply with all other provisions of this subchapter.



(Ord. 96-13, passed 5-13-96)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.30  INDEMNIFICATION.



   Each person, firm, or corporation in making any cut or excavation in
any public street, alley, parking lot, or right-of-way shall indemnify,
defend, and hold the city harmless against any and all costs, including
expenses, claims, damages, demands, liabilities, and reasonable attorney fees
for injuries to or death of any persons or damage to property arising out of
the cut or excavation.



(Ord. 96-13, passed 5-13-96)



§ 97.31  REMEDY FOR FAILURE TO REPAIR.



   (A)   If any person, firm, or corporation making a cut or excavation
in any public street, alley, parking lot, or public right-of-way of the city,
fails to backfill or repair the cut or excavation in accordance with the
terms of this subchapter, the city may give notice to that person, firm, or
corporation that repairs to the cut or excavation must be completed within
five days or the city will make necessary repairs and collect the cost of
those repairs from the person, firm, or corporation making and failing to
repair the cut or excavation.



   (B)   The city's election to proceed under this section shall be a
remedy in addition to and not affecting the imposition of any fine for
failure to comply with any other provision of this subchapter.



(Ord. 96-13, passed 5-13-96)



§ 97.32  APPROVED APPLICATIONS.



   (A)   Applications will be maintained in the Clerk-Treasure's office
for not less than three years.



   (B)   The Street Commissioner will be furnished a copy of each
approved street cutting permit from the Clerk-Treasurer.



(Ord. 96-13, passed 5-13-96)



§ 97.33  DISBURSEMENT OF FEE.



   (A)   Fifty dollars of each permit fee shall be deposited into the
city general fund for administrative services.



   (B)   The fee collected on each linear foot or square yard shall be
deposited into the city motor vehicle highway fund.



   (C)   All fines imposed pursuant to the subchapter shall be
deposited into the city motor vehicle highway fund.



(Ord. 96-13, passed 5-13-96)



SEWER LINE TRENCHES



§ 97.40  REPLACING DIRT IN TRENCHES AFTER CONNECTIONS REQUIRED.



   All persons hereafter digging trenches in the streets of the city, for
the purpose of making connections from the sewage system or sewer lines of
residential or business property with the sewers or sewer lines of the city
or the sewer lines of the sewage disposal system of the city shall replace
the dirt in those trenches after the connections are made so that the dirt
foundation under the streets is in substantially the same condition as it was
before the trenches were dug, and so that no humps or holes are left in the
street as the result of digging or replacing the dirt in those trenches.



(Ord. 847, passed 12-3-56)  Penalty, see § 97.99



Cross-reference:



   Sewer tap-ins, see §§ 50.198



§ 97.41  RESPONSIBILITY FOR WORK DONE.



   All persons who authorize the work set out in § 97.40 or who own the
residential or business property in which the sewage system or sewer lines
are connected with the sewers or sewer lines of the city as set out in §
97.40 shall be responsible for any work set out in § 97.40 in which they
have so authorized or which work has been performed in the connecting of the
sewage system or sewer lines of residential or business property that they
own with the sewers or sewer lines of the city or the sewer lines of the
sewage disposal system of the city.  These persons shall be liable under the
terms of § 97.40 the same as though they had individually performed the work
set out in that section if the work is improperly performed as set out in §
97.40.



(Ord. 847, passed 12-3-56)



VACATING STREETS AND PUBLIC WAYS



§ 97.50  EXPENSES TO BE PAID BY PETITIONER.



   All expenses related to the vacation of any public way including but
not limited to, the preparation of petitions, notices, ordinances, and any
title work, surveys, or other information or documents required by law or
deemed appropriate by the city shall be paid by the petitioner.



(Ord. 84-12, passed 6-11-84)



§ 97.51  RESERVING EASEMENTS.



   The city shall reserve easements for any water, sanitary sewer, or
storm sewer lines in the area to be vacated and may reserve an easement to
construct those lines if the Common Council believes the reservation to be
appropriate.



(Ord. 84-12, passed 6-11-84)



§ 97.52  DETERMINATION OF CHARGE FOR IMPROVEMENTS.



   The city may impose a charge to be determined by the Board of Public
Works and Safety before passage of an ordinance of vacation for any
improvements such as improved streets or sidewalks maintained by the city
within the area to be vacated.



(Ord. 84-12, passed 6-11-84)



§ 97.53  WARRANTY.



   No ordinance vacating any public way or any other action related to the
vacation shall be construed as a warranty of title to the vacated area nor a
warranty against the existence of other easements or rights-of-way within
that area.



(Ord. 84-12, passed 6-11-84)



PARADES



§ 97.60  NOTIFYING CHIEF OF POLICE OF PERTINENT INFORMATION.



   Any person, firm, or organization desiring to conduct a parade on any
public street in the city shall notify the Chief of Police of the parade
route, starting and ending time, the approximate number of parade units,
sponsoring agent or person, a responsible person to contact regarding the
parade and any other information as the Chief of Police may require to
adequately provide for traffic control and public safety.



(Ord. 75-3, passed 1-27-75)



§ 97.61  THROWING OR DISTRIBUTING FROM MOVING VEHICLES.



   No person may throw or distribute from any moving vehicle, any candy,
gum, or any other article likely to attract children into the parade route or
into the path of parade vehicles or units.



(Ord. 75-3, passed 1-27-75)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.62  DISCHARGING OR DETONATING FIREARMS OR EXPLOSIVES.



   No person may, while participating in parade fire, discharge, or
detonate any gun, cannon, blank firing devise, or explosive of any nature.



(Ord. 75-3, passed 1-27-75)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which no
penalty is otherwise provided, shall be fined not more than $200 for each
offense.  A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day that a
violation occurs or continues.



   (B)   Whoever violates any provision of §§ 97.01, 97.02, 97.04
through 97.15 shall be fined not more than $300 and costs.  Each day any
such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense.



(Ord. 75-25, passed 7-28-75)



   (C)   (1)   Any person, firm, or corporation in violation of any
provision of §§ 97.25 through 97.33 shall be fined not more than $2,500 for
each offense.



      (2)   A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day
that a violation occurs or continues on each separate cut or excavation.



      (3)   No new permits shall be issued to any person, firm, or
corporation who has an unpaid bill for failure to repair a cut or excavation
or an unpaid fine for failure to comply with imposed requirements.



(Ord. 96-13, passed 5-13-96)



   (D)   Whoever violates any provision of § 97.16 shall be fined in
an amount not to exceed $50.00 for the first offense and a fine not to exceed
$250.00 for each subsequent offense during a festival or celebration.



(Ord. 09-22, passed 8-10-09)



CHAPTER 98:  WEEDS



Section



Weed Control



   98.01   Definitions



   98.02   Weeds, grass, and rank vegetation to be cut and removed



   98.03   Notice of violation



   98.04   Removal by city; collection of costs



   98.05   Lien upon property



   98.06   Appeal rights



WEED CONTROL



§ 98.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   OCCUPANT.  The person who resides in, on, or occupies real estate.



   OWNER.  The person listed as owner of real estate as shown on the
records of the Posey County Auditor.



   PERSON.  An individual, an incorporated or unincorporated organization
or association, a trustee or legal representative, an agent, the state, an
agency of the state, or a political subdivision.



   WEEDS, GRASS AND RANK VEGETATION.  Any of the following:



      (1)   Any plant or vegetative matter, not cultivated in plant
beds by the owner or occupant, and not including trees which are being
cultivated by the owner or occupant, which exceeds the height of eight inches;



      (2)   The existence of any detrimental plant as defined in
I.C. 15-16-8-1, as may be amended from time to time, regardless of height;



      (3)   Fallen trees, stumps over 36 inches, dead trees, cut
plant or vegetative matter;



      (4)   Any tree, plant or vegetative matter which obstruct any
public way, including streets, alleys and sidewalks, or cause a visual
barrier for use of the public way or safety hazard; or



      (5)   Any plant or vegetative matter which is a safety hazard
or health hazard.



(Ord. 95-26, passed 12-11-95)



§ 98.02  WEEDS, GRASS, AND RANK VEGETATION TO BE CUT AND REMOVED.



   Each and every person owning, occupying, controlling or having a
substantial interest in any real estate within the corporate limits of the
city, shall be required to cut and remove all weeds, grass, or other rank
vegetation from any real estate within the city and to cut and remove all
weeds, grass, and other vegetation from gutters and sidewalks on or adjoining
the real estate and shall be required to cut and remove all weeds, grass, and
other rank vegetation from streets and alleys fronting, abutting or adjoining
the real estate to the center line of the streets and alleys.  Failure to
maintain real estate pursuant to this section shall constitute a violation of
this chapter.



(Ord. 1118, passed 6-12-67; Am. Ord. 95-26, passed 12-11-95)



§ 98.03  NOTICE OF VIOLATION.



   (A)   When it shall come to the attention of the City of Mt. Vernon,
IN (hereinafter referred to as city) that weeds grass, or other rank
vegetation are growing upon real estate within the corporate limits of the
city, in violation of this chapter, the city code enforcement officer, or
other designated city officer shall issue a ten-day written notice to cut and
remove those weeds, grass, or other rank vegetation and the notice shall be
served upon the landowner by personal service or by first class mail, at the
last known address of the landowner. The notice must be served to the owner
of record, in a sole ownership of the property, or at least one of the owners
in a multi-owner property. The address to be used is as indicated in the
records of the County Auditor as of the date of the notice.



   (B)   The notice shall list the location of the real estate
concerned, require abatement of the violation within ten days of the date of
the notice and briefly describe the enforcement and collection procedures.
The notice shall also notify the owner that a fine shall be assessed as
follows for each parcel of real estate in violation of this chapter.



      (1)   First failure by owner or the occupant to abate a
violation within the five day period during a calendar year:  $25 fine;



      (2)   Second failure by owner or the occupant to abate a
violation within the five day period during a calendar year: $100 fine;



      (3)   Third failure by owner or the occupant to abate a
violation within the five day period during a calendar year: $250 fine.



      (4)   Fourth and each subsequent failure by owner or the
occupant to abate a violation within the five day period during a calendar
year: $750 fine.



   (C)   If an initial notice of the violation of this section issued
under § 98.03(A) was provided by first class mail or personal service, a
continuous abatement notice may be posted at the property at the time of
abatement instead of issued by first class mail or equivalent service as
required under § 98.03(A). A continuous abatement notice serves as notice to
the real property owner the each subsequent violation during the same year of
which the initial notice of  the violation was provided may be abated by the
municipality or its contractors.



(Ord. 1118, passed 6-12-67; Am. Ord. 95-26, passed 12-11-95; Am. Ord. 13-22,
passed 10-3-13; Am. Ord. 2016-3A, passed 3-17-16)



§ 98.04  REMOVAL BY CITY; COLLECTION OF COSTS.



   (A)   If the landowner or occupant failed to abate the violation
within the time prescribed, the City Code Enforcement Officer, or other
designated City officer shall issue a written work order to the City of Mt.
Vernon Motor Vehicle/Highway Department.  The Motor Vehicle/Highway
Department shall cut and remove, or have cut and removed, the weeds, grass or
other rank vegetation.  The Motor Vehicle/Highway Department shall, upon
abating the violation, furnish to the Clerk-Treasurer and the City Code
Enforcement Officer, or other designated City officer, a written statement of
costs incurred in abating the violation. The City Code Enforcement Officer,
or other designated City officer shall provide to the owner and occupant a
certified statement of the costs  incurred  by the  Motor Vehicle/Highway
Department and the City Code Enforcement Officer, or other designated City
officer for the cutting and removal, or the hiring thereof, of the weeds,
grass and rank vegetation including administrative costs, attorney fees, and
appropriate fine, which statement shall be delivered to the owner and
occupant of the real estate by personal service or by first class mail.  The
owner shall have 30 days from the date of the notice within which to pay that
amount at the Office of the City of Mt. Vernon, Indiana Clerk-Treasurer. The
address to be used is an indicated in the records of the County Auditor as of
the date of the notice.



   (B)   If the owner fails to pay the sum within the time prescribed,
a certified copy of the statement of costs shall be filed in the Auditor’s
Office of Posey County, and the Auditor shall place the amount so claimed on
the tax duplicate of the lands affected by the cutting and removal of those
weeds, grass, or other rank vegetation, and the same shall be collected as
taxes are collected, and when so collected, shall be disbursed to the General
Fund of the city.  The costs due and owing to the City shall bear interest
at the rate of 8% per annum from the date of the certification, if not paid
within ten days, until paid in full, for the costs certified concerning
cutting and removal of the weeds, grass or rank vegetation.



   (C)   The amounts collected hereunder, for the costs certified
concerning cutting and removal of the weeds, grass or rank vegetation, shall
be disbursed to the Mt. Vernon Highway fund and administrative costs,
interest and fines shall be disbursed to the City’s General Fund.



(Ord. 1118, passed 6-12-67; Am. Ord. 95-26, passed 12-11-95; Am. Ord. 13-22,
passed 10-3-13; Am. Ord. 2016-3A, passed 3-17-16)



§ 98.05  LIEN ON PROPERTY.



   The cost of cutting and removing the weeds, grass, or other rank
vegetation, administrative costs, fines and interest shall be a lien upon the
real estate affected and shall also be enforceable and collected as provided
by I.C. 36-7-10.1-4.



(Ord. 1118, passed 6-12-67; Am. Ord. 95-26, passed 12-11-95; Am. Ord.
2016-3A, passed 3-17-16)



§ 98.06  APPEAL RIGHTS.



   An appeal of the written removal notice issued pursuant to this chapter
must be made in writing within five days of the date of the removal notice
and must be submitted to the Board of Public Works and Safety which shall set
this matter for hearing.  An appeal of the certification of costs issued
pursuant to this chapter must be made in writing within five days of the date
of the certification of costs and must be submitted to the Board of Public
Works and Safety which shall set the matter for hearing. Following the
hearing, the Board of Public Works and Safety shall issue its written
findings.  All appeals from the written findings of the Board of Public
Works and Safety shall be made to Courts of competent jurisdiction within ten
days of the date of the findings.



(Ord. 95-26, passed 12-11-95)



CHAPTER 99:  TIRE DISPOSAL



Section



   99.01   Definitions



   99.02   Applicability



   99.03   Long-term storage of waste tires prohibited



   99.04   Open storage of tires is prohibited



   99.05   Retail and wholesale tire establishments



   99.06   Enforcement and inspection



   99.07   Entry upon property



 



   99.99   Penalty



§ 99.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   NEW TIRE.  A tire which has never been placed on a vehicle wheel rim.



   PERSON.  An individual, entity, corporation, partnership, or an
unincorporated association.



   REMANUFACTURED TIRE.  A waste tire which has been recapped, retreaded,
or regrooved and which has not been placed on the wheel of a motor vehicle.



   TIRE.  A continuous, solid or pneumatic rubber covering designed to
encircle a wheel of a vehicle, trailer, or other implement.  This definition
shall include new tires, waste tires, and remanufactured tires.



   WASTE TIRE.  A tire that is not suitable for the tire's original
purpose because of wear, damage, or defect.  This definition includes a tire
that has been shredded, chopped, drilled with holes, or otherwise altered for
recycling, disposal, or any other purpose.  It shall also mean any used tire
which is not being held for immediate sale at retail or wholesale.



(Ord. 96-40, passed 11-25-96)



§ 99.02  APPLICABILITY.



   This chapter shall apply to all property, including commercial,
industrial, or residential located within the city.



(Ord. 96-40, passed 11-25-96)



§ 99.03  LONG-TERM STORAGE OF WASTE TIRES PROHIBITED.



   The long-term storage of waste tires is prohibited within the corporate
limits of the city.  For purposes of this chapter, LONG-TERM is defined as
any period longer than the time waste tires are  stored awaiting pick-up
and/or removal by a waste disposal firm, which in no event shall exceed
thirty days.  Each owner or possessor of waste tires shall keep a record
from which it can be readily determined the day that each individual waste
tire came into such person's premises. Any waste tire existing on premises
for which a record of its arrival on the premises is not maintained shall
conclusively be presumed to have been stored in excess of thirty days in
violation of this chapter.



(Ord. 96-40, passed 11-25-96)  Penalty, see § 99.99



§ 99.04  OPEN STORAGE OF TIRES IS PROHIBITED.



   Open storage of tires is prohibited.  OPEN STORAGE shall mean any
means of storage whereby tires are exposed to rain or can accumulate water.



(Ord. 96-40, passed 11-25-96)  Penalty, see § 99.99



§ 99.05  RETAIL AND WHOLESALE TIRE ESTABLISHMENTS.



   New, manufactured, and used tires which are intended for sale, at
retail or wholesale, for use as tires may be stored on the site of the retail
or wholesale establishment without limitation as to time of storage.



(Ord. 96-40, passed 11-25-96)



§ 99.06  ENFORCEMENT AND INSPECTION.



   The responsibility for inspection and enforcement shall be shared
equally among the Fire Department, Police Department, the City Building
Commissioner, and the County Health Department.



(Ord. 96-40, passed 11-25-96)



§ 99.07  ENTRY UPON PROPERTY.



   (A)   If a condition violating the terms of this chapter exists on
real property within the city, officers or agents of the city may enter onto
that property and take appropriate action to bring the property into
compliance [with this chapter].  All persons holding a substantial interest
in the property must be given a reasonable opportunity to bring the property
into compliance, which in no event shall be longer than seven days.  If
action to bring compliance is taken by the city, the expense involved,
including city attorney fees and court costs, shall be made a lien against
the property and collected in the same manner as delinquent taxes on property
are collected.



   (B)   (1)   Notwithstanding the provisions of division (A) above,
the city is specifically authorized to negotiate an agreed order or other
written undertaking with any person found to have violated this chapter. 
Such agreed order shall provide for a remediation plan and establish specific
time limits for the implementation of such plan and shall contain specified
penalties for the failure to meet those time limits or any other terms of
such agreed order.



      (2)   Enforcement under this section shall abate during the
period covered by any agreed order, so long as the terms and time limits
contained in the agreed order are being fulfilled and no additional
violations of this chapter occur on the subject property. All such agreed
orders shall be approved on behalf of the city by the Building Commissioner,
Fire Chief, Police Chief, and County Health Officer, or their respective
designees.



   (C)   The provisions of this chapter are in addition to, and not
exclusive of or intended to exclude, any other remedies available to the city
concerning violation of this chapter or other state, local, or federal laws,
rules, or regulations concerning tires.



(Ord. 96-40, passed 11-25-96)



§ 99.99  PENALTY.



   Any person who shall be found to have violated any provision of this
chapter shall be subject to a fine of not less than $200 and not more than
$1,000 for each offense.  A separate and distinct offense shall be deemed to
have been committed for each and every day on which any person shall be
guilty of such violation.



(Ord. 96-40, passed 11-25-96)



CHAPTER 100:  ALARMS



Section



   100.01   Definitions



   100.02   Permitted devices



   100.03   Monitoring system



   100.04   Permit required



   100.05   Application for permit



   100.06   Local alarms



   100.07   Testing or repairing equipment



   100.08   Fines applicable for false alarms



   100.09   Revocation of permit



 



   100.99   Penalty



§ 100.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALARM CONDITIONS.  Alarms activated by unlawful violation of a user's
property or other violations that the systems were designed to protect
against, acts of God, or violent conditions, or by outside agencies not under
the control of the owner, lessee, or his or her employee or agent.



   ALARM EQUIPMENT SUPPLIER.  Any person, firm, or corporation that
sells, leases, or installs automatic protection devices or signaling devices
which transmit alarms upon receipt of a stimulus from a detection apparatus
or a manually operated system.



   ALARM SYSTEM.  An assembly of equipment and devices such as a solid
state unit, arranged to signal the presence of a hazard requiring urgent
attention and to which Police or Fire Departments are expected to respond.



   ALARM USER.  Any person on whose residence, commercial property, or
other premises an alarm system is maintained within the city, except for
alarm systems on motor vehicles. Also, included are those systems which
employ an audible signal emitting sounds or a flashing light or beacon
designed to alert or signal persons outside the premises.



   CENTRAL DISPATCH.  A facility whose prime purpose is to monitor
incoming alarm signals 24 hours a day, and relay the signal information to
the appropriate authorities.



   CITY.  The City of Mount Vernon, Indiana.



   DIRECT LINE.  A telephone line leading directly into the
communications center of the Police or Fire Department, that is for use only
to report signals on a person-to-person basis.



   FALSE ALARMS.  The activation of an alarm system caused by improper
operation, negligence, equipment malfunction, or intentional act by an
unauthorized individual such as results in the dispatch of a city officer or
Fire Department personnel, unnecessarily.



   FIRE CHIEF.  The Chief of the City Fire Department, or his or her
authorized representative.



   LOCAL ALARMS.  A signaling system which, when activated, causes an
audible or visual signaling device to be activated in or on the premises
within which the system is installed.



   PERSON.  Any individual, partnership, corporation, business
association, entity, or society, but does not include the city.



   POLICE CHIEF.  The Chief of the Police Department of the City of Mount
Vernon, or his or her authorized representative.



   PUBLIC TRUNKLINE.  A telephone line leading into the communication
center of the Police or Fire Department that is for the purpose of handling
emergency and administrative calls on a person-to-person basis.



   SIGNALLNG DEVICE.  An electrically operated instrument which
automatically sends visual or audible signals to be registered by indicators
at a monitor panel at the receiving terminal or central dispatch.



(Ord. 02-10, passed 5-28-02)



§ 100.02  PERMITTED DEVICES.



   (A)   No person shall use or cause or permit to be used, an alarm
system utilizing signaling devices that automatically select a public
trunkline of the Police or Fire Department of the city and then reproduce any
pre-recorded message to report any robbery, burglary, fire, or other
emergency.



   (B)   With the exception of local alarms, signaling devices shall
only be permitted to be installed in the city for the purpose of reporting
any robbery, burglary, fire, or other emergency to the city Police or Fire
Department.



(Ord. 02-10, passed 5-28-02)



§ 100.03  MONITORING SYSTEM.



   The City Police or Fire Department is authorized to regulate the
installation and operation of a uniform monitoring system to receive visual
and audible signals over direct lines.



(Ord. 02-10, passed 5-28-02)



§ 100.04  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   No alarm user shall install, operate, or maintain an alarm
system in the city without first obtaining a permit as required in § 100.05.



   (B)   Any alarm user who operates an alarm system without first
obtaining authorization as required by this section, or who, after having an
authorization revoked, fails to disconnect his or her alarm system, shall be
in violation of this chapter.



(Ord. 02-10, passed 5-28-02)



§ 100.05  APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.



   (A)   Applications for permits to install, maintain, and operate an
alarm system shall be filed with the City Clerk-Treasurer, with an
application fee of $10, for alarm systems to be installed, maintained, and
operated for residential use, by merchants, and businesses for commercial and
industrial use.  The permit shall be renewable every two years beginning in
January 2003.



   (B)   The alarm user applying for the authorization required shall
state on the application form the following:



      (1)   His or her name;



      (2)   The address of the residence, business, or businesses,
in or upon which the alarm system has been or will be installed, also the
telephone number of that location and that of the applicant, if different
from the location;



      (3)   Type of alarm system (local, burglar signaling device,
holdup signaling device, fire signaling device);



      (4)   The alarm equipment supplier selling, installing,
monitoring, inspecting, responding to, or maintaining the alarm system; and



      (5)   The name and the telephone number of at least two other
persons (in case of a corporate alarm user applicant at least three persons)
who can be reached at any time, day or night, who can open the premises in
which the system is installed.  The alarm user shall provide written updates
when changes occur in the contact persons at the time the change occurs.



   (C)   The information contained in an alarm user authorization
application required by this section, and other information received by the
Police or Fire Chief through correspondence or communications with an alarm
user, shall be securely maintained and restricted to inspection only by the
Police or Fire Chief or city employees specifically assigned the
responsibility for handling and processing alarm user authorizations in the
city.  City officials and employees assigned these duties shall not
knowingly or willfully reveal the information contained in an alarm user
authorization application or in correspondence or communications with an
alarm user, to any other person for any purpose not related to this chapter
or official law enforcement matters without the express written consent of
the alarm user supplying the information.



   (D)   The Clerk-Treasurer and Police or Fire Chief shall approve the
application if they find that the applicant has provided the information
required in this section.  The Police Department and Fire Department shall
certify that the requirements are met and shall supply this certification to
the Clerk-Treasurer.



(Ord. 02-10, passed 5-28-02)



§ 100.06  LOCAL ALARMS.



   Local alarms with any externally audible alert shall not make a sound
similar to that of any emergency warning system. Such an alarm in residential
districts must have an automatic cutoff after 15 minutes of sounding.



(Ord. 02-10, passed 5-28-02)



§ 100.07  TESTING OR REPAIRING EQUIPMENT.



   No alarm system designed to transmit alarm conditions directly to the
Police or Fire Department shall be tested or demonstrated without fist
obtaining permission from the Police or Fire Department. Permission is not
required to test or demonstrate alarm devices not transmitting alarm
conditions directly to the Police or Fire Department unless the alarm
conditions are to be relayed to the Police or Fire Department.  Failure to
notify the Police Department and Fire Department prior to testing or
conducting repairs on an alarm system shall constitute a false alarm.
Responsibility for notification lies with the alarm holder.



(Ord. 02-10, passed 5-28-02)



§ 100.08  FINES APPLICABLE FOR FALSE ALARMS.



   (A)   Any alarm user having more than four false alarms in any
calendar year shall pay a fine in the sum of $25 for the fifth false alarm
within the year, and a fine in the sum of $50 for each false alarm in excess
of five within the year.  All lines shall be paid to the City
Clerk-Treasurer to be deposited into the General Fund within ten days after
notice and the number of false alarms set forth above.



   (B)   The number of false alarms shall be prorated for any alarm
user who applies midyear for the system's first partial year.  Thereafter,
this section shall be applied on a calendar year basis.



   (C)   Any alarm user who does not pay the fine within the time
prescribed shall be subject to having the permit revoked pursuant to §
100.09.



(Ord. 02-10, passed 5-28-02)



§ 100.09  REVOCATION OF PERMIT.



   (A)   False alarms on more than ten dates in one calendar year from
any alarm system for which alarm user authorization has been obtained, or
failure to pay a fine pursuant to § 100.08, may constitute grounds for
revocation of the permit granted subject to provisions of this section.



   (B)   After the Police or Fire Department has recorded false alarms
on four dates in any calendar year from any authorized user, it shall notify
the authorized alarm user (with a copy to the alarm equipment supplier),
specifically those persons authorized to deal with police and fire personnel,
and inform them of the facts, and ask that they within 15 days submit a
written report describing efforts to discover and eliminate the cause or
causes of the false alarms.



   (C)   If the authorized alarm user fails to submit a report within
15 days or such longer period as the Police Chief or Fire Chief may
reasonably grant, or if by the report the alarm user fails to show that he or
she has taken or will take reasonable steps to eliminate or reduce false
alarms, the Police Chief or Fire Chief may revoke the alarm user's
authorization.



   (D)   When alarm conditions are received by the Police or Fire
Department that evidence a failure to comply with the requirements of this
chapter, the Police Chief or Fire Chief is authorized to demand that the
owner or lessee of the device, or his or her representative, disconnect the
device until it is made to comply with the requirements of this chapter.



   (E)   The Police Chief or Fire Chief may revoke or suspend any
permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter after giving written
notice to the alarm user and an opportunity for the alarm user to effect
compliance within ten days, if the Police Chief or Fire Chief determines that
the alarm system under the permit has been installed, maintained, or operates
in violation of this chapter or of any term or condition of the permit, or if
any fine is unpaid.



   (F)   An alarm system user whose authorization has been revoked is
not precluded under this section from applying for a new authorization
pursuant to § 100.05.  However, before a new permit is issued, the
Clerk-Treasurer shall have a report from the Police Chief or Fire Chief as
hereinafter defined and in addition, all lines due must be paid and the
system corrected from any deficiencies.  Before the Clerk-Treasurer shall
issue a new permit, the Police Chief or Fire Chief shall make reasonable
efforts to determine that the alarm user's system has been corrected from its
previous deficiencies, and upon payment of all fines, the Clerk-Treasurer
shall then issue a new permit provided all requirements of this chapter are
complied with.



   (G)   Any person affected by the Police Chief's or Fire Chief's
order to disconnect or by the Police Chief's or Fire Chief's refusal to
certify to the Clerk-Treasurer that the system currently meets all
requirements, shall have the right to request the Board of Public Works of
the city to review the decision or action by the Police Chief or Fire Chief
within ten days after any decision has been made by the Police Chief or Fire
Chief.  The Board of Public Works is given the authority to either affirm,
modify, or reverse any decision made by the Police Chief or Fire Chief.



   (H)   Any person who fails or refuses to disconnect their alarm
system once their permit to install, operate, or maintain has been revoked as
provided within the provisions of this chapter, shall be subject to the
penalties outlined in § 100.99.



   (I)   Failure to pay any fee or fine imposed after 30 days notice
shall be subject to the penalties outlined in § 100.99.



(Ord. 02-10, passed 5-28-02)



§ 100.99  PENALTY.



   If any individual, partnership, corporation, business, association,
entity or society shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter or
shall perform any action prohibited herein, or shall fail to perform any duty
lawfully enjoined, within the time prescribed by the Police Chief or Fire
Chief, or shall fail, neglect, or refuse to obey any lawful order given by
the Police Chief or Fire Chief; in connection with the provisions of this
chapter, and for violation of § 100.09, for each such violation, failure or
refusal, such person, firm or corporation shall be fined in any such sum not
less than $25, nor more than $1,000, and shall be responsible for the city's
legal expenses and court costs incurred in the enforcement of this chapter. 
Each day a violation of this chapter exists shall constitute a separate
offense.



(Ord. 02-10, passed 5-28-02)



TITLE XI:  BUSINESS REGULATIONS



   Chapter



      110.   INTOXICATING LIQUORS



      111.   JUNK YARDS



      112.   TAXICABS



      113.   CONTRACTORS



      114.   PEDDLERS



CHAPTER 110:  INTOXICATING LIQUORS



Section



   110.01   Use of alcohol on certain public property prohibited



§ 110.01  USE OF ALCOHOL ON CERTAIN PUBLIC PROPERTY PROHIBITED.



   No person may have in his possession or in the passenger compartment of
any motor vehicle he occupies any alcoholic beverage in an open container or
in a container on which the seal has been broken if that person is:



   (A)   On any parks and recreation facilities (park grounds) operated
by Mount Vernon-Black Township Park and Recreation Board (hereinafter
referred to as Parks Board), within the corporate limits of the city, with
the exception of property leased to a non-municipal entity, or division (B)
of this section. This prohibition does not include persons actively loading
or unloading a boat at the boat ramp at Sherburne Park.



   (B)   (1)   There may be drinking of alcoholic beverages on park
grounds during “permitted events”, which “permitted event” is an
event where alcohol will be sold or otherwise provided under a temporary beer
and wine permit issued by the Indiana Alcohol and Tobacco Commission (IATC)
and when such event has been authorized by the City of Mount Vernon Board of
Public Works and Safety prior to the event.



      (2)   In the event alcohol will be supplied or sold at the
permitted event by a person/entity, at least five business days prior to a
permitted event, the person/entity responsible for the event shall submit a
list of the names and addresses of each person serving alcohol and must also
provide a copy of their license to serve alcohol, as well as the hosting
entity’s temporary permit from IATC. Additionally, the person/entity
responsible for the permitted event at which alcoholic beverages will be
served shall provide the city with proof of insurance for public liability
and liquor liability coverage, which shall include proof of both public
liability insurance and liquor liability insurance in an amount not less than
$1,000,000 each, wherein the city/Parks Board are additional named insureds.
The hosting entity shall also provide proof of insurance from any vendor
selling alcohol at the permitted event of liquor liability insurance coverage
naming the city/Parks Board as an additional insured. Any person/entity who
is responsible for the permitted event agrees to indemnify and hold the city
and Parks Board harmless from any loss, damage, or injury of any nature
arising out of or from for their use of the grounds. Use of the grounds, park
and recreation facilities is subject to completion of all other rental/use
forms required by the Parks Board or the Board of Public Works and Safety.
The serving and use of alcohol is subject to Indiana state law and any misuse
shall be prosecuted accordingly. In addition, persons or entities who violate
this section shall be subject to the penalty provisions of § 96.99.



(Ord. 83-21, passed 8-22-83; Am. Ord. 14-16, passed 8-21-14)  Penalty, see
§ 96.99



CHAPTER 111:  JUNK YARDS



Section



   111.01   Confinement of junk



   111.02   Fence or other structure of sufficient height required



§ 111.01  CONFINEMENT OF JUNK.



   Any person, firm, association, or corporation purchasing or selling
junk and having a place of business for carrying on the business in dealing
with junk shall keep the junk within the confines of his lot at all times.



(Ord. 708, passed 9-25-50)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 111.02  FENCE OR OTHER STRUCTURE OF SUFFICIENT HEIGHT REQUIRED.



   Any person shall erect and maintain or cause to have erected around the
junk yard or place of business where he purchases or sells junk, a fence or
any other structure of sufficient height and of a type that will prevent the
observance of all matter or junk so located within the confines of that lot
from the streets, sidewalks, or alleys.



(Ord. 708, passed 9-25-50)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 112:  TAXICABS



Section



   112.01   Certificate required



   112.02   Issuance; public hearing



   112.03   Indemnity bond



   112.04   Public passenger drivers' license required



   112.05   Transfer of certificate



   112.06   Periodic inspections



   112.07   Rate card to be displayed



   112.08   Posting of driver's license



   112.09   Police Department to report violations



   112.10   Revocation or suspension; appeal



 



   112.99   Penalty



§ 112.01  CERTIFICATE REQUIRED.



   No one shall operate a taxicab or allow a taxicab owned by him to be
operated upon the streets in the city, unless or until the driver and the
vehicle complies with all requirements set forth in this chapter and unless
the owner shall hold a valid certificate.



(Ord. 1262, passed 8-24-70)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.02  ISSUANCE; PUBLIC HEARING.



   (A)   A certificate to operate one or more taxicabs in the city
shall be issued by the Clerk-Treasurer upon order of the Board of Public
Works and Safety to any party, who shall comply with all of the requirements
set forth in this chapter.  The certificate shall specify the number of
taxicabs permitted and no operator shall operate more taxicabs than permitted
by the certificate.



   (B)   No certificate shall be issued until a public hearing has been
held relative to the public convenience and necessity for the issuance
thereof.  Notice of the public hearing shall be published in one local
newspaper at least ten days before the date of the hearing.



(Ord. 1262, passed 8-24-70)



§ 112.03  INDEMNITY BOND.



   No certificate shall be issued or contained in operation unless there
is in full force and effect an indemnity bond for each vehicle authorized in
the amount of $100,000 for bodily injury to any one person; for injuries to
more than one person which are sustained in the same accident, $300,000; and
for property damage resulting from any one accident, $5,000.  The bond shall
inure to the benefit of any person who shall be injured or who shall sustain
damage to property proximately caused by the negligence of a holder, his
servants, or agents.  The bond shall be filed in the office of the City
Clerk-Treasurer and shall have as surety thereon a surety company authorized
to do business in the state.



(Ord. 1262, passed 8-24-70)



§ 112.04  PUBLIC PASSENGER DRIVERS' LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No person shall operate a taxicab for hire upon the streets of the
city, and no person who owns or controls a taxicab shall permit it to be so
driven, unless the driver of the taxicab has a valid public passenger
drivers' license issued by the State License Bureau.



(Ord. 1262, passed 8-24-70)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.05  TRANSFER OF CERTIFICATE.



   A certificate to operate a taxicab shall not be sold, assigned,
mortgaged, or otherwise transferred without the consent of the city.



(Ord. 1262, passed 8-24-70)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.06  PERIODIC INSPECTIONS.



   Every vehicle operating under this chapter shall be periodically
inspected by the Police Department at 90-day intervals to insure the
continued maintenance of safe operating conditions.



(Ord. 1262, passed 8-24-70)



§ 112.07  RATE CARD TO BE DISPLAYED.



   A rate card issued by the Police Department which contains the rates of
fare then in force shall be displayed in each taxicab.



(Ord. 1262, passed 8-24-70)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.08  POSTING OF DRIVER'S LICENSE.



   Every driver licensed under this chapter shall post his driver's
license in such a place as to be in full view of all passengers while the
driver is operating that taxicab.



(Ord. 1262, passed 8-24-70)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.09  POLICE DEPARTMENT TO REPORT VIOLATIONS.



   The Police Department of the city is hereby given the authority and is
instructed to watch and observe the conduct of holders and drivers operating
under this chapter.  Upon discovering a violation of the provisions of this
chapter, the Police Department shall report the same to the Mayor, who will
order or take appropriate action.



(Ord. 1262, passed 8-24-70)



§ 112.10  REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION; APPEAL.



   (A)   A certificate issued under the provisions of this chapter may
be revoked or suspended by the Board of Public Works and Safety if the holder
thereof has violated any of the provisions of this chapter; discontinued
operations for more than seven days; has violated any ordinances of the city
or the laws of the United States or the state, the violations of which
reflect unfavorably on the fitness of the holder to offer public
transportation.



   (B)   Prior to suspension or revocation, the holder shall be given
notice of the proposed action to be taken and shall have an opportunity to be
heard.



(Ord. 1262, passed 8-24-70)



§ 112.99  PENALTY.



   Any persons violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined not
exceeding $2,500.



(Ord. 1262, passed 8-24-70)



CHAPTER113: CONTRACTORS



Section



   113.01   Registration required



   113.02   Contractor defined



   113.03   Registration requirements



   113.04   Duties of the contractor



   113.05   Enforcement authority



 



   113.99   Penalty



§ 113.01  REGISTRATION REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, association or
other entity to engage in the business of a contractor, as defined herein,
within the corporate limits of the city, without first having registered with
the city, being issued a registration card, and having paid the applicable
registration fee as set forth herein.



(Ord. 04-10, passed 4-12-04)  Penalty, see §113.99



§ 113.02  CONTRACTOR DEFINED.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CONTRACTOR.  Any person, firm, corporation, association or other
entity that shall engage as a principal in the business of entering into
contracts with any person or entity of the city for the purpose of doing any
of the following work in or around any buildings, structures or property
within the corporate limits of the city: electrical; plumbing; heating,
ventilation or air conditioning; roofing; or any other work regarding
construction, installation, replacements, improvements or repairs of any
nature.



(Ord. 04-10, passed 4-12-04)



§ 113.03  REGISTRATION REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   (1)   All contractors shall first register with the city by
making application with the Building Commissioner.



      (2)   All information and documents given by the contractor
must be true and accurate.



   (B)   The registration application shall include the following
information and documents:



      (1)   Company or person's name, address and phone number;



      (2)   If a company, the owner's name, address and phone number;



      (3)   A list of the specific types of work in which the
contractor shall engage in the year for which the application is being
submitted;



      (4)   A list of all subcontractors and other employees or
personnel that shall work with or under the contractor in the year for which
application is being submitted;



      (5)   A state plumbing license number, if engaged as a
plumbing contractor or as a plumber;



      (6)   Whether the contractor carries liability insurance and
is bonded and, if so, copies of all documents showing proof of insurance and
bonding; and



      (7)   Any and all documents or other information showing that
the contractor has failed any test given by any approved testing facility
where testing is required in the contractor's field of work.



   (C) A contractor does not have to be insured and bonded to be
registered with the city.



(Ord. 04-10, passed 4-12-04)  Penalty, see §113.99



§ 113.04  DUTIES OF THE CONTRACTOR.



   (A)   (1)   If the Commissioner makes a determination that the
contractor has met all of the registration requirements set forth herein, the
contractor shall pay a registration fee of $20 to the Clerk-Treasurer's
Office, no later than 30 days after the contractor is notified by the
Commissioner in writing that the contractor has met said requirements.



      (2)   Once the fee has been paid, the contractor is registered
only until the end of the calendar year in which application was made.



   (B)   The contractor shall pay a renewal fee of $20, if the
contractor wishes to continue to engage in the business of a contractor
within the corporate limits of the city in the next calendar year.



      (1)   Any renewal fee must be paid before February 1 of that
year.



      (2)   Before the contractor engages in any work in that year,
the contractor must verify in writing to the Commissioner that the
information contained in the previous year's application continues to be true
and accurate, and to supplement any new information necessary to comply with
the registration requirements herein.



   (C)   Once the contractor has paid the fee or renewal fee, the
Commissioner shall issue a registration card to the contractor, verifying
that the contractor is registered to work as a contractor in the city until
the end of the calendar year.



   (D)   The contractor is responsible for making certain that the
registration card is placed conspicuously in the front window of at least one
vehicle at any work site at which the contractor is doing work.



(Ord. 04-10, passed 4-12-04)  Penalty, see §113.99



§ 113.05  ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY.



   The Commissioner has full enforcement authority under this chapter,
including but not limited to, the right to enter onto any property where any
work is being done, to determine whether the contractor on site is properly
registered or is otherwise in compliance with this chapter.



(Ord. 04-10, passed 4-12-04)



§ 113.99  PENALTY.



   Any contractor who violates any of the provisions of this chapter or
who permits any subcontractor or other employee to violate this chapter is
subject to a fine of $500 for the first violation, and a fine of $1,000 for
each subsequent violation.



(Ord. 04-10, passed 4-12-04)



CHAPTER114: PEDDLERS



Section



   114.01   Definitions



   114.02   License required



   114.03   Application for license



   114.04   Investigation by the Clerk-Treasurer



   114.05   Fees for license



   114.06   License not transferable



   114.07   Restricted hours



   114.08   Duty of police to enforce



   114.09   Revocation of license



   114.10   Appeal to the Common Council



   114.11   First Amendment activity



 



   114.99   Penalty



§ 114.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BUSINESS.  The marketing activity conducted for the sale of goods or
services for a profit.



   EXEMPT ORGANIZATIONS. Non-profit or not-for-profit corporations,
religious organizations, school corporations, charitable organizations,
hospital and nursing care facilities, and libraries.



   INDIVIDUAL. A person, partnership, sole proprietorship, corporation,
limited partnership, or joint venture.



   MERCHANDISE. Manufactured goods, wares, furniture, machinery, tools,
equipment, clothes, animal and vegetable produce that is not directly made,
grown, raised, produced or manufactured by the individual peddler or merchant.



   PEDDLER.  An individual who sells tangible commodities or merchandise
from house to house, store to store, on any street, or in any public place;
and whose sales are not made from one established location, except where they
are made in a street or a public place.



   TEMPORARY BUSINESS.  The sale of goods or services by a business
operating in the city for less than 48 hours, or operating out of a vehicle,
truck, trailer or other mobile unit.



   TRANSIENT MERCHANT.  An individual who sells commodities or
merchandise from a private premise, but remains at one place for that purpose
for temporary periods only, not to exceed 90 days.



(Ord. 04-39, passed 11-8-04)



§ 114.02  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for a peddler or a transient merchant to
peddle, sell or trade merchandise within the corporate limits of the city,
without first obtaining a license hereunder.



   (B)   It shall also be unlawful for any individual to operate a
temporary business within the limits of the city, without first obtaining a
license hereunder.



(Ord. 04-39, passed 11-8-04)  Penalty, see §114.99



§ 114.03  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.



   (A)   An individual may obtain a peddler's or transient merchant's
license, or a temporary business license, authorizing the sale, trade or
peddling of merchandise within the corporate limits of the city, or the
conducting of a temporary business within the corporate limits.



   (B)   (1)   Application for license shall be made at the
Clerk-Treasurer's Office, upon forms approved by the city.



      (2)   Such application shall be sworn to or affirmed, and
filed with the City Clerk-Treasurer at least 72 hours prior to the time in
which the license applied for shall become effective.



   (C)   The application herein shall contain the following information:



      (1)   The name, address or headquarters of the individual
applying for the license.



      (2)   If the applicant is not a person, the name and address
of the applicant's principal office or the manager.



      (3)   The name and address of the individual or individuals
who will be in direct charge of conducting the local operations.



      (4)   The time within which the business activity will be
operated, and the location of the business in the city.



      (5)   Any application for license must also be signed by the
party upon whose property the temporary business or business activities shall
be located.



      (6)   A statement regarding whether the individual has engaged
in, or been held civilly liable for, any fraudulent transaction or been
convicted of any crime involving moral turpitude.



(Ord. 04-39, passed 11-8-04)



§ 114.04  INVESTIGATION BY THE CLERK-TREASURER.



   (A)   The Clerk-Treasurer shall examine each application filed under
this chapter for a license and shall make, or cause to be made, such further
investigation of the application as the Clerk-Treasurer shall deem necessary,
including but not limited to, a check for any outstanding warrants.



   (B)   The license shall be issued only if the Clerk-Treasurer
determines the following facts:



      (1)   That all of the statements made in the application are
true.



      (2)   That the applicant has not engaged in any fraudulent
transaction or enterprise or been convicted of any crime involving moral
turpitude and is not currently subject to any outstanding warrants.



      (3)   That the applicant will not conduct any business
constituting a breach of the peace or a menace to the health, safety or
general welfare of the public.



      (4)   That nothing in the proposal or application will violate
any provisions of this chapter or any other law or ordinance.



(Ord. 04-39, passed 11-8-04; Am. Ord. 07-15, passed 9-10-07)  Penalty, see
§114.99



§ 114.05  FEES FOR LICENSE.



   Before a license is issued, the applicant shall pay to the
Clerk-Treasurer the sum of $10 for a license, allowing the peddler, transient
merchant or temporary business to operate at one or more specified locations
for a period of one day.



(Ord. 04-39, passed 11-8-04)



§ 114.06  LICENSE NOT TRANSFERABLE.



   Any license issued under this chapter shall not be transferable to any
other individual.



(Ord. 04-39, passed 11-8-04)



§ 114.07  RESTRICTED HOURS.



   It shall be unlawful for a peddler, transient merchant, or an
individual operating a temporary business to peddle, sell or trade
merchandise within the corporate limits of the city at any time other than
between 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.



(Ord. 04-39, passed 11-8-04)  Penalty, see §114.99



§ 114.08  DUTY OF POLICE TO ENFORCE.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of the police officers or other
authorized officers of the Police Department to:



      (1)   Examine and investigate all places of business and
individuals subject to the provisions of this chapter, to determine if this
chapter has been complied with; and



      (2)   Enforce the provisions of this chapter against any
individual found to be violating the same.



   (B)   An officer may temporarily suspend any license granted
hereunder, if he or she has reason to believe that a violation of this
chapter has occurred.



   (C)   Upon a temporary suspension of a license, the individual shall
be entitled to notice and a hearing under § 114.09, no later than 15 days
after the temporary suspension has been issued by the officer.



(Ord. 04-39, passed 11-8-04)



§ 114.09  REVOCATION OF LICENSE.



   (A)   Licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter may be
revoked by the Mayor, after notice and hearing, for a wilful violation of any
of the following provisions:



      (1)   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in
the application for license;



      (2)   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the
course of carrying on business as a peddler, transient merchant, or an
individual engaged in a temporary business;



      (3)   Any violation of this chapter;



      (4)   Conviction of any crime involving moral turpitude; or



      (5)   Conducting the business of peddling or soliciting in an
unlawful manner, or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace,
or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the
public.



   (B)   (1)   Notice of the hearing for revocation of a license
shall be given in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of
complaint, and the time and place of the hearing.



      (2)   The notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the
individual at his or her last known address, at least three days prior to the
date set for the hearing.



   (C)   The Mayor shall file a copy of his or her findings and
determination with the city fiscal officer within 24 hours after it has been
made.



(Ord. 04-39, passed 11-8-04)



§ 114.10  APPEAL TO THE COMMON COUNCIL.



   (A)   Any individual aggrieved by a decision under § 114.09 shall
have the right to appeal to the Common Council.



      (1)   Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the
Clerk-Treasurer, within 14 days after notice of the decision has been mailed
to such individual's last known address, a written statement setting forth
the grounds for appeal.



      (2)   The Council shall set the time and place for a hearing,
and notice for such hearing shall be given to such individual in the same
manner as provided by § 114.09(B).



   (B)   The order of the Council after such hearing shall be final.



(Ord. 04-39, passed 11-8-04)



§ 114.11  FIRST AMENDMENT ACTIVITY.



   No First Amendment or constitutionally protected activity shall be
regulated under this chapter.



(Ord. 04-39, passed 11-8-04)



§ 114.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any individual violating any provision of this chapter shall
be fined not less than $25 nor more than $2,500 for each offense.



   (B)   A separate offense shall be determined committed on each day
during or on which a violation occurs or continues.



(Ord. 04-39, passed 11-8-04)



TITLE XIII:  GENERAL OFFENSES



   Chapter



      130.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



CHAPTER 130:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   130.01   Shooting of firearms



   130.02   Abandoned refrigerators



   130.03   Curfew



   130.04   Fireworks



 



   130.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Street and park festivals, see § 97.16



§ 130.01  SHOOTING OF FIREARMS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to shoot or discharge any loaded
cannon, swivel gun, pistol, or other firearm within the corporate limits of
the city.



(Ord. passed 12-28-03)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.02  ABANDONED REFRIGERATORS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to
leave outside of any building or dwelling in a place accessible to children
any abandoned, unattended, or discarded ice box, refrigerator, or any other
container of any kind which has an air-tight door, or lock which may not be
released for opening from the inside of the ice box, refrigerator, or
container.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to
leave outside of any building or dwelling in a place accessible to children
any abandoned, unattended, or discarded ice box, refrigerator, or any other
container of any kind which has an air-tight snap-lock or other device
thereon without first removing the snap-lock or doors from the ice box,
refrigerator, or container.



(Ord. 763, passed 11-23-53)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.03  CURFEW.



   (A)   Curfew for children less than 15 years of age.



      (1)   It is a curfew violation for a child less than 15 years
of age to be in a public place after 11:00 p.m. or before 5:00 a.m. on any
day.



      (2)   A law enforcement officer may not detain a child or take
a child into custody based on a violation of this section unless the law
enforcement officer, after making a reasonable determination and considering
facts and surrounding circumstances, reasonably believes that:



         (a)   The child has violated this section; and



         (b)   There is no legal defense to the violation.



   (B)   Curfew for children 15, 16, or 17 years of age.



      (1)   It is a curfew violation for a child 15, 16, or 17 years
of age to be in a public place:



         (a)   Between 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. on Saturday or
Sunday;



         (b)   After 11:00 p.m. on Sunday, Monday, Tuesday,
Wednesday, or Thursday; or



         (c)   Before 5:00 a.m. on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday,
Thursday, or Friday.



      (2)   A law enforcement officer may not detain a child or take
a child into custody based on a violation of this section unless the law
enforcement officer, after making a reasonable determination and considering
facts and surrounding circumstances, reasonably believes that:



         (a)   The child has violated this section; and



         (b)   There is no legal defense to the violation.



   (C)   Defenses.



      (1)   It is a defense to a violation under this section that
the child was emancipated:



         (a)   Under I.C. 31-37-19-27 or I.C. 31-6-4-15.7 (before
its repeal);



         (b)   By virtue of having married; or



         (c)   In accordance with the laws of another state or
jurisdiction;



at the time that the child engaged in the prohibited conduct.



      (2)   It is a defense to a violation under this section that
the child engaged in the prohibited conduct while:



         (a)   Accompanied by the child’s parent, guardian, or
custodian;



         (b)   Accompanied by an adult specified by the child’s
parent, guardian, or custodian;



         (c)   Participating in, going to, or returning from:



            1.   Lawful employment;



            2.   A school sanctioned activity;



            3.   A religious event;



            4.   An emergency involving the protection of a
person or property from an imminent threat of serious bodily injury or
substantial damage;



            5.   An activity involving the exercise of the
child’s rights protected under the First Amendment to the United States
Constitution or Article 1, Section 31 of the Constitution of the State of
Indiana, or both, such as freedom of speech and the right of assembly; or



            6.   An activity conducted by a nonprofit or
governmental entity that provides recreation, education, training, or other
care under the supervision of one or more adults;



         (d)   Participating in an activity undertaken at the
prior written direction of the child’s parent, guardian, or custodian; or



         (e)   Engaged in interstate or international travel from
a location outside Indiana to another location outside Indiana.



   (D)   Authority of police during curfew hours.



      (1)   Each police force member may stop and question any minor
suspected of violating this section's provisions and may take the minor into
custody when found violating provisions of this section after making the
reasonable inquiry as outlined above. The officer shall take the minor to the
city police headquarters where the name of the minor’s parent, guardian, or
person having legal custody of him or her shall be ascertained.



      (2)   A person violating this chapter shall be referred to
juvenile court officials for proper disposition.



   (E)   Adoption of Indiana Code. I.C. Title 31, Art. 37, Ch. 3 is
adopted herein by reference.



(Ord. 10-13, passed 8-9-10)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.04  FIREWORKS.



   (A)   For the purpose of this section the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      (1)   CONSUMERFIREWORK.  A small firework that is designed
primarily to produce visible effects by combustion, and that is required to
comply with the construction, chemical composition, and labeling regulations
promulgated by the United States Consumer Product Safety Commission under 16
C.F.R. l507.  The term also includes some small devices designed to produce
an audible effect, such as whistling devices, ground devices containing 50
milligrams or less of explosive composition, and aerial devices containing
130 milligrams or less of explosive composition.  Propelling or expelling
charges consisting of a mixture of charcoal, sulfur, and potassium nitrate
are not considered as designed to produce an audible effect. 
CONSUMERFIREWORKS shall:



         (a)   Include aerial devices, which include sky rockets,
missile-type rockets, helicopter or aerial spinners, roman candles, mines,
and shells; ground audible devices, which include firecrackers, salutes, and
chasers; and firework devices containing combinations of the effects
described in this division.



         (b)   Not include items referenced in I.C. 22-11-14-8.



      (2)   FIRECRACKER or SALUTE.  A device that consists of a
small paper-wrapped or cardboard tube containing not more than 50 milligrams
of pyrotechnic composition and that produces, upon ignition, noise
accompanied by a flash of light.



      (3)   FIREWORK.Any composition or device designed for the
purpose of producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, deflagration,
or detonation.  FIREWORKS consist of consumer fireworks, items referenced in
I.C. 22-11-14-8 and special fireworks.  The following items are excluded
from the definition of FIREWORKS.



         (a)   Model rockets.



         (b)   Toy pistol caps.



         (c)   Emergency signal flares.



         (d)   Matches.



         (e)   Fixed ammunition for firearms.



         (f)   Ammunition components intended for use in
firearms, muzzle-loading cannons, or small arms.



         (g)   Shells, cartridges, and primers for use in
firearms, muzzle-loading cannons, or small arms.



         (h)   Indoor pyrotechnics special effects material.



         (i)   M-80s, cherry bombs, silver salutes, and any
device banned by the federal government.



      (4)   SPECIALFIREWORKS.Fireworks designed primarily to produce
visible or audible effects by combustion, deflagration, or detonation,
including firecrackers containing more than 130 milligrams of explosive
composition, aerial shells containing more than 40 grams of pyrotechnic
composition, and other exhibition display items that exceed the limits for
classification as consumer fireworks.



(I.C. 22-11-14-1)



   (B)   Every fireworks display shall be handled by a qualified
operator approved by the Chief of the Fire Department, and shall be located,
discharged, or fired as, in the opinion of the Chief of the Fire Department,
after proper inspection, is not hazardous to property or persons  A permit
granted under this section is not transferable.  A person may not possess,
transport or deliver special fireworks, except as authorized by this section.



(I.C. 22-11-14-2)



   (C)   The Common Council shall require a certificate of insurance
conditioned for the payment of all damages which may be caused either to a
person or persons in an amount of not less than $10,000 and to property in an
amount of not less than $10,000, by reason of the licensed display, and
arising from any acts of the licensee, his agents, employees, or
subcontractors.  However, the Common Council may in its discretion require
additional amounts of insurance coverage not to exceed $100,000 for damages
caused to a person or persons, or $100,000 for damage to property.



(I.C. 22-11-14-3)



§ 130.99  PENALTY.



   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which another
penalty is not already otherwise provided, shall be fined not more than
$2,500.



(Am. Ord. 10-13, passed 8-9-10)



TITLE XV:  LAND USAGE



   Chapter



      150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS



      151.     MASTER PLAN



      152.     SUBDIVISION CONTROL



      153.     ZONING CODE



      154.     ECONOMIC REVITALIZATION AREAS



      155.   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN



CHAPTER 150:  BUILDING REGULATIONS



Section



Building Code



   150.01   Title



   150.02   Purpose



   150.03   Authority



   150.04   Scope



   150.05   Adoption of regulations by reference



   150.06   Application for permits



   150.07   Permit required



   150.08   Compliance with other ordinances



   150.09   Fees



   150.10   Review of application



   150.11   Inspections



   150.12   Right of entry



   150.13   Stop work order



   150.14   Certificate of occupancy



   150.15   Accepted standards and practices



   150.16   Violations



   150.17   Right of appeal



   150.18   Remedies



Minimum Building and Housing Code



   150.30   Purpose



   150.31   Conflict among provisions



   150.32   Building Commissioner



   150.33   Department of Buildings



   150.34   Protection of the Public



   150.35   Orders



   150.36   Compliance with orders



   150.37   Applicability to existing buildings



   150.38   Coordination with Plan Commission



   150.39   Definitions



   150.40   Dwelling unit requirements



   150.41   Rooming house requirements



   150.42   Building permit and inspection fees



   150.43   Adoption of Electrical, Plumbing, Refrigeration, Heating
and Air Conditioning Codes




Vacant Structures




   150.55   Policy concerning vacant structures



   150.56   Adoption of International Existing Building Code and
International Property Maintenance Code



   150.57   Adoption of Local Property Maintenance Code for exterior
maintenance of residential and commercial buildings



 



   150.99   Penalty



   Appendix: Schedule of fees



BUILDING CODE



§ 150.01  TITLE.



   This subchapter shall be known as the Building Code of the city, may be
cited as such, and will be referred to herein as this code.



(Ord. 88-15, passed 5-23-88)



§ 150.02  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this code is to provide minimum standards for the
protection of life, limb, health, environment, public safety and welfare, and
for the conservation of energy in the design and construction of buildings
and structures.



(Ord. 88-15, passed 5-23-88)



§ 150.03  AUTHORITY.



   The Building Commissioner is hereby authorized and directed to
administer and enforce all of the provisions of this code.  Whenever in the
building regulations, it is provided that anything must be done to the
approval of or subject to the direction of the Building Commissioner or any
other officer of the city, this shall be construed to give such officer only
the discretion of determining whether the rules and standards established by
ordinance has been complied with; and no such provision shall be construed as
giving any officer discretionary powers as to what such regulations, codes,
or standards shall be, or power to require conditions not prescribed by
ordinances or to enforce ordinance provisions in an arbitrary or
discriminatory manner.  Any variances from adopted building rules are
subject to approval under I.C. 22-13-2-7(b).



(Ord. 88-15, passed 5-23-88)



§ 150.04  SCOPE.



   The provisions of this code apply to the construction, alterations,
repair, use, occupancy, maintenance, and additions to all buildings and
structures, other than industrialized building systems or mobile structures
certified under I.C. 22-15-4, within the city.



(Ord. 88-15, passed 5-23-88)



§ 150.05  ADOPTION OF REGULATIONS BY REFERENCE.



   (A)   Building rules of the Indiana Fire Prevention and Building
Safety Commission as set out in the following Articles of Title 675 of the
Indiana Administrative Code are hereby incorporated by reference in this
subchapter and shall include later amendments to those articles as the same
are published in the Indiana Register or the Indiana Administrative Code with
effective dates as fixed therein.



      (1)   Articles 13 - Building Codes:



         (a)   Fire and Building Safety Standards



         (b)   Indiana Building Code



         (c)   Indiana Building Code Standards



         (d)   Indiana Handicapped Accessibility Code



      (2)   Article 14 - One and Two Family Dwelling Codes:



         (a)   Council of American Building Officials One and Two
Family Dwelling Code.



         (b)   CABO One and Two Family Dwelling Code; Amendments



         (c)   Standard for Permanent Installation of
Manufactured Homes



      (3)   Article 16 -  Plumbing Codes:



         (a)   Indiana Plumbing Code



      (4)   Article 17 - Electrical Codes:



         (a)   Indiana Electrical Code



         (b)   Safety Code for Health Care Facilities



      (5)   Article 18 - Mechanical Codes:



         (a)   Indiana Mechanical Code



      (6)   Article 19 - Energy Conservation Codes:



         (a)   Indiana Energy Conservation Code



         (b)   Modifications to the Model Energy Code



      (7)   Article 20 - Swimming Pool Codes:



         (a)   Indiana Swimming Pool Codes



   (B)   Copies of adopted building rules, codes, and standards are on
file in the office of the Building Commissioner.



(Ord. 88-15, passed 5-23-88; Am. Ord. 98-05, passed 6-22-98)



§ 150.06  APPLICATION FOR PERMITS.



   No building permit shall be issued for the foregoing purposes, unless
the application for a permit is accompanied by a plat or sketch of the
proposed location showing lot boundaries, and by plans and specifications
showing the work to be done.  In addition, a copy of a design release,
issued by the State Building Commissioner and the State Fire Marshal pursuant
to I.C. 22-15-3-1, shall be provided to the Building Commissioner before
issuance of a permit for construction of a Class I structure as defined by
I.C. 22-15-3-3.



(Ord. 88-15, passed 5-23-88)



§ 150.07  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   A permit shall be obtained before beginning construction, alteration,
or repair of any building or structure, the cost of which exceeds $500, using
forms furnished by the Building Commissioner.  All permits shall be issued
by the Building Commissioner, and all fees provided for herein shall be paid
to the Building Commissioner. Any permit issued under this chapter may be
revoked if active work is not commenced within 60 days after the date of the
permit's issue, or if work was started and then stopped for a period of six
months.



(Ord. 88-15, passed 5-23-88; Am. Ord. 10-12, passed 8-9-10)  Penalty, see §
150.99



§ 150.08  COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER ORDINANCES.



   All work done under any permit issued hereunder shall be in full
compliance with all other ordinances pertaining thereto, and in addition to
the fees for permits hereinafter provided for, there shall be paid the fees
prescribed in such ordinances.



(Ord. 88-15, passed 5-23-88)



§ 150.09  FEES.



   Fees for the permits required by § 150.07 shall be in the amounts
shown in the Appendix of this chapter for the types of work and permits shown
in that Appendix.  The Board of Public Works and Safety shall have the
authority to amend by resolution the schedule of fees shown in the Appendix
as the Board deems appropriate from time to time.



(Ord. 88-15, passed 5-23-88)



§ 150.10  REVIEW OF APPLICATION.



   Prior to the issuance of any building permit hereunder, the Building
Commissioner shall:



   (A)   Review all building permit applications to determine full
compliance with the provisions of this subchapter.



   (B)   Review all building permit applications for new construction
or substantial improvements to determine whether proposed building sites will
be reasonably safe from flooding.



(Ord. 88-15, passed 5-23-88)



§ 150.11  INSPECTIONS.



   After the issuance of any building permit hereunder, the Building
Commissioner shall make, or shall cause to be made, such inspections of the
work being done under such permit as are necessary to insure full compliance
with the provisions of this subchapter and the terms of the permit. 
Reinspections of work found to be incomplete  or not ready for inspection
are subject to assessment of reinspection fees as prescribed in this code.



(Ord. 88-15, passed 5-23-88)



§ 150.12  RIGHT OF ENTRY.



   Upon presentation of proper credentials, the Building Commissioner or
his duly authorized representatives may enter at reasonable times any
building, structure, or premises in the city to perform any duty imposed upon
him by this code.



(Ord. 88-15, passed 5-23-88)



§ 150.13  STOP WORK ORDER.



   Whenever any work is being done contrary to the provisions of this
code, the Building Commissioner may order the work stopped by notice in
writing served on any persons engaged in the doing or causing such work to be
done, and any such persons shall forthwith stop such work until authorized by
the Building Commissioner to proceed with the work.



(Ord. 88-15, passed 5-23-88)



§ 150.14  CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.



   No certificate of occupancy for any building or structure erected,
altered, or repaired after the adoption of this subchapter shall be issued
unless such building or structure was erected, altered, or repaired in
compliance with the provisions of this subchapter.



(Ord. 88-15, passed 5-23-88)  Penalty, see § 150.99



§ 150.15  ACCEPTED STANDARDS AND PRACTICES.



   All work on the construction, alteration, and repair of buildings and
other structures shall be performed in a good and workmanlike manner
according to accepted standards and practices in the trade.



(Ord. 88-15, passed 5-23-88)  Penalty, see § 150.99



§ 150.16  VIOLATIONS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation, whether as
owner, lessee, sub-lessee, or occupant, to erect, construct, enlarge, alter,
repair, improve, remove, convert, demolish, equip, use, occupy, or maintain
any building or structure, other than fences, in the city, or cause or permit
the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of the provisions of this
code.



(Ord. 88-15, passed 5-23-88)  Penalty, see § 150.99



§ 150.17  RIGHT OF APPEAL.



   All persons shall have the right to appeal the Building Commissioner's
decision first through the Board of Public Works and Safety, and then to the
Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission of Indiana in accordance with
the provisions of I.C. 22-13-2-7 or I.C. 4-21.5-3-7 as applicable.



(Ord. 88-15, passed 5-23-88)



§ 150.18  REMEDIES.



   The Building Commissioner shall in the name of the Board of Public
Works and Safety bring actions in the county circuit court for mandatory and
injunctive relief in the enforcement of and to secure compliance with any
order made by the Building Commissioner, and any such action for mandatory or
injunctive relief may be joined with an action to recover the penalties
provided for in this subchapter.



(Ord. 88-15, passed 5-23-88)



MINIMUM BUILDING AND HOUSING CODE



§ 150.30  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to adopt the provisions of I.C.
36-7-9 (Building Code—Unsafe Building Law) and other provisions contained
herein as the Mt. Vernon Minimum Housing and Building Code.  Henceforth, all
proceedings within the City of Mt. Vernon for the inspection, repair, and
removal of unsafe and dangerous buildings shall be governed by said Code.



(Ord. 79-49, passed 11-26-79; Am. Ord. 81-34, passed 11-9-81)



§ 150.31  CONFLICT AMONG PROVISIONS.



   Wherever other provisions of the subchapter shall conflict with I.C.
36-7-9, the Indiana Code shall control.  Any amendments to that chapter of
the Indiana Code shall be amendments to this subchapter.  Repeal of that
chapter shall not act as a repeal of this subchapter.



(Ord. 79-49, passed 11-26-79; Am. Ord. 81-34, passed 11-9-81)



§ 150.32  BUILDING COMMISSIONER.



   The Building Commissioner is authorized to proceed under the provisions
of this subchapter in ordering the repair or removal of any buildings deemed
to be unsafe or in ordering conformance with any minimum housing standards,
as specified herein.  The Building Commissioner, with the consent and
approval of the Board of Public Safety, is authorized to appoint an Assistant
Building Commissioner whose duties shall be determined by the Building
Commissioner.  The salary of the Assistant Building Commissioner shall be
fixed by the Board of Public Safety.  For the purposes of this subchapter,
the Building Commissioner and his assistants shall have the power of police
officers.  They shall have the right to enter a building, site, or premises,
or upon any work in process of construction, upon showing proper credentials,
at reasonable hours, or at any time if an emergency exists affecting life,
safety, or property.  Penalties and remedies for interfering with the
Building Commissioner or his assistants or for other violations of or
non-compliance with this chapter shall be as provided in the Indiana Code.



(Ord. 79-49, passed 11-26-79; Am. Ord. 81-34, passed 11-9-81)



§ 150.33  DEPARTMENT OF BUILDINGS.



   (A)   The administration of the Department of Buildings shall cover
fully the survey and inspection of all classes of buildings in the process of
construction and already constructed, all laws and ordinances relative to
their erection, construction, alteration, repair, removal, and safety, all
building structures, heating apparatus, gas fittings, house drainage and
plumbing, electric wiring, equipment, air conditioning, refrigeration, fire
protective devices, prevention of smoke, and construction of spires.



   (B)   The Building Commissioner shall:



      (1)   Examine and approve all plans and specifications before
issuing permits;



      (2)   Have the power of signing and issuing permits,
certificates, bulletins, or notices, and shall have the power to revoke the
same;



      (3)   Promptly acknowledge the receipt of all official
communications, notices, and reports;



      (4)   Inspect all one- and two-family dwellings and lodging
houses for the purpose of determining the safety thereof in the event of fire
or accident, which inspections shall include entrances, openings,
passageways, halls, stairways, fire escapes, and other means of exit or
egress, the strength of floors, and the column and beam framing of such
buildings;



      (5)   Maintain an accurate building record of all work carried
on in the city, as well as a report of daily operations showing the
investigations and disposition of each individual case; and,



      (6)   Follow carefully the process of erection of all
structures for which building permits have been issued by the Department of
Buildings.



   (C)   Everything pertaining to, affected by, or part of any building
in process of construction, or any existing building, shall be under the
jurisdiction of the Department of Buildings.  The Department and its
administrators shall have jurisdiction of all problems relating to
excavating, soil-bearing, needling, shoring, underpinning, form work, framing
construction, the inspection of iron and steel, the construction and assembly
of masonry, concrete, brick, stone, cement and tile, foundations,
fireproofing, timber construction and framing, general carpentry
construction, mechanical equipment, plumbing and heating, and electrical
wiring relative to dwellings, fire escapes, stairways, signs, skylights,
elevators, escalators, and any and all equipment used in the construction,
remodeling, or repair of any buildings, or consisting of any part thereof,
all of which are fully covered by this subchapter.



(Ord. 79-49, passed 11-26-79)



§ 150.34  PROTECTION OF THE PUBLIC.



   No building project shall proceed without the contractor or his
authorized agent taking the proper precautions for the protection of life and
property.  Where permission is given for the storage of materials, where
excavations have been made, or where anything in or about work or
construction is being undertaken, there shall be properly displayed all
necessary warning signs/red lights, and danger signals.  All red lights or
lanterns must be lighted before sundown and kept burning throughout the night
until sunrise.



(Ord. 79-49, passed 11-26-79)



§ 150.35  ORDERS.



   In any case where an order has been issued under the authority of this
subchapter for the repair, alteration, or improvement of a building or
dwelling:



   (A)   If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the building or
dwelling can be made at a cost of less than 50% of the value of the building
or dwelling, the order shall require the owner, within the time specified
therein,  to repair,  alter, or improve such building or dwelling so as to
render it fit for human habitation or to vacate and close the building or
dwelling as a human habitation or for any and every use.



   (B)   If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the building or
dwelling cannot be made at a cost of less than 50% of the value of the
building or dwelling, the order shall require the owner, within 60 days, to
remove or demolish such building or dwelling.



(Ord. 79-49, passed 11-26-79)



§ 150.36  COMPLIANCE WITH ORDERS.



   (A)   If the owner of the building or dwelling fails to comply with
the order to repair, alter, improve, or vacate and close the building or
dwelling, the Building Commissioner shall cause to be posted on the main
entrance to any building or dwelling so closed, a placard with the following
words: "This building is dangerous and unfit for human habitation.  The use
or occupancy of this building for human habitation, or any other purpose, is
prohibited and unlawful."



   (B)   If the owner fails to comply with an order to remove or
demolish a building, the Building Commissioner may cause such building to be
removed or demolished as provided in I.C. 36-7-9-10.



   (C)   A person who violates any provision of this subchapter or any
provision of I.C. 36-7-9-28 shall be subject to the penalties to which that
statute refers.



(Ord. 79-49, passed 11-26-79; Am. Ord. 81-34, passed 11-9-81)



§ 150.37  APPLICABILITY TO EXISTING BUILDINGS.



   Existing buildings may be maintained in their present condition and
occupancy, except that such changes as are specifically required herein or
which may become necessary for safety shall be made when ordered by the
Building Commissioner.  Existing buildings which comply with the
requirements of this subchapter for existing buildings may be altered and
repaired at a cost not exceeding 50% of their value without being made to
comply with the requirements for new buildings, provided the occupancy is not
changed and the hazard to occupants and surrounding property is not
increased, in the opinion of the Building Commissioner.  Existing buildings
damaged by collapse or fire to the extent of less than 50% of their value may
be rebuilt in conformity with this subchapter.



(Ord. 79-49, passed 11-26-79)



§ 150.38  COORDINATION WITH PLAN COMMISSION.



   In the administration of this subchapter, and any other ordinances
incident thereto, the Department of Buildings shall coordinate its activities
with the Posey County Area Plan Commission at all times in order to prevent
unnecessary overlapping, duplication, and waste in the administrative process.



(Ord. 79-49, passed 11-26-79)



§ 150.39  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   In addition to the definitions contained in I.C. 36-7-9-2, for
the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BASEMENT.  A portion of a building located partly underground, but
having less than half its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the average
grade of the adjoining ground.



   BUILDING COMMISSIONER.  The Commissioner of Buildings of the City of
Mt. Vernon, or his authorized representatives.



   CELLAR.  A portion of a building located partly or wholly underground,
and having half or more than half of its clear floor-to-ceiling height below
the average grade of the adjoining ground.



   DWELLING.  Any building which is wholly or partly used or intended to
be used for living or sleeping by human occupants; provided that “Temporary
Housing” as defined in this section shall not be regarded as a dwelling.



   DWELLING UNIT.  Any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling
and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used or
intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating.



   EXTERMINATION.  The control and elimination of insects, rodents or
other pests by eliminating their harborage places, by removing or making
inaccessible materials that may serve as their food, by poisoning, spraying,
fumigating, trapping, or by any other recognized and legal pest elimination
methods approved by the Posey County Board of Health.



   GARBAGE.  The animal and vegetable waste resulting from handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food.



   HABITABLE ROOM.  A room or enclosed floor space used or intended to be
used for sleeping, cooking, or eating purposes, excluding bathrooms, water
closet compartments, laundries, pantries, foyers, or communicating corridors,
closets, storage spaces, and recreation rooms not used as sleeping space.



   INFESTATION.  The presence, within or around a dwelling, of any
insects, rodents or other pests.



   MULTIPLE DWELLING.  Any dwelling containing more than two dwelling
units.



   OCCUPANT.  Any person, over one year of age, living, sleeping,
cooking, eating in or having possession of a dwelling unit, rooming unit, or
other building.



   OPERATOR.  Any person who has charge, care or control of any building,
or part thereof, including but not limited to any building in which dwelling
units or rooming units are let.



   OWNER.  Any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others:



      (1)   Shall have legal title to any dwelling, dwelling unit,
or other building, with or without accompanying actual possession thereof; or



      (2)   Shall have charge, care or control of any dwelling,
dwelling unit, or other building as owner or agent of the owner, or as
executor, executrix, administrator, administratrix, trustee or guardian of
the estate of the owner. Any person representing the actual owner shall be
bound to comply with the provisions of this Minimum Housing and Building Code
and of Rules and Regulations adopted pursuant thereto, to the same extent as
if he were the owner.



   PERSON.  Includes any individual, firm, corporation, association, or
partnership.



   PLUMBING. Includes all of following supplies, facilities and equipment:
gas pipes, gas-burning equipment, water pipes, garbage disposal units, waste
pipes, water closets, sinks, installed dishwashers, lavatories, bathtubs,
shower baths, installed clothes-washing machines, catch basins, drains, vents
and any other similar supplied fixtures, together with all connections to
water, sewer or gas pipes.



   PREMISES.  All areas including but not limited to yards, outbuildings
and courts.



   ROOMING HOUSE.  Any dwelling, or that part of any dwelling containing
one or more rooming units in which-space is let, for a valuable
consideration, by the owner or operator to three or more persons who are not
husband and wife, son or daughter, mother or father, sister or brother, of
the owner or operator.



   ROOMING UNIT.  Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable
unit, used or intended to be used for living and sleeping but not for cooking
or eating purposes.



   RUBBISH.  Combustible and non combustible waste materials, except
garbage.  The term shall include the residue from the burning of wood, coal,
coke, and other combustible material, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, excelsior,
rubber, leather, tree branches, wood, yard trimmings. tin cans, metals,
mineral matter, glass crockery and dust.



   SUPPLIED.  Paid for, furnished or provided by or under the control of
the owner or operator.



   TEMPORARY HOUSING.  Any tent, trailer, or other structure used for
human shelter, which is designed to be transportable and which is not
attached to the ground, to another structure or to any utility system on the
same premises for more than 30 consecutive days.



   (B)   Wherever the words “Dwelling,” “dwelling unit,”
“rooming house,” “rooming unit,” or “premises” are used in this
subchapter, they shall be construed as though they are followed by the words
“or any part thereof”.



   (C)   Wherever the term is used in I.C. 36-7-9:



   DEPARTMENT.  The Board of Public Works of the City of Mt. Vernon.



   ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY.  The Building Commissioner of the City of Mt.
Vernon.



   HEARING AUTHORITY.  Refers to the person or persons designated as such
by the Mayor.



(Ord. 79-49, passed 11-26-79; Am. Ord. 81-34, passed 11-9-81; Am. Ord. 05-04,
passed 4-11-05)



§ 150.40  DWELLING UNIT REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Kitchen and bathroom facilities: means of egress.  No person
shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy any dwelling
or dwelling unit for the purpose of living, sleeping, cooking, or eating
therein, which does not comply with the following requirements:



      (1)   Every dwelling unit shall contain a kitchen sink in good
working condition and properly connected to a water system and sewer system
approved by the Building Commissioner.



      (2)   Every dwelling unit shall contain a room which affords
privacy to a person with the room and which is equipped with a flush water
closet and a lavatory basin in good working condition and properly connected
to a water and sewer system approved by the Posey County Board of Health and
the Building Commissioner.



      (3)   Every dwelling unit shall contain, within a room which
affords privacy to a person within the room, a bathtub or shower in good
working condition and properly connected to a water and sewer system approved
by the Posey County Board of Health and the Building Commissioner.



      (4)   Every kitchen sink, lavatory basin and bathtub or shower
required under the provisions of divisions (A)(1) through (3) of this section
shall be properly connected with both hot and cold water lines.



      (5)   Every dwelling unit shall be supplied with adequate
rubbish storage facilities, the type and location of which is approved by the
Building Commissioner.



      (6)   Every dwelling unit shall have adequate garbage disposal
facilities or garbage storage containers, the type and location of which is
approved by the Building Commissioner.



      (7)   Every dwelling shall have supplied water heating
facilities which are properly installed, are maintained in safe and good
working condition, are properly connected to hot water lines required under
the provisions of division (a)(4) of this section and are capable of heating
water to such a temperature as to permit an adequate amount of water to be
drawn at a required kitchen sink, lavatory basin, bathtub or shower at a
temperature of not less than 120° F.  Such supplied water heating
facilities shall be capable of meeting the requirements of this division
(A)(7) when the dwelling or dwelling unit heating facility required under the
provisions of division (A)(4) of this section are not in question.



      (8)   Every dwelling unit shall have safe, unobstructed means
of egress leading to a safe and open space at ground level, as required by
laws of this state and city.



   (B)   Light, ventilation, heating facilities.  No person shall
occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy any dwelling or
dwelling units for the purpose of living therein, which does not comply with
the following minimum requirements:



      (1)   Every habitable room shall have at least one window or
skylight directly facing the outdoors.  The minimum total window area,
measured between stops, for every habitable room shall be 10% of the floor
area of such room.  Whenever walls or other portions of structures face a
window of any such room and such light-obstructing structures are located
less than three feet from the window and extend to a level above that of the
ceiling of the room such window shall not be deemed to face directly to the
outdoors and shall not be included as contributing to the required minimum
total window area.  Whenever the only window in a room is a skylight-type
window in the top of such room, the total window area of such skylight shall
equal at least 15% of the total floor area of such room.



      (2)   Every habitable room shall have at lease one window or
skylight which can be easily opened, or such other device that will
adequately ventilate the room.  The total of openable window area in every
habitable room shall be equal to at least 45% of the minimum window area size
or minimum skylight window size, as required in division (B)(1) of this
section, except where there is supplied some other device affording adequate
ventilation and approved by the Building Commissioner.



      (3)   Every bathroom and water closet compartment shall comply
with the light and ventilation requirements for habitable rooms contained in
divisions (B)(1) and (2) of this section, except no window or skylight shall
be required in adequately ventilated bathrooms and water closet compartments
equipped with a ventilation system which is kept in continuous operation and
is approved by the Building Commissioner.



      (4)   Where there is electric service available from power
lines which are not more than 300 feet from a dwelling, every habitable room
of such dwelling shall contain at least two separate wall or floor type
electric convenience outlets, or one such convenience outlet and one supplied
ceiling type electric light fixture.  Every water closet compartment,
bathroom, laundry room, furnace room, and public hall shall contain at least
one supplied ceiling or wall type electric light fixture.  Every such outlet
and fixture shall be properly installed, maintained in good and safe working
condition and connected to the source of electric power in a safe manner.



      (5)   Every dwelling shall have heating facilities which are
properly installed, are maintained in safe and good working condition, and
are capable of safely and adequately heating all habitable rooms, bathrooms,
and water closet compartments in every dwelling unit located therein to a
temperature of at least 70°F., at a distance three feet above floor level.



      (6)   Every public hall or stairway in every multiple dwelling
containing five or more dwelling units shall be adequately lighted at all
times.  Every public hall or stairway in structures devoted solely to
dwelling occupancy and containing not more than four dwelling units may be
supplied with conveniently located light switches, controlling an adequate
lighting system which may be turned on as needed, instead of full-time
lighting.



      (7)   During that portion of the year from April 1 to October
1, for protection against mosquitoes, flies, and other insects, every door
opening directly from a dwelling unit to outdoor space shall be supplied with
screens with metal or elastic screen wire of not less than 16 meshes to the
square inch, and a self closing device.  Every window or other device with
opening to outdoor space used or intended to be used for ventilation, shall
likewise be supplied with such screens, provided that such screens shall not
be required during such period in rooms deemed by the Building Commissioner
to be located high enough in upper stories of buildings as to be free from
such insects, and in rooms located in areas of the city which are deemed by
the Building Commissioner to have so few insects as to render screens
unnecessary.



      (8)   Every basement or cellar window used or intended to be
used for  ventilation and every other opening to a basement which might
provide an entry for rodents shall be supplied with such a screen or other
device as will effectively prevent their entrance.



   (C)   Construction; cleanliness; services.  No person shall own,
possess, occupy, or let to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling
unit, for the purpose of living therein, which does not comply with the
following minimum requirements:



      (1)   Every foundation, floor, wall, ceiling, and roof shall
be reasonably weathertight, watertight, rodentproof, shall be capable of
affording privacy and shall be kept in good repair.



      (2) Every window, exterior door, and basement hatchway, shall be
reasonably weathertight, watertight, and rodentproof, and shall be kept in
sound working condition and good repair.



      (3)   Every inside and outside stair, every porch and every
appurtenance thereto shall be constructed as to be safe to use and capable of
supporting the load that normal use may cause to be placed thereon, and shall
be kept in sound condition and good repair.



      (4)   Every plumbing fixture and water and waste pipe shall be
properly installed and maintained in good sanitary working condition, free
from defects, leaks and obstructions.



      (5)   Every water closet compartment floor surface and
bathroom floor surface shall be constructed and maintained so as to be
reasonably impervious to water and so as to permit such floor to be easily
kept in a clean and sanitary condition.



      (6)   Every supplied facility, piece of equipment, or utility
which is required under this subchapter shall be so constructed or installed
that it will function safely and effectively and shall be maintained in
satisfactory working condition.



      (7)   No owner, operator, or occupant shall cause any service,
facility, equipment or utility which is required under this subchapter to be
removed from or shut off from or discontinued for any occupied dwelling let
or occupied by him, except for the temporary interruption as may be necessary
while actual repairs or alterations are in process, or during temporary
emergencies when discontinuance of service is approved by the Building
Commissioner.



      (8)   No owner shall occupy or let to another for occupancy
any vacant dwelling unit unless it is clean, sanitary and fit for human
occupancy.



      (9)   All courts, yards, or other areas on the premises
outside every dwelling shall be drained so as to prevent the accumulation of
surface water, and shall be kept free from rubbish, garbage, rodent
infestation, or from other matter deleterious to health or constituting a
fire hazard.



      (10)    The Building Commissioner shall determine that a
dwelling is unfit for human habitation or a building is dangerous if he
finds: (a) interior walls or other vertical structural members which list,
lean, or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the
center of gravity falls outside the middle third of its base; (b) supporting
member or members which show 33% or more damage or deterioration; (c)
nonsupporting enclosing or outside walls or covering which show 50% or more
damage or deterioration; or (d) floors or roofs which have improperly
distributed loads or which are so damaged by fire, wind, or other causes as
endangers the lives, safety or welfare of the occupants or other people in
the City.



   (D)   Floor space; room arrangement; habitable basement.  No person
shall occupy or let to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit,
for the purpose of living therein, which does not comply with the following
minimum requirements:



      (1)   Every dwelling unit shall contain at least 150 square
feet of floor space for the first occupant thereof, and at least 100
additional square feet of floor space for every additional occupant thereof,
the floor space being calculated on the basis of total habitable room area.



      (2)   In every dwelling unit of two or more rooms, every room
occupied for sleeping purposes by one occupant shall contain at least 70
square feet of floor space, and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by
more than one occupant shall contain at least 50 square feet of floor space
for each occupant thereof.



      (3)   No dwelling or dwelling unit containing two or more
sleeping rooms shall have such room arrangements that access to the bathroom
or water closet compartment intended for use by occupants of more than one
sleeping room can be had only by going through another sleeping room, nor
shall room arrangements be such that access to a sleeping room can be had
only by going through another sleeping room or bathroom or water closet
compartment.



      (4)   At least one-half of the floor area of every habitable
room shall have a ceiling height of at least seven feet, and the floor area
of that part of any room where the ceiling height is less than five feet
shall not be considered as part of the floor area in computing the total
floor area of the room for purposes of determining the maximum permissible
occupancy thereof.



      (5)   No cellar space shall be used as a habitable room or
dwelling unit.



      (6)   No basement shall be used as a habitable room or
dwelling unit unless:



         (a)   The floor and walls are impervious to leakage of
underground and surface runoff water and are insulated against dampness;



         (b)   The total window area of each room is equal to at
least the minimum window area size as required in division (B)(1) of this
section;



         (c)   Such required minimum window area is located
entirely above the grade of ground adjoining such window area;



         (d)   The total openable window area in each room is
equal to at least the minimum as required in division (B)(2) of this section,
except where there is supplied some other device affording adequate
ventilation and approved by the Building Commissioner.



         (e)   The central heating plant of the dwelling in which
such habitable room is located is separated from such habitable room by a
one-hour fire resistive material.



   (E)   Owner responsible for sanitary condition.  Every owner of a
dwelling containing three or more dwelling units shall be responsible for
maintaining in a clean and sanitary condition the shared or public areas of
the dwelling or premises thereof.



   (F)   Occupant responsible for sanitary conditions.  Every occupant
of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall keep in a clean and sanitary condition
that part of the dwelling unit and premises thereof which he occupies and
controls.



   (G)   Rubbish and garbage disposal.



      (1)   Every occupant of a dwelling or a dwelling unit shall
dispose of all his rubbish in a clean and sanitary manner by placing it in
the rubbish containers required by division (A)(6) of this section.



      (2)   Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall
dispose of all his garbage and any other organic waste which might provide
food for rodents in a clean and sanitary manner by placing it in the garbage
disposal facilities or garbage storage containers required by division (A)(5)
of this section.



      (3)   It shall be the responsibility of the owner to supply
such facilities or containers for all dwelling units in a dwelling containing
more than four dwelling units and for all dwelling units located on the
premises where more than four dwelling units share the same premises.  In
all other cases it shall be the responsibility of the occupant to furnish
such facilities or containers.



   (H)   Installing screens and storm doors.  Every occupant of a
dwelling or dwelling unit shall be responsible for hanging all screens and
double or storm doors and windows whenever the same are required under the
provisions of this subchapter, or of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant
thereto, except where the owner has agreed to supply such services.



   (I)   Extermination of insects.  Every occupant of a dwelling
containing a single dwelling unit shall be responsible for the extermination
of any insects, rodents or other pests therein or on the premises; and every
occupant of a dwelling unit in a dwelling containing more than one dwelling
unit shall be responsible for such extermination whenever his dwelling unit
is the only one infested.  Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this
section, whenever infestation exists in two or more dwelling units in any
dwelling or in shared public parts of any dwelling containing two or more
dwelling units, extermination thereof shall be the responsibility of the
owner.



   (J)   Plumbing fixtures.  Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall
keep all plumbing fixtures therein in a clean and sanitary condition and
shall be responsible for the exercise of a reasonable care in the proper use
and operation thereof.



(Ord. 79-49, passed 11-26-79; Am. Ord. 05-04, passed 4-11-05)



§ 150.41  ROOMING HOUSE REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Compliance.  No person shall operate a rooming house or
occupy or let to another for occupancy any rooming unit in any rooming house,
except in compliance with the provisions of this subchapter, excepting,
however, the provisions of § 150.40(A) and such other sections which, by
their terms, do not apply to rooming houses.



   (B)   Provisions also applicable to hotels.  Every provision of
this subchapter which applies to rooming houses shall also apply to hotels,
except to the extent that any such provision may be found in conflict with
the laws of this State or with the lawful regulations of any State Board or
Agency.



   (C)   Permit required; display; transfer; expiration.



      (1)   No person shall operate a rooming house unless he holds
a valid rooming house permit issued by the Building Commissioner for the
specific dwelling or dwelling unit.  The operator shall apply to the
Building Commissioner for such permit, which permit shall be issued by the
Building Commissioner upon compliance of the operator with the applicable
provisions of this subchapter.  This permit shall be displayed in a
conspicuous place with the rooming house at all times.  The charge for such
permit shall be $10.



      (2)   No such permit shall be transferable.  Every person
holding such permit shall give notice in writing to the Building Commissioner
within 24 hours after having sold, transferred, given away or otherwise
disposed of ownership of, interest in or control of any rooming house.  Such
notice shall include the name and address of the person succeeding to the
ownership or control of such rooming house.



      (3)   Every rooming house permit shall expire at the end of
one year following its date of issuance, unless sooner revoked or suspended
for any violation of this subchapter.



   (D)   Permit application denied; hearing.  Any person whose
application for a permit to operate a rooming house has been denied by the
Building Commissioner may request and shall be granted a hearing on the
matter before the Building Commissioner in a like manner and in accordance
with the provisions of I.C. 36-7-9-7.



   (E)   Bathroom Facilities.  At least one flush water closet,
lavatory basin and bathtub or showers properly connected to a water and sewer
system approved by the Posey County Board of Health, and in good working
condition, shall be supplied for each eight persons or fraction thereof,
residing within a rooming house, including members of the operator's family
wherever they share the use of the facilities; provided that, in a rooming
house where rooms are let only to males, flush urinals may be substituted for
not more than one-half the required number of water closets.  All such
facilities shall be so located within the dwelling as to be reasonably
accessible from a common hall or passageway to all persons sharing the
facility.  Every lavatory basin and bathtub and shower shall be supplied
with hot water at all times.  No such facilities shall be located in a
basement except by written approval of the Building Commissioner.



   (F)   Linens.  The operator of every rooming house shall change
supplied bed linen and towels therein at least once each week, and prior to
the letting of any room to any occupant.  The operator shall be responsible
for the maintenance of all supplied bed linen in a clean and sanitary manner.



   (G)   Sleeping rooms floor space.  Every room occupied for sleeping
purposes by one person shall contain at least 70 square feet of floor space,
and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one person shall
contain at least 50 square feet of floor space for each occupant thereof.



   (H)   Means of egress.  Every rooming unit shall have safe,
unobstructed means of egress leading to safe and open space at ground level,
as required by the laws of this State and City.



   (I)   Operator responsible for sanitary conditions.  The operator
of every rooming house shall be responsible for the sanitary maintenance of
all walls, floors, ceilings, and for maintenance of a sanitary conditions in
every other part of the rooming house.  He shall be further responsible for
the sanitary maintenance of the entire premises where the entire structure or
building is leased or occupied by the operator.



(Ord. 79-49, passed 11-26-79)



§ 150.42  BUILDING PERMIT AND INSPECTION FEES.



   For a schedule of building permit and inspection fees, see the Appendix
to this chapter.



§ 150.43  ADOPTION OF ELECTRICAL, PLUMBING, REFRIGERATION, HEATING AND AIR
CONDITIONING CODES.



   (A)   Adoption of National Electrical Code.  The Common Council of
the City of Mt. Vernon, Indiana, hereby adopts by reference the National
Electrical Code, and all amendments thereto, of the National Board of Fire
Underwriters.  The National Electrical Code herein adopted shall be a part
of this Building Code as though fully set forth herein.  One copy of this
Code is on file at the City Clerk's Office, Mt. Vernon, Indiana.



   (B)   Adoption of the State Plumbing Rules and Regulations.  The
Common Council of the City of Mt. Vernon, Indiana, hereby adopts by reference
the Plumbing Rules and Regulations, Volume III, of the Administrative
Building Council of Indiana, 1968, and all amendments thereto.  The Rules
and Regulations herein adopted shall  be a part of this Building Code as
though fully set forth herein.  One copy of the Rules and Regulations is on
file in the City Clerk's Office, Mt. Vernon, Indiana.



   (C)   Adoption of the Steam Fitting and Refrigeration Code.  The
Common Council of the City of Mt. Vernon, Indiana, hereby adopts by reference
the  State of  Indiana Rules  and  Regulations for Boiler and Pressure
Vessels, 1972 Edition of Indiana Boiler and Pressure Vessel Board, and all
amendments thereto.  The Rules and Regulations herein adopted shall be a
part of this Building Code as though fully set forth herein.  One copy of
the Rules and Regulations is on file in the City Clerk's Office, Mt. Vernon,
Indiana.



   (D)   Heating and Air Conditioning Code.  The Common Council of the
City of Mt. Vernon, Indiana hereby adopts the Rules and Regulations of the
Administrative Building Council of Indiana known as Heating, Ventilating, and
Air Conditioning Rules and Regulations of Volume IV, 1969, and all amendments
thereto.  One copy of this Code is on file at the City Clerk's Office, Mt.
Vernon, Indiana.



(Ord. 79-49, passed 11-26-79)



VACANT STRUCTURES



§ 150.55  POLICY CONCERNING VACANT STRUCTURES.



   (A)   In Indiana, especially in urban areas, there exist a large
number of unoccupied structures that are not maintained and that constitute a
hazard to public health, safety, and welfare.



   (B)   Vacant structures often become dilapidated because the
structures are not maintained and repaired by the owners or persons in
control of the structures.



   (C)   Vacant structures attract children, become harborage for
vermin, serve as temporary abodes for vagrants and criminals, and are likely
to be damaged by vandals or set ablaze by arsonists.



   (D)   Unkept grounds surrounding vacant structures invite dumping of
garbage, trash, and other debris.



   (E)   Many vacant structures are situated on narrow city lots and in
close proximity to neighboring structures, thereby increasing the risk of
conflagration and spread of insect and rodent infestation.



   (F)   Vacant, deteriorated structures contribute to blight, cause a
decrease in property values, and discourage neighbors from making
improvements to properties.



   (G)   Structures that remain boarded up for an extended period of
time also exert a blighting influence and contribute to the decline of the
neighborhood by decreasing property values, discouraging persons from moving
into the neighborhood, and encouraging persons to move out of the
neighborhood.



   (H)   Vacant structures often continue to deteriorate to the point
that demolition of the structure is required, thereby decreasing available
housing in a community and further contributing to the decline of the
neighborhood.



   (I)   The blighting influence of vacant, deteriorated structures
adversely affects the tax revenues of local government.



   (J)   The city finds that vacant, deteriorated structures create a
serious and substantial problem in urban areas and are public nuisances.



   (K)   In recognition of the problems created in a community by
vacant structures, the city finds that vigorous and disciplined action should
be taken to ensure the proper maintenance and repair of vacant structures and
will adopt maintenance and repair standards appropriate for the community in
accordance with proclamation.



(Ord. 13-3, passed 3-7-13)



§ 150.56  ADOPTION OF INTERNATIONAL EXISTING BUILDING CODE AND
INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE.



   (A)   Adoption of International Existing Building Code (Commercial
Property). The 2003 International Existing Building Code, and all amendments
thereto, is hereby adopted by reference as though fully set forth herein,



   (B)   Adoption of International Property Maintenance Code
(Residential and Commercial Property, occupied and unoccupied). The 2003
International Existing Property Maintenance Code, and all amendments thereto,
is hereby adopted by reference as though fully set forth herein.



(Ord. 13-3, passed 3-7-13)



§ 150.57  ADOPTION OF LOCAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE FOR EXTERIOR
MAINTENANCE OF RESIDENTIAL AND COMMERCIAL BUILDINGS.



   (A)   The following minimum exterior maintenance requirements are
incorporated Into Title XV Land Usage, Chapter 150 Building Regulations,
Minimum Building and Housing Code (Unsafe Building Code).



   (B)   All buildings/properties within the city shall be maintained
according to the following exterior maintenance requirements. In the event a
different city, state, or federal code, rule, regulation, or law requires a
different level of maintenance, all requirements shall apply, and if there is
a conflict, the more stringent requirement shall apply.



      (1)   Grading and drainage. All premises shall be graded and
maintained to prevent the erosion of soil and to prevent the accumulation of
water thereon, or within any structure located thereon.



      (2)   Stairs, decks, porches, and balconies. Stairs, decks,
porches, balconies and similar areas shall be kept in a proper state of
repair, structurally sound, with proper anchorage, capable of supporting the
imposed loads, and maintained free from hazardous conditions.



      (3)   Rodents. All structures and premises shall be kept free
from rodent harborage and infestation. Where rodents are found, they shall be
promptly exterminated by an approved process which will not be injurious to
human health. After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to
eliminate rodent harborage and prevent re-infestation.



      (4)   Exhaust vents. Pipes, ducts, conductors, fans or blowers
shall not discharge gases, steam, noxious vapors, hot air, grease smoke,
odors, or other gaseous or particulate wastes directly upon abutting or
adjacent public or private property.



      (5)   Accessory structures. All accessory structures on
premises shall be maintained in compliance with all property maintenance
codes.



      (6)   Swimming pools. Swimming pools shall be maintained in a
safe, clean and sanitary condition, in accordance with all state and local
codes, and in good repair.



      (7)   Defacement of property. No person shall knowingly or
intentionally damage, mutilate or deface any exterior surface of any
structure or building on any private or public property by placing thereon
any marking, carving, or graffiti without the consent of the owner. No curse
words or sexually explicit drawings, pictures, or expletives shall be visible
on any exterior surface. Notwithstanding the owners’ right to pursue
criminal or civil remedies against a wrongdoer, it shall be the
responsibility of the owner to restore the surface to an approved state of
maintenance or repair.



      (8)   Exterior use or storage of indoor furniture prohibited.
No person occupying or having control of any premises shall allow the use or
storage of furniture which is upholstered or not designed for outdoor use in
an uncovered or exposed area where it is likely to decay, decompose, or
retain moisture causing a health hazard.



      (9)   General exterior condition. The exterior of a structure
shall be maintained in good repair, structurally sound and sanitary so as not
to pose a threat to the public health or, safety, welfare, or be a public
nuisance. All exterior walls shall be free from holes, breaks, and loose or
rotting materials; and maintained weatherproof and properly surface-coated
where required to prevent deterioration.



      (10)   Protective treatment. All exterior, surfaces;
including, but not limited to, doors, door and window frames, cornices,
porches, trim, balconies, decks, and fences shall be maintained in good
condition. Exterior wood surfaces, other than decay-resistant woods, shall be
protected from the elements and decay by painting or other protective
covering or treatment. Peeling, flaking and chipped paint shall be eliminated
and surfaces repainted. All siding and masonry joints as well as those
between the building envelope and the perimeter or windows, doors, and
skylights shall be maintained weather-resistant and watertight.



      (11)   Structural members. All structural members shall be
maintained free from deterioration, and shall be capable of safety supporting
the imposed dead and live loads.



      (12)   Foundation walls. All foundation walls shall be
maintained plumb and free from open cracks and breaks and shall be kept in
such condition so as to prevent the entry of rodents and unwanted animals.



      (13)   Roofs and drainage. The roof and flashing shall be
sound, tight and not have defects that admit rain. Roofing shall be installed
as designed by its manufacturer. Roof drainage shall be adequate to prevent
dampness or deterioration in the walls or interior portion of the structure.
Every structure shall have adequate gutters and downspouts in sound condition
maintained in good repair to divert normal rainwater from the roof to an
available storm sewer or to cither areas on the premises, not including a
sanitary sewer, where dispersal of water will not adversely affect the
foundation of any structure and will not cause a public hazard. If there is
no storm sewer available, the downspouts shall terminate above grade with a
diverter and splash block to direct water away from the foundation of any
structure, and in a manner that will not cause a public hazard.



      (14)   Decorative features. All cornices, belt courses,
corbels, terra-cotta trim, wall facing, or other decorative features shall be
maintained in good repair with proper anchorage and in a safe condition.



      (15)   Overhang extensions. All canopies, marquees, metal
awnings, fire escapes, standpipes, exhaust ducts, and similar overhang
extensions, chimneys, cooling towers, and smoke stacks shall be maintained in
good repair and be properly anchored so as to be kept in a sound condition.
When required, all exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be protected from
the elements and against decay or rust by periodic application of
weather-resistant coatings, such as paint or similar surface treatment.



      (16)   Handrails and guardrails. Every handrail and guardrail
shall be firmly fastened and capable of supporting normally imposed loads,
and shall be maintained in good condition.



      (17)   Windows and doorframes. Every window, door and frame
shall be kept in sound condition, good repair and weather-tight. All
glazing/materials shall be maintained free from cracks and holes. Every
window, other than a fixed window, shall be easily opened and capable of
being held in position by window hardware.



      (18)   Insect screens. Doors, windows and other outside
openings utilized or required for ventilation purposes serving any structure
containing habitable rooms, food preparation areas, food service areas, or
any areas where products to be included or utilized in food for human
consumption are processed, manufactured, packaged, or stored, shall be
supplied with tightly fitting screens of not less than 16 mesh per inch.



      (19)   Basement hatchways and basement windows. Every basement
hatchway and window shall be maintained in good condition to prevent the
entrance or rodents, unwanted animals, vagrants, rain, and surface drainage
water and shall be capable of supporting normally imposed loads.



      (20)   Posting of street numbers. To enhance response for
emergency services, it shall be the responsibility of every property owner,
trustee, agent, and occupant of every structure (residential or commercial)
to post or maintain address numbers at all times. Each structure to which a
street number has been assigned shall have such number displayed on the front
of the structure or an a mailbox located on the same lot and readable from
the public right-of-way at all times, from either direction. All numbers
shall be in Arabic numerals (or equivalent) at least three inches (76 mm) in
height and a minimum of one-half-inch (13 mm) stroke, and shall be a
contrasting color from its background. If the structure is 50 feet or more
from the public roadway, the number must be at the entrance to a driveway
accessing the structure and again on the structure if the driveway provides
access to multiple structures. An addition, multiple-unit structures must
display the building number in such a manner to clearly identify each unit.



(Ord. 13-3, passed 3-7-13)  Penalty, see § 150.99



§ 150.99  PENALTY.



   If any person, firm, or corporation shall violate any of the provisions
of this chapter, or shall do any act prohibited herein, or shall fail to
perform any duty lawfully enjoined, within the time prescribed by the
Building Commissioner, or shall fail, neglect, or refuse to obey any lawful
order given by the Building Commissioner in connection with the provisions of
this chapter, for each such violation, failure, or refusal, such person,
firm, or corporation shall be fined in any sum not less than $100 nor more
than $500.  Each day of such unlawful activity as is prohibited by the first
sentence of this section shall constitute a separate offense.



(Ord. 88-15, passed 5-23-88)



APPENDIX:  SCHEDULE OF FEES



   The following fees shall apply to the building code:



   (A)   One- and two-family housing:



 



 
Fees


(1)   Single Family (Mechanics included)
 
$150 for homes having a completed construction cost value of $1-$200,000;
$200 for homes having a completed construction cost value of
$200,001-$299,999;
$300 for homes having a  completed construction cost value of $300,000 and
higher


(2)   Two Family (Mechanics included)
 
$200 for homes having a completed construction cost value of $1-$200,000;
$250 for homes having a completed construction cost value of $200,001 and
higher


(3)   Modular/Sectional (Mechanics included and foundation included)
 
$120


(4)   Mobile Home (Single Unit) (Mechanics included)
 
$90


(5)   Carports - (Without Mechanics)
   Minimum fee of
 
$.02 sq. ft.
$25


(6)   Unattached garages, pole buildings, accessory or storage building up
to 3000 sq. ft.
 
$50


    Over 3000 sq. ft.
 
$60


(7)   Agricultural uses are exempt from fees
 


(8)   Swimming pool and required fencing
 
$10




 



   (B)   Multi-family housing:



 

 
Fees


(1)   Multi-family (three or more) (Mechanics included)
 
each unit $120


(2)   Garages, carports, accessory or storage building (Mechanics included)
 
each $50


(3)   Swimming pool and required fencing (Mechanics included)
 
$50 plus $10 (per unit serviced)


 



 



   (C)   Remodel & addition permits - one- and two-family housing:



 

 
Fees


(1)   Minimum Fee (examples include, but are not limited to open porch,
non-enclosed deck) - (Mechanics not included)
 
$50


(2)   Remodel-Addition, (Mechanics included)
 
$100


   (examples include, but are not limited to adding room, enclosed porch,
attached garage (new or replacement))
 


(3)   Siding/Roofing/Foundation/Windows
 
$50



 



   (D)   One- and two-family housing electrical permit:



 

 
Fees


(1)   Up to 400 AMPS
 
$50


(2)   Above 400 AMPS
 
$75


 



 



      Other Than One- and Two-Family Housing:



 

 
Fees


(1)   Apartment and Motels, Hotels (each)
 
$25 per unit


 



 



      Commercial:



 

 
Fees


(1)   Minimum fee of
 
$100



 



      Manufacturing & industrial:



 

 
Fees


(1)   Minimum fee of
 
$100



 



   (E)   Plumbing permits - not listed in other sections:



 

 
Fees


(1)   One- and Two-Family Housing
 
$25


(2)   Apartments, Motels, Hotels, etc  per unit
 
$25


(3)   Commercial and schools  per rest room
 
$40


(4)   Industrial and Manufacturing
 
$100



 



   (F)   Heating and/or air conditioning - not listed in other section:



 



 
Fees


(1)   One- and Two-Family Dwelling:
 


   (a)   Gas Meter Only
 
$25


   (b)   Gas Meter with new furnace
 
$30


   (c)   Gas Meter with new furnace and air conditioning
 
$35


(2)   Apartments, Motels and Hotel, etc  per unit
 
$25


(3)   Commercial and schools  plus $3 per ton
 
$25


(4)   Industrial and Manufacturing  plus $3 per ton
 
$50


(5)   Boiler - other than One- and Two-Family Dwelling includes all piping
- see division (K)
 




 



   (G)   Signs:



 

 
Fees


(1)   Under 100 sq. ft (Minimum)
 
$100


(2)   Over 100 sq. ft.
 
$75


(3)   Add for Electric from Electrical Section
 



 



   (H)   Fees for moving buildings:



 

 
Fees


(1)   Minimum Fee
 
$25


(2)   1½ stories or more
 
$40


(3)   Other Buildings, Vessels, Boilers, etc.
 
$50



 



   (I)   Fees for wrecking buildings, vessels, etc.:



 

 
Fees


(1)   1st 1,000 sq. ft.
 
$15


(2)   For each 1,000 sq. ft. thereafter or fraction thereof
 
$10


(3)   Removal of underground tanks
 
$20



 



   (J)   Reinspection fees.  When an inspection is called for, and it
is not ready, the person who bought the permit may be sent a bill for $10
plus $.25 per mile for reinspection.  If not paid in 30 days, it will be
turned over to the Prosecutor for collection at which time the fee will be
doubled.



   (K)   Other fees.  For all other construction other than dwellings
and for all new and remodeling construction other than dwellings



      (1)   Warehouses, parking garages, truck terminals, hangers,
light industrial buildings, Communications Towers, with Building... $6 per
$1,000 up to a maximum of $10,000.



      (2)   Private clubs, country clubs and building designed for
public or private meetings, restaurants, shopping centers, office buildings
and similar types of buildings, hospitals, nursing homes, banks, schools,
savings and loans, laboratories, clinics, camping sites, amusement parks,
apartments, hotels and motels... $6 per $1,000 up to a maximum of $10,000



 

 
Fees


(3)   Service stations
 
$75


   (a)   Plus each tank over 660 gallons
 
$25


   (b)   Tank replacement or new tanks over 660 gallons  per tank
 
$50


   (c)   Tanks 660 gallons or less  per tank
 
$25



 



(Ord. 79-49, passed 11-26-79; Am. Ord. 88-15, passed 5-23-88; Am. Ord. 93-4,
passed 4-26-93; Am. Ord. 93-13, passed 8-9-93; Am. Ord. 98-05, passed
6-22-98; Am. Ord. 10-12, passed 8-9-10)



CHAPTER 151:  MASTER PLAN



Section



   151.01   Adoption by reference



§ 151.01  ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.



   The Master Plan of the city is hereby incorporated by reference as if
fully set forth herein.



(Ord. 1020, passed 12-30-63)



CHAPTER 152:  SUBDIVISION CONTROL



Section




General Provisions




   152.001   Title



   152.002   Policy



   152.003   Purposes of these regulations



   152.004   Authority and jurisdiction



   152.005   Enactment



   152.006   Interpretation, conflict and separability



   152.007   Saving provision



   152.008   Reservations and repeals



   152.009   Amendments



   152.010   Conditions



   152.011   Resubdivision of land



   152.012   Variances



   152.013   Enforcement, violation, and penalties



   152.014   Appeals from the enforcement of the chapter



   152.015   Review by certiorari of decisions



   152.016   Usage



   152.017   Definitions




Subdivision Approval Process




   152.030   General procedure



   152.031   Major and minor subdivisions



   152.032   Major subdivisions



   152.033   Minor subdivisions



   152.034   Exempt divisions




Improvement Standards




   152.045   General improvements



   152.046   Lot improvements



   152.047   Streets



   152.048   Drainage and storm sewers



   152.049   Water facilities



   152.050   Sewerage facilities



   152.051   Sidewalks



   152.052   Utilities and easements



   152.053   Parks, playgrounds, and recreation areas



   152.054   Preservation of natural features and amenities



   152.055   Non-residential subdivisions



   152.056   Off-site public facilities




Completion and Maintenance of Improvements




   152.070   Improvements completion and performance bond



   152.071   Inspection of public improvements



   152.072   Maintenance of public improvements



   152.073   Waiver of required public improvements



   152.074   Issuance of building permits




Specifications for Documents




   152.085   Sketch plan



   152.086   Preliminary plat



   152.087   Construction plans



   152.088   Final subdivision plat



   152.089   Exempt “I” divisions



   152.090   Exempt “II” divisions




Certifications




   152.105   Required forms and certificates



   152.106   Form one: application for minor sketch plan review,
primary approval and certificate



   152.107   Form two: application for major sketch plan review and
certificate



   152.108   Form three: request for primary approval of a major
subdivision plat



   152.109   Form four: notice of public hearing on subdivision plat



   152.110   Form five: notice to interested parties Posey County Area
Plan Commission



   152.111   Form six: affidavit of notice to interested parties for
primary subdivision approval



   152.112   Form seven: secondary approval of subdivision



   152.113   Form eight: certificate of approval



   152.114   Form nine: land surveyor’s certificate



   152.115   Form ten: dedication certificate



   152.116   Form eleven: subdivision performance bond



   152.117   Form twelve: dedication certificate



   152.118   Form thirteen: irrevocable letter of credit



   152.119   Form fourteen: maintenance bond



   152.120   Form fifteen: statement of compliance for exempt divisions
of land



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 152.001  TITLE.



   These regulations shall hereafter be known and cited as the Subdivision
Regulations of the City of Mount Vernon, Town of Cynthiana, Town of
Poseyville and Unincorporated Posey County.



(Ord. 13-8, passed 5-16-13)



§ 152.002  POLICY.



   (A)   It is hereby declared to be the policy of the participating
communities to consider the subdivision of land and the subsequent
development of the subdivided plat as subject to the official comprehensive
plan and related policies for the orderly and efficient development of the
county and participating city and towns.



   (B)   Land to be subdivided shall be of such a character that:



      (1)   It can be developed without peril to health or peril
from flood, fire or other menace, and land shall not be subdivided until
having access to available existing public facilities and improvements and
proper provision has been made for stormwater drainage, potable water, and
sanitary sewage.



      (2)   Other necessary new public improvements such as schools,
parks, recreation facilities, and transportation facilities, are adequate for
serving the subdivision.



      (3)   Private wells and septic systems in lieu of public water
and public sanitary sewer facilities are allowable if approved by the
City/County Health Department without objection from the participating city
and towns.



   (C)   Both existing and proposed public facilities serving the
subdivision shall be property related and conform to the official city, town
and county comprehensive plans, related policies and implementation programs
including the capital budget, official map, zoning ordinance, and housing and
building code.



(Ord. 13-8, passed 5-16-13)



§ 152.003  PURPOSES OF THESE REGULATIONS.



   (A)   To protect and provide for the public health, safety, and
general welfare of the county and participating city and towns.



   (B)   To guide the future development (and renewal) of the county
and participating cily and towns in accordance with the comprehensive plans
and related policies.



   (C)   To provide for the safety, comfort, and soundness of the built
environment and related open spaces.



   (D)   To protect the compatibility, character, economic stability
and orderliness of all development through reasonable design standards.



   (E)   To guide public and private policy and action to provide
adequate and efficient public and private facilities, the most esthetically
pleasing and beneficial interrelationship between land uses, conserve natural
resources such as natural beauty, woodlands, open spaces, and energy both
during and after development.



(Ord. 13-8, passed 5-16-13)



§ 152.004  AUTHORITY AND JURISDICTION.



   (A)   This chapter which was enacted pursuant to Indiana home rule
and planning enabling legislation (I.C. 36-1-3-4 and the 36-7-4-700 et seq.,
as amended) authorized the Posey County Area Plan Commission to review and
approve or disapprove plats for subdivision throughout the county, except the
towns of New Harmony and Griffin, which show lots, blocks, or sites with or
without new streets or highways. This authority extends to the development or
resubdivision (replatting) of undeveloped portions of already recorded plats.



   (B)   No building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued
for any parcel or plat of land which was created by subdivision after the
effective date of, and not in conformity with, the provisions of these
subdivision regulations, and no excavation of land or construction of any
public or private improvements shall take place or be commenced except in
conformity with the regulations contained herein and in conformity with
construction standards of the participating jurisdictions.



(Ord. 13-8, passed 5-16-13)



§ 152.005  ENACTMENT.



   In order that land may be subdivided in accordance with these purposes
and policies, these subdivision regulations are hereby adopted.



(Ord. 13-8, passed 5-16-13)



§ 152.006  INTERPRETATION, CONFLICT AND SEPARABILITY.



   (A)   In their interpretation and application the provisions of
these regulations shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the
promotion of the public health, safety, and general welfare.



   (B)   Conflict with public and private provisions.



      (1)   Public provisions. These regulations are not intended to
interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation,
statute, or other provision of law. Where any provision of these regulations
imposed by any other provision of these regulations or any other ordinance,
rule or regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more
restrictive or impose higher standards shall control.



      (2)   Private provisions. These regulations are not intended
to abrogate any easement, covenant or any other private agreement or
restriction, provided that where the provisions of these regulations are more
restrictive or impose higher standards or regulations then such easement,
covenant, or other private agreement or restriction, the requirements of
these regulations shall govern. Where the provisions of the easement,
covenant, or private agreement or restriction impose duties and obligations
more restrictive, or higher standards than the requirements of these
regulations, or the determinations of the Area Plan Commission in approving a
subdivision or in enforcing these regulations, and such private provisions
are not inconsistent with these regulations or determinations there under,
then such private provisions shall be operative and supplemental to these
regulations and determinations made there under.



   (C)   Separability. If any part or provision of these regulations or
application thereof to any person or circumstances is adjudged invalid by any
court or competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall be confined in its
operation to the part, provision or application directly involved in all
controversy in which such judgment shall have been rendered, and shall not
affect or impair the validity of the remainder of these regulations or the
application thereof to other persons or circumstances. The county and
participating city and towns hereby declare that it would have enacted the
remainder of these regulations even without any such part, provision or
application.



(Ord. 13-8, passed 5-16-13)



§ 152.007  SAVING PROVISION.



   These regulations shall not be construed as abating any action now
pending under, or by virtue of, prior existing subdivision regulations, or as
discontinuing, abating, modifying, or altering any penalty accruing or about
to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm, or corporation,
or as waiving any right of the municipality under any section or provision
existing at the time of option of these regulations, or as vacating or
annulling any rights obtained by any person, firm, corporation, by lawful
action of the county and participating city and towns, except as shall be
expressly provided for in these regulations.



(Ord. 13-8, passed 5-16-13)



§ 152.008  RESERVATIONS AND REPEALS.



   Upon the adoption of these regulations according to law, the
Subdivision Regulations of Posey County, Mt. Vemon, Poseyville, and
Cynthiana, Indiana, adopted August 30, 1974, or subsequently readopted on
November 16, 1986, or as subsequently amended, are hereby repealed, except
for such sections expressly retained herein.



(Ord. 13-8, passed 5-16-13)



§ 152.009  AMENDMENTS.



   For the purpose of providing for the public health, safety, and general
welfare, the county and participating city and towns, on recommendation of
the Area Plan Commission, may from time to time amend the provisions imposed
by these subdivision regulations. Public hearings on all proposed amendments
shall be held by the Area Plan Commission and/or the county or participating
city and towns in the manner prescribed by law.



(Ord. 13-8, passed 5-16-13)



§ 152.010  CONDITIONS.



   Regulation of the subdivision of land and the attachment of reasonable
conditions to land subdivision is an exercise of valid police power delegated
by the state to this county and participating city and towns. The developer
has the duty of compliance with reasonable conditions laid down by the Area
Plan Commission for design, dedication, improvement, and restrictive use of
the land in order to conform to the physical and economical development of
the county and participating city and towns, and to the safety and general
welfare of the future plot owners in the subdivision and of the county ana
participating city and towns at large.



(Ord. 13-8, passed 5-16-13)



§ 152.011  RESUBDIVISION OF LAND.



   (A)   Procedure for resubdivision (replatting). For any change in a
map of an approved or recorded subdivision plat, if such change affects any
street layout shown on such map, or area reserved thereon for public use, or
any lot line, or if it affects any map or plat legally reached prior to the
adoption of any regulations controlling subdivisions, such parcel shall be
approved by the Area Plan Commission by the same procedure, rules, and
regulations as for a subdivision.



   (B)   Procedure for subdivisions where future resubdivision
(replatting) is indicated. Whenever a parcel of land is subdivided and the
subdivision plat shows one or more lots containing more than one acre of land
and there are indications that such lots will eventually be resubdivided
(replatted) into small building sites, the Area Plan Commission may require
that such parcel of land allow for the provision of future street/road
openings and extensions as requirement of the plat approval.



(Ord. 13-8, passed 5-16-13)



§ 152.012  VARIANCES.



   (A)   General. Where the Area Plan Commission finds that
extraordinary hardships or practical difficulties may result from strict
compliance with these regulations and/or the purposes of the regulations may
be served to a greater extent by an alternative proposal, it may approve
variances to these subdivision regulations so that substantial justice may be
done and the public interest secured, provided that such variances shall not
have the effect of nullifying the intent and the purpose of these
regulations; and further provided the Area Plan Commission shall not approve
variances unless it shall make findings based upon the evidence presented to
it in each specific case that:



      (1)   The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to
the public safety, health, or welfare or injurious to other nearby property;



      (2)   The conditions upon which the request for a variance is
based are unique to the property for which the variance is sought and are not
applicable generally to other property;



      (3)   Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape
or topographical conditions of the specific property involved, a particular
hardship to the owner would result, as distinguishes from a mere
inconvenience, if the strict letter of these regulations are carried out;



      (4)   The variance will not in any manner contravene the
provisions of the zoning ordinance, Comprehensive Plan, or Official Map as
interpreted by the Area Plan Commission and the county or participating city
and towns; and



      (5)   Variance modifications submitted in writing to the Area
Plan Commission shall be referred immediately to the appropriate
participating jurisdiction for their approval or rejection. If such
participating jurisdiction approves of such modifications in writing, or
fails to either approve or disapprove within 30 days after the same has been
referred to them, the Area Plan Commission may modify such requirement,
standards and specifications so as to promote the public health, safety, and
welfare, and prevent detriment to the use and value of the land, provided
however, that nothing herein shall be construed as altering or conflicting
with the powers and duties of the Board of Zoning Appeals of the Area Plan
Commission pursuant to I.C. 36-7-4-900 et seq., as currently amended. No
authority to modify shall exist in the Area Plan Commission if the
appropriate participating jurisdiction by writing disapproves such
modification.



   (B)   Conditions. In approving variances, the Area Plan Commission
may require such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially
the objectives of the standards or requirements of the regulations.



   (C)   Procedures. A petition for any such variance shall be
submitted in writing by the subdivider at the time when the primary plat is
filed for the consideration of the Area Plan Commission. The petition shall
state fully the grounds for the application and all of the facts relied upon
by the petitioner.



(Ord. 13-8, passed 5-16-13)



§ 152.013  ENFORCEMENT, VIOLATION, AND PENALTIES.



   (A)   General.



      (1)   It shall be the duty of the Administrator to enforce
these regulations and to bring any violations or lack of compliance to the
attention of the Area Plan Commission Attorney.



      (2)   No owner, or agent of the owner, of any parcel of land
located in a proposed subdivision shall transfer or sell any such a parcel
before a plat of such subdivision has been approved by the Area PlaD
Commission, in accordance with the provisions of these regulations and filed
with the County Recorder.



      (3)   The division of any lot or parcel of land into a
subdivision, as defined in this chapter, by the use of metes and bounds
description for the purpose of sale, or transfer, or lease resulting in the
creation of one or more new building sites shall not be permitced. All such
described divisions or the division of any lot or any parcel of land into a
subdivision, as defined in this chapter, by the use of metes and bounds
description for such purposes, shall be subject to all of the appropriate
requirements of this chapter.



      (4)   No improvement location permit or building permit
required under the Uniform Building Code, the zoning ordinance or this
chapter shall be issued on any property subject to this chapter until the
provisions of this chapter are met.



   (B)   Violations and penalties. Any person who violates a provision
of this chapter or any regulations herein contained, shall be fined not less
than $10 and not more than $300 for each day’s violation.



   (C)   Restraining provisions.



      (1)   Any land within the participating jurisdictions
subdivided in violation of the terms of this chapter after the effective date
hereof, is hereby declared to be a common nuisance, which may be restrained,
enjoined or abated in any appropriate action or proceeding.



      (2)   The Area Plan Commission may institute an injunction
suit requesting an individual or governmental unit be directed to remove a
structure erected in violation of this chapter, or to make the same comply
with its terms. If the Area Plan Commission is successful in its suit, the
respondent shall bear the costs of the action.



      (3)   The Area Plan Commission may institute a suit for
mandatory injunction requesting an individual or governmental unit be
directed, where such individual or governmental unit has violated any
provisions of this chapter, to comply with the provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 13-8, passed 5-16-13)



§ 152.014  APPEALS FROM THE ENFORCEMENT OF THE CHAPTER.



   (A)   An appeal may be made to the Board of Zoning Appeals when it
is alleged there is an error in any order, requirement or determination made
by an administrative official, staff member, or board (other than the Area
Plan Commission) in the enforcement of this chapter.



   (B)   Notice of appeal. An appeal shall be taken within ten days
from the determination which is the subject of the complaint. The appeal
shall be initiated by filing with the Secretary of the Board of Zoning
Appeals, a notice of appeal specifying the grounds for the appeal. The body
from which the appeal is taken shall, upon receipt of notice, forthwith
transmit to the Secretary of the Board, certified copies of all the papers
constituting the record of the matter. Upon receipt of the record the
Secretary shall set the matter for public hearing.



   (C)   Board of Zoning Appeals action. The Board shall hold a public
hearing. The Board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the
order, requirement, decision or determination appealed. Additionally, the
Board may make such order, requirement, decision or determination as needed.
In doing so, the Board shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the
appeal is taken. The concurring vote of a majority of the entire membership
of the Board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision
or determination.



   (D)   Stay of proceedings. When an appeal from the decision of an
administrative official, staff member or board (except the Area Plan
Commission) has been filed with the Board of Zoning Appeals, proceedings and
work on the premises affected shall be stayed unless the official or board
certifies to the Board of Zoning Appeals that, by reason of the facts stated
in the certificate, a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property. In
that case, proceedings or work may not be stayed except by a restraining
order. After notice to the officer or board and to the owner of the premises
affected and after due cause is shown, the applicable court having
jurisdiction in the county in which the premises affected are located may
grant the restraining order.



(Ord. 13-8, passed 5-16-13)



§ 152.015  REVIEW BY CERTIORARI OF DECISIONS.



   (A)   Each decision of the Area Plan Commission and the Area Board
of Zoning Appeals are subject to review by certiorari. Each person aggrieved
by a decision of the Area Plan Commission or the Board of Zoning Appeals may
present to the court of record a verified petition, setting forth that the
decision is illegal, in whole or in part and specifying the grounds of
illegality. No change of venue from the county in which the premises affected
are located may be had.



   (B)   The person shall file the petition with the court within 30
days after the date of the decision by the Area Plan Commission or the Area
Board of Zoning Appeals.



(Ord. 13-8, passed 5-16-13)



§ 152.016  USAGE.



   (A)   For the purpose of these regulations, certain numbers,
abbreviations, terms, and words used herein shall be used, interpreted, and
defined as set forth in this section.



   (B)   Unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary, words
used in the present tense include the future tense; words used in the plural
number include the singular; the word “herein” means “in these
regulations”; the word “regulations” means “these regulations”.



   (C)   A “person” includes a corporation, partnership, and an
incorporated association of persons such as a club; “shall” is always
mandatory; “used” or “occupied” as applied to any land or building
shall be construed to include the words “intended, arranged, or designed to
be used or occupied”.



(Ord. 13-8, passed 5-16-13)



§ 152.017  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACCESSORY BUILDING.  A subordinate structure, the use of which is
incidental to that of the dominant use of the primary building or land.



   ADMINISTRATOR.  The officer appointed by and/or delegated the
responsibility for the administration of these regulations by the Area Plan
Commission, normally construed to mean the Executive Director/Secretary of
the Area Plan Commission. This term shall be construed to include those
planning staff members working under the direction of the ADMINISTRATOR in
the exercise of his or her responsibilities in regard to the processing of
these subdivision regulations.



   AGENCY.  See PUBLIC AGENCY.



   ALLEY.  A public or private street primarily designed to serve as
secondary access to the side or rear of those properties whose principal
frontage is on some other street.



   APPLICANT.  The owner of land proposed to be subdivided or his or her
agent or his or her legal representative.



   AREA PLAN COMMISSION.  A multiple jurisdictional plan commission
established as defined under the I.C. 36-7-4-102 (1983) as amended. In the
context of this chapter, the Posey County Area Plan Commission.



   ARTERIAL.  Either a PRIMARY ARTERIAL or a SECONDARY ARTERIAL as
defined in this section.



   AVERAGE DENSITY PROCEDURES.  Procedures for calculating overall
density of development prescribed in the zoning ordinance as a flexible tool
for maintaining overall densities while allowing individual lot sizes to vary
from the minimum sizes allowed in a given zone.



   BLOCK.  A tract of land bounded by streets, or by a combination of
streets and public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, shorelines of
waterways, or boundary lines of municipalities.



   BOND.  Any form of security including a cash deposit, surety bond,
collateral, property, or instrument of credit in an amount and form
satisfactory to the Area Plan Commission. All BONDS (or equivalent financial
instruments) shall be approved by the Area Plan Commission wherever a bond is
required by these regulations.



   BUFFER LANDSCAPING.  Any trees, shrubs, walls, fences, berms, or
related landscaping features required under this chapter or the zoning
ordinance on private lots and privately maintained for buffeting lots from
adjacent properties or public rights-of-way for the purpose of increasing
sound and/or visual privacy. (See also SCREENING).



   BUILDING.  Any structure built for the support, shelter, or enclosure
of persons, animals, chattels, or movable property of any kind.



   BUILDING CODE.  That county ordinance or group of ordinances
establishing and controlling the standards for constructing buildings,
utilities, mechanical equipment and all forms of structures and permanent
installations and related matters, within the county. Also referred to herein
as the County Building Code.



   BUILDING PERMIT.  A certificate issued by the building permit official
of the jurisdiction permitting a person, firm or corporation to erect,
construct, enlarge, alter repair, move, improve, remove, convert, or demolish
any building or structure within its jurisdiction, or cause the same to be
done.



   BUILDING PERMIT OFFICIAL.  That official of local government
authorized to issue building permits.



   CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PROGRAM.  A proposed schedule of all future
projects listed in order of construction priority together with cost
estimates and the anticipated means of financing each project. All major
projects requiring the expenditure of public funds, over and above the annual
local government’s operating expenses, for the purchase, construction, or
replacement of the more durable, longer lived physical assets of the
community are included.



   CENTRAL SEWERAGE SYSTEM.  A community sewer system including
collection and treatment facilities established by the developer to serve a
new subdivision or an existing public sewer system.



   CENTRAL WATER SYSTEM.  A community water supply system including
existing and new wells and/or surface water sources and intakes, treatment
facilities, and distribution lines and includes such of the above facilities
established by the developer to serve a new subdivision.



   CERTIFICATE.  The signed and attested document which indicates that a
subdivision has been granted secondary approval by the Area Plan Commission
subsequent to proper public notice of its hearing.



   CHECKPOINT AGENCY.  A public agency or organization called upon by the
Area Plan Commission to provide expertise with regard to a specific aspect of
community infrastructure development or required by law to give its assent
before a subdivision may take place.



   COLLECTOR STREET.  A street intended to move traffic from local
streets to secondary arterials. (A COLLECTOR STREET serves a neighborhood or
large subdivision and should be designed so that no residential properties
face onto it and no direct residential driveway access to it is permitted
unless the property is for multi-family use for four or more dwelling units).



   COMMISSION.  The Posey County Area Plan Commission as referred to
herein; not the Board of County Commissioners, or any other commission unless
so specified.



   COMMISSION ATTORNEY.  The licensed attorney designated by the Area
Plan Commission to furnish legal assistance for the administration of this
chapter or as provided by statute.



   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.  Inclusive physical, social, and economic plans
and policies in graphic verbal statement forms for the development of the
county (and the constituent communities within its planning jurisdiction),
prepared and adopted by the Area Plan Commission and other legally
participating jurisdictions pursuant to the state acts, and including any
part of such plan and/or policies separately adopted and any amendment to
such plan and/or policies, or parts thereof.



   CONDOMINIUM.  The division of building(s) and the related land into
horizontal property interests meeting the requirements of and controlled by
the Indiana statutes for condominiums as prescribed by the I.C. 32-1-6-1
through 32-1-6-31.



   CONSTRUCTION PLAN(S).  The maps or drawings accompanying a subdivision
plat and showing the specific location and design of improvements to be
installed for the subdivision in accordance with the requirements of this
chapter as a condition of the approval of the plat.



   COUNTY ATTORNEY.  The licensed attorney designated by the legally
authorized body to furnish legal assistance for the administration of these
regulations in lieu of the Area Plan Commission having its own attorney.



   COUNTY AUDITOR.  That county official empowered to examine and settle
all accounts and demands that are chargeable against the county and not
otherwise provided for by the statute.



   COUNTY BUILDING CODE. See BUILDING CODE.



   COUNTY COMMISSION or COUNTY BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS.  Referred to
herein as simply, the county so as not to be confused with the Area Plan
Commission, referred to here in simply as the County Commission.



   COUNTY DESIGN REVIEW BOARD.  A board established by the county to
provide technical services to the Area Plan Commission in the administration
of these regulations.



   COUNTY ENGINEER.  The licensed engineer designated by the county to
furnish engineering assistance in the administration of these regulations.
(The person also referred to as the County Highway Engineer and Drainage
Engineer or designee).



   COUNTY GOVERNMENT.  That governmental body of the county empowered to
adopt planning and public policy ordinances: the County Commission, here in
referred to only as the county.



   COUNTY HEALTH OFFICER.  See HEALTH OFFICER.



   COUNTY HOUSING CODE.  See HOUSING CODE.



   COUNTY RECORDER.  That county official empowered to record and file
land description plats.



   CUL-DE-SAC.  A local street with only one outlet and having an
appropriate terminal for the safe and convenient reversal of traffic movement
including public safety vehicles.



   DEAD-END STREET.  A street or portion of a street with only one
vehicular traffic outlet.



   DEPARTMENT.  See PUBLIC AGENCY.



   DESIGNATED OFFICIALS.  Those officials of the Area Plan Commission
designated in the subdivision ordinance as required signatories for the
execution of secondary approval.



   DEVELOPER.  The owner of land proposed to be subdivided or his or her
representative. Consent for making applications for development approval
shall be required from the legal owner of ths premises.



   DRIVES, PRIVATE.  Vehicular streets and driveways paved or unpaved
which are wholly within private property except where they intersect with
other streets within public rights-of-way.



   EASEMENT.  An authorization grant by a property owner for the use oy
another of any designated part of his or her property for a clearly specified
purpose(s).



   ESCROW.  A deposit of cash with the Area Plan Commission in lieu of an
amount required and still force on a performance or maintenance bond. Such
ESCROW funds shall be held by the County Auditor.



   EXEMPT DIVISIONS.  See definition of SUBDIVISION.



   FINAL PLAT.  The map, or plan described in this chapter of a
subdivision and any accompanying material submitted to the Area Plan
Commission for secondary approval, and which, if approved and signed by the
designated officials, may be submitted to the County Recorder for filing.



   FLOOD HAZARD AREAS.  Those flood plains which have not been adequately
protected from flooding by the regulatory flood by means of dikes, levees, or
reservoirs, and are shown on the floodway-flood boundary maps of the Federal
Insurance Administration or maps provided to the Area Plan Commission from
the State Natural Resources Commission.



   FLOOD PLAIN.  The area adjoining the river or stream which has been or
may hereafter be covered by flood water from the regulatory flood.



   FLOOD PROTECTION GRADE.  The elevation of the lowest point around the
perimeter of a building at which flood waters may enter the interior of the
building. All plumbing, electrical, heating and cooling equipment must be
located above this grade including all habitable floors.



   FLOODWAY.  See REGULATORY FLOODWAY.



   FLOODWAY FRINGE.  Those portions of the flood hazard areas lying
outside the floodway, shown on the floodway-flood boundary maps of the
Federal Insurance Administration.



   FOUNDATION.  The supporting member of a wall or structure.



   FRONT YARD.  A yard as defined herein, encompassing the horizontal
space, between the nearest foundation of a building to the right-of-way line
and that right-of-way line, extending to the side lines of the lot, and
measured as the shortest distance from that foundation to the right-of-way
line. The FRONT YARD of a corner lot shall be that yard abutting the street
upon which the lot has the least frontage.



   FRONTAGE.  That side of a lot abutting on a street or way and
ordinarily regarded as the front lot line. Lots shall not be considered to
front on stub ends of streets and in the case of corner lots will be
considered to front on both intersecting streets. (In the case of
single-family detached and attached dwelling units, no access for any one lot
is permitted to more than one street and that street generally will be the
one calculated to have lower traffic volumes and less frequent intersections.
In the case of multi-family dwelling units and nonresidential development,
more than one street access may be permitted depending on the lot frontage,
density and intensity of the use).



   FRONTAGE STREET.  Any street to be constructed by the developer or any
existing street in which development shall take place on both sides.



   GOVERNING BODY.  The body of the relevant local government having the
power to adopt ordinances.



   GRADE.  The slope of a street or other public way, specified in
percentage (%) terms.



   HEALTH DEPARTMENT AND (COUNTY) HEALTH OFFICER.  The agency and person
designated by the county to administer the health regulations within the
county’s jurisdiction.



   HIGH DENSITY.  Those residential zoning districts in which the density
is equal to or greater than one dwelling unit per 10,000 square feet.



   HIGHWAY, LIMITED ACCESS.  A freeway, or expressway, providing for
through traffic, in respect to which owners or occupants of abutting property
or lands and other persons have no legal right to access to or from the same,
except at such points and in such manner as may be determined by the public
authority having jurisdiction over such a highway.



   HOUSING CODE.  That county ordinance controlling the continuing safety
and healthfulness of buildings for human occupation within the county’s
jurisdiction. Also referred to herein as the County or Mt. Vernon Housing
Code.



   IMPROVEMENTS.  See LOT IMPROVEMENTS or PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS.



   INDIANA CODE.  The Burns Indiana Statutes - Code Edition which
codifies all Indiana statutes for reference purposes. The latest edition with
any amending supplements must be referred to for the laws now in force and
applicable. The INDIANA CODE is usually abbreviated as I.C. or IC herein.



   INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM.  A septic tank, seepage tile sewage
disposal system or any other approved sewage treatment device (including a
drip system or Wisconsin mound) approved by the Health Department. Where
public sanitary sewers are available, individual sewage disposal systems are
not an acceptable alternative. Where a public sanitary sewer system is not
available the County Health Department may approve an alternative sewage
treatment system serving multiple single-family detached dwellings.



   INTERESTED PARTIES.  Those parties who are the owners of properties
adjoining or adjacent to the proposed subdivision as shown on the sketch plan.



   JOINT OWNERSHIP.  Joint ownership among persons shall be construed as
the same owner; “constructive ownership” for the purpose of imposing
subdivision regulations.



   LAND DIVIDER.  The owner of a parcel of land to be further divided
through making an exempt division.



   LANDSCAPING.  See BUFFER LANDSCAPING, SCREENING and SHADE TREES.



   LOCAL STREET.  A street intended to provide access to other streets
from individual properties and to provide right-of-way beneath it for sewer,
water, and storm drainage. Unless a temporary dead end, a LOCAL STREET has an
access point or outlet at either end. Accordingly, a LOCAL STREET for the
purposes of these subdivision regulations has two access points or an outlet
at either end. A street with only one outlet or access point is considered to
be a “cul-de-sac”. A permanent dead end street is considered a
“cul-de-sac” for the purposes of these subdivision regulations.



   LOT.  A tract, plot, or portion of a subdivision or other parcel of
land intended as a unit for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of
transfer of ownership or of building development.



   LOT, CORNER.  A lot situated at the intersection of two streets, the
interior angle of such intersection not exceeding 135 degrees.



   LOT IMPROVEMENT.  Any building, or structure, place, work of art, or
other object, or improvement of the land on which they are situated
constituting a physical betterment of real property, or any part of such
betterment. Certain LOT IMPROVEMENTS shall be properly bonded as provided in
these regulations.



   LOT OF RECORD.  Any lot or parcel recorded before November 16, 1986.



   LOW DENSITY.  Those residential zoning districts in which the density
is equal or less than one dwelling unit per 40,000 square feet.



   MAJOR STREET.  A collector or arterial street.



   MAJOR STREET PLAN.  See OFFICIAL MAP. This may also be the
thoroughfare element of the Comprehensive Plan or an adopted thoroughfare
plan (independent of the Comprehensive Plan).



   MAJOR SUBDIVISION.  Any subdivision not classified as a minor
subdivision, including but not limited to subdivisions of four or more lots,
or any size subdivision requiring any new street or extension of the local
governmental facilities, or the creation of any public improvements.



   MAP.  A representation of a part or the whole of the earth’s
surface, in signs and symbols on a plane surface, at an established scale,
with a method of orientation indicated.



   MARKER.  A stake, pipe, rod, nail, or any other object which is not
intended to be a permanent point for record purposes.



   MASTER PLAN.  See COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.



   MEDIUM DENSITY.  Those residential zoning districts in which the
density is between 10,000 and 40,000 square feet per dwelling unit.



   MINOR SUBDIVISION.  Any subdivision of not more than three lots
fronting on an existing street which is an improved right-of-way maintained
by the state, county or other local government, not involving any new street
or the extension of municipal facilities, or the creation of any public
improvements, and not adversely affecting the remainder of the parcel or
adjoining property, and not in conflict with any provision or portion of the
Comprehensive Plan, the Thoroughfare Plan, Official Map, Zoning Ordinance, or
this chapter. Sanitary sewer, waterline, electric, gas, or telecommunication
service connections on an individual lot are not considered public
improvements, and drainage ditches to be installed at the option of the owner
are also not considered public improvements.



   MODEL HOME.  A dwelling unit used initially for display purposes which
typifies the kind of units that will be constructed in the subdivision. Such
dwelling units may be erected, at the discretion of the Area Plan Commission,
by permitting a portion of a major subdivision involving no more than two
lots to be created according to the procedures for minor subdivisions, as set
out in these regulations.



   MONUMENT.  A physical structure which marks the location of a corner
or other survey point .



   NON-RESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISION.  A subdivision whose intended use is
other than residential, such as commercial or industrial. Such subdivisions
shall comply with the applicable provisions of these regulations.



   OFF-SITE.  Any premises not located within the area of the property to
be subdivided, whether or not in the same ownership of the applicant for
subdivision approval.



   OFFICIAL MAP.  The map or maps established by the county pursuant to
law showing the existing and proposed streets, highways, parks, drainage
systems, and set back lines theretofore laid out, adopted and established by
law, and any amendments or additions thereto, resulting from the approval of
subdivision plats by the Area Plan Commission and the subsequent filing of
such approved plats.



   OFFICIAL MASTER PLAN.  See COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.



   ORDINANCE.  Any legislative action, however denominated, of a local
government which has the force of law, including any amendment or repeal or
any ordinance.



   ORIGINAL PARCEL.  A parcel of land existing and duly recorded in the
office of the Posey County Recorder as of November 16, 1986.



   OWNER.  Any person, group of persons, firm or firms, corporation or
corporations, or any legal entity having legal title to or sufficient
proprietary interest in the land sought to be subdivided under these
regulations.



   PARTICIPATING JURISDICTION.  A jurisdiction with the County having
joined the Area Plan Commission and having it undertake both planning studies
and the administration of zoning, subdivision, and other planning related
ordinances for that jurisdiction.



   PERIMETER STREET.  Any existing street to which the parcel of land to
be subdivided abuts on only one side.



   PLAN COMMISSION.  The county’s “area” planning body as
established in accordance with Indiana law, often referred to herein simply
as the Commission or the Area Plan Commission. “Commission” standing
alone does not refer to the County Commission.



   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT.  A means of land regulation which permits
large scale, unified land development in a configuration and possibly a mix
of uses not otherwise permitted as of right under the Comprehensive Zoning
Ordinance but requiring under that ordinance or a special ordinance a special
review and approval process.



   PLAT.  A map indicating the subdivision or re-subdivision of land
filed or intended to be filed for record with the County Recorder.



   PRELIMINARY PLAT.  The preliminary drawing or drawings described in
these regulations indicating the proposed manner or layout of the subdivision
to be submitted to the Area Plan Commission for approval.



   PRIMARY APPROVAL.  An approval, or approval with conditions imposed,
granted to a subdivision by the Area Plan Commission after having determined
in a public hearing that the subdivision complies with the standards
prescribed in this chapter (per I.C. 36-7-4-700 et seq.,  Subdivision
Control).



   PRIMARY ARTERIAL.  A street intended to move through-traffic to and
from such major attractions as central business district, regional shopping
centers, colleges and/or universities, military installations, major
industrial areas, and similar traffic generators within the county; and/or as
a route for traffic, between communities; a major thoroughfare.



   PRINCIPAL USE BUILDING.  A building in which the principal use of the
lot or parcel is conducted. Standards recognized by the Indian Administrative
Building Council shall be used to determine whether a given structure
constitutes one or more buildings in cases where ambiguities exist.



   PUBLIC AGENCY.  An agency or government department acting under the
aegis of and representing an elected or appointed council, commission, or
other policy making or advisory body of federal, state, or local government
to whom it is responsible.



   PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT.  Any sanitary sewer, waterline, electric and gas
service or telecommunication line, storm sewer, drainage ditch, stormwater
retention or detention basin, street, highway, parkway, sidewalk, pedestrian
way, tree, lawn, off street parking area, lot improvement, or other facility
for which the local government may ultimately assume the responsibility for
maintenance and operation, or which may affect an improvement for which local
government responsibility is established. All such improvements shall be
properly bonded. Sanitary sewer, waterline, electric, gas, or
telecommunication service connections on an individual lot are exempt for
this definition, and drainage ditches to be installed at the option of the
owner may also be exempt from this definition.



   REAR YARD.  A yard as defined herein, encompassing the horizontal
space between the nearest foundation of a building to a rear line and that
rear lot line, extending to the side lines of the lot, and measured as the
shortest distance from that foundation to the rear lot line. The REAR YARD of
a corner lot shall be that yard at the opposite end of the front yard.



   REGISTERED LAND SURVEYOR.  A land surveyor properly licensed and
registered or through reciprocity permitted to practice in the State of
Indiana.



   REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER.  An engineer properly licensed and
registered in the State of Indiana or permitted to practice in Indiana
through reciprocity.



   REGULATORY FLOOD.  That flood having a peak discharge which can be
equaled or exceed on the average of once in a 100 year period, as calculated
by a method and procedure which is acceptable to and approved by the State
Natural Resources Commission; this flood is equivalent to a flood having a
probability of occurrence of 1% in any given year.



   REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION.  The maximum elevation reached by the
regulatory flood at the locations in question relevant to approval of a given
subdivision under consideration.



   REGULATORY FLOODWAY.  The channel of a river or stream and those
portions of the flood plains adjoining the channel which are reasonably
required to efficiently carry and discharge the peak flow of the regulatory
flood of any river or stream shown on the floodway-flood boundary maps of the
Federal Insurance Administration.



   RESTRICTIVE COVENANTS.  Limitations of various kinds on the usages of
lots within a subdivision which are proposed by the subdivider, and, in the
case of public health, safety, and welfare by the Area Plan Commission, that
are recorded with the plat and run with the land.



   RE-SUBDIVISION.  A change in a map of an approved or recorded
subdivision plat if such change affects any street layout on such map or area
reserved thereon for public, use, or any lot line; or if it affects any map
or plan legally recorded prior to the adoption of any regulations controlling
subdivisions.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY.  A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by
a street, pedestrian way, crosswalk, railroad, electric transmission line,
oil or gas pipeline, water main, sanitary or storm sewer main, special
landscaping, or for another special use. The usage of the terms RIGHT-OF-WAY
for land platting purposes shall mean that every RIGHT-OF-WAY hereafter
established and shown on a final plat is to be separate and distinct from the
lots or parcels adjoining such RIGHT-OF-WAY and not included within the
dimensions or areas of such lots or parcels. RIGHTS-OF-WAY intended for
streets, crosswalks, water mains, sanitary sewers storm drains, screening or
special landscaping, or any other use involving maintenance by a public
agency shall be dedicated to public use by the subdivider on whose plat such
RIGHT-OF-WAY is established.



   ROAD(S).  See STREETS.



   SALE OR LEASE.  Any immediate or future transfer of ownership, or any
possessor interest in land, including contract of sale, lease, devise,
intestate succession, or transfer, of an interest in a subdivision or part
thereof, whether by metes and bounds, deed, contract, plat, map, lease,
devise, intestate succession, or other written instrument.



   SAME OWNERSHIP.  Ownership by the same person, corporation, firm,
entity, partnership, or unincorporated association; or ownership by different
corporations, firms, partnerships, entities, or unincorporated associations,
in which a stockholder, partner, or associate, or a member of his or her
family owns an interest in each corporation, firm, partnership, entity, or
unincorporated association.



   SCREENING.  Either (a) a strip of at least ten feet wide, densely
planted (or having equivalent natural growth) with shrubs or trees at least
four feet high at the time of planting, or a type that will form a year-round
dense screen at least six feet high; or (b) an opaque wall or barrier or
uniformly painted fence at least six feet high. Either (a) or (b) shall be
maintained at all times and may have no signs affixed to or hung in relation
to the outside thereof except as permitted or required under the Zoning
Ordinance. Where required by the Zoning Ordinance, a screen shall be
installed along or within the lines of a plot as a protection for adjoining
or nearby properties. Earth berms may be incorporated as part of such
SCREENING measures where appropriate.



   SECONDARY APPROVAL.  The stage of application for formal Area Plan
Commission approval of a final plat of a subdivision, the construction of
which has been completed or guaranteed by a performance bound (or equivalent
financial instrument) which, if approved and signed by the designated
officials, may be submitted to the County Recorder for filing.



   SECONDARY ARTERIAL.  A street intended to collect and distribute
traffic in a manner similar to primary arterial, except that these streets
service minor traffic generating areas such as community-commercial areas,
primary and secondary educational plants, hospitals, major recreational
areas, churches, and offices, and/or designed to carry traffic from collector
sheets to the system of primary arterials.



   SETBACK.  A line parallel to and equivalent from the relevant lot line
(front, back, side) between which no buildings or structures may be erected
as prescribed in the Zoning Ordinance.



   SIDE LOT LINES.  Any lines separating two lots other than front or
rear lot lines.



   SKETCH PLAN.  An informal, informational drawing, as described in this
chapter, preparatory to the drawing of the preliminary plot plan or final
plat in the case of a minor subdivision to enable the subdivider to save time
and expense in reaching general agreement with the Area Plan Commission as to
the form of the plat and conformance to the objectives of this chapter.



   STATE ACTS.  Such legislative acts of the State of Indiana as they
affect these regulations.



   STREET, DEAD END.  A street or portion of a street with only one
vehicular traffic outlet.



   STREET, RIGHT-OF-WAY WIDTH.  The distance between property lines
measured at right angles to the center line of the street.



   STREETS, CLASSIFICATION.  For the purpose of providing for the
development of the streets, highways, and rights-of-way, in the governmental
units, and for their future improvement, reconstruction, realignment, and
necessary widening, including provision for curbs and sidewalks each existing
street, highway, and right-of-way, and those located on approved and filed
plats, have been designated on the official map or thoroughfare plan of the
county or participating city or towns and classified therein. The
classification of each street, highway, and right-of-way is based upon its
location in the respective zoning districts of the county and participating
city and towns and its present and estimated future traffic volume and its
relative importance and function as specified in the county, city or town
comprehensive plan and/or its thoroughfare plan component. The required
improvements shall be measured as set forth for each STREET CLASSIFICATION on
The official map or thoroughfare plan.



   STRUCTURE.  Anything constructed or erected that requires location on
or in the ground, or is attached to something having a location on or in the
ground.



   SUBDIVIDER.  Any person who:



      (1)   Having a proprietary interest in land, causes it,
directly or indirectly, to be divided into a subdivision; or who



      (2)   Directly or indirectly sells, leases, or develops, or
who offers to sell, lease, or develop, or advertise for sale, lease or
development, any interest, lot, parcel site, unit, or plat in a subdivision;
or who



      (3)   Engages directly, or through and agent, in the business
of selling, leasing, developing, or offering for sale, lease, or development
a subdivision of any interest, lot, parcel site, unit, or pat in a
subdivision; or who



      (4)   Is directly or indirectly controlled by, or under
direct, or indirect common control with any of the foregoing.



   SUBDIVISION.  The division of an original parcel of land into two or
more lots, parcels, sites, units, plats, or interests for the purpose of
offer, sale, lease, of development, either on the installment plan or upon
any and all other plans, terms, and conditions, including resubdivision.
SUBDIVISION includes the division of development of land zoned for
residential and nonresidential uses, whether by deed, metes and bounds
description, devise, intestacy, lease, map, plat, or other recorded
instrument. The following kinds of divisions of existing parcels of land are
herein called “Exempt Divisions” and are classified into two categories:
Exempt I and Exempt II. These divisions are exempt from most provisions of
this chapter.



      (1)   Exempt I divisions must be one of the following types of
divisions:



         (a)   Type A. A division of land into two or more tracts
all of which are at least ten acres in size and are outside an incorporated
area.



         (b)   Type B. A division of land for the sale or
exchange of tracts to correct errors in an existing legal description,
provided that no additional building site is created by the division.



         (c)   Type C. A division of land pursuant to an
allocation of land in the settlement of a descendant’s estate or a court
decree for the distribution of property.



         (d)   Type D. A division of land for the acquisition of
street right-of-way by a public agency. The creation or addition of an
easement by any public agency or private property owner to any existing
recorded deed, plat or lot of record does not require subdivision approval.



         (e)   Type E. A division of land for the sale or
exchange of tracts between adjoining landowners, provided no additional
building site is created by the division; and



         (f)   Type F. A division of land into cemetery plots for
the purpose of burial of corpses.



      (2)   Exempt I divisions are subject only to the provisions of
§§ 152.034 and 152.089, but shall be exempt from other provisions of this
chapter not specified or referred to in those sections.



      (3)   Exempt II divisions are divisions of land of a lot of
record into not more than four new parcels (excluding the original parcel
residual) all of which are at least two acres but less than ten acres in size
and are outside an incorporated area. Such divisions shall conform to §§
152.034 and 152.090 but shall be exempt from other provisions of this chapter
not specified or referred to in those sections. Once the four new parcels
have been created from the lot of record, further division of such parcels is
subject to subdivision regulations and no longer exempt, unless the original
parcel residual is divided into two lots of at least ten acres meeting the
Exempt I Type A criteria.



   SUBDIVISION AGENT.  Any person who represents, or acts for or on
behalf of, a subdivider or developer, in selling, leasing, or developing, or
offering to sell, lease, or develop any interest, lot, parcel, unit, site, or
plat in a subdivision, except an attorney-at-law whose representation of
another person consists solely of rendering legal services.



   SUBDIVISION, EXEMPT.  See SUBDIVISION.



   SUBDIVISION, MAJOR.  See MAJOR SUBDIVISION.



   SUBDIVISION, MINOR.  See MINOR SUBDIVISION.



   TEMPORARY IMPROVEMENT.  Improvements built and maintained by a
subdivider during construction of the subdivision and intended to be replaced
by a permanent improvement prior to release of the performance bond (or
equivalent financial instrument) or turn-around improvements at the ends of
stub streets intended to be replaced when the adjoining area is developed and
the through street connection made.



   THOROUGHFARE PLAN.  See OFFICIAL MAP.



   YARD.  A space on the same lot with a principal building, such space
being open, unoccupied and unobstructed by buildings or structures from the
ground to sky except where encroachments and accessory buildings are
expressly permitted.



   ZONING ORDINANCE.  The ordinance setting forth the regulations
controlling the use of land in the unincorporated areas and in those
jurisdictions within the county and the participating city and towns. Also
referred to as the “Zoning Ordinance for the City of Mount Vernon, the Town
of Cynthiana, the Town of Poseyville and the Unincorporated Area of Posey
County”.



(Ord. 13-8, passed 5-16-13)




SUBDIVISION APPROVAL PROCESS




§ 152.030  GENERAL PROCEDURE.



   (A)   Discussion of requirements: pre-design conference. Prior to
submitting any of the materials required by this chapter, the applicant or
his representative should discuss with the Administrator the nature of the
land division being proposed, so that the applicant may be instructed
concerning the classification of his or her subdivision and what regulatory
procedures apply to it and must be followed under this chapter in order to
secure primary and secondary approval. Where applicable, requirements
concerning the general layout of streets and for reservations of land, street
improvements, drainage, sewerage, fire, fire protection, and similar matters,
as well as the availability of existing services should be discussed. The
Administrator shall also advise the applicant, where appropriate, to discuss
the proposed land division with those other officials who must eventually
approve those aspects of the subdivision plat coming within their
jurisdiction. The distinction between major and minor subdivisions and exempt
divisions as defined in this chapter, shall be made by the Administrator when
the applicant submits an application for sketch plan approval in the case of
major and minor subdivisions or, in the case of exempt divisions, provides
the Administrator at a pre-design conference with adequate information to
enable him to determine that the proposed division is an exempt division.



   (B)   Classification of land divisions. All land to be divided shall
be categorized into one of the three main classes of land division indicated
in this chapter’s definition of subdivision. These classes are (see §
152.017 for definitions):



      (1)   Major subdivisions;



      (2)   Minor subdivisions (no public improvements); and



      (3)   Exempt divisions. Exempt divisions are not subject to
the requirements of this chapter beyond the determination by the
Administrator that they meet all the requirements for exempt divisions set
forth in § 152.034. Before any permit shall be granted for a structure to be
erected on land to be subdivided into a major or minor subdivision, the
subdividing owner or his or her subdivision agent shall apply for and secure
approval of the proposed subdivision in accordance with § 152.031 and either
§ 152.032 or § 152.033 as appropriate. Before any permit shall be granted
for a structure to be erected on a parcel of land to be created or altered by
an exempt division, the land divider or his or her agent shall certify to the
satisfaction of the Administrator that all requirements for exemption have
been met, as detailed in § 152.034, in order to exempt the land division
from all other requirements of this chapter.



(Ord. 13-8, passed 5-16-13)



§ 152.031  MAJOR AND MINOR SUBDIVISIONS.



   Sketch plan application procedure for primary approval.



   (A)   Application requirements. In order to begin the subdivision
process, the applicant shall file an application for review of sketch plan
and certificate with the Administrator, and be entitled to a sign a receipt
for same. This application shall:



      (1)   Be made on forms available at the Office of the Area
Plan Commission and signed by the owner (or the designated individual with
limited power of attorney);



      (2)   Include indications of all contiguous holdings of the
owner including land in the same ownership, with an indication of the portion
which is proposed to be subdivided, accompanied by affidavit of ownership,
which shall include the dates the respective holdings of land were acquired,
together with the book and page of each conveyance to the present owner as
recorded in the County Recorder’s Office. The affidavit shall advise as to
the legal owner of the property, the contract owner of the property, option
of the property, and the date on which the contract of sale was executed. If
any corporations are involved, the Administrator may request a complete list
of all directors, and a listing of stockholders if less than ten in number;



      (3)   Be presented to the Administrator in duplicate;



      (4)   Be accompanied by a minimum of three copies of the
sketch plan;



      (5)   Be submitted with the appropriate filing fee:



         (a)   Application and petitions filed pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter shall be accompanied by the appropriate filing fee;



         (b)   Pursuant to statute, the plan commission shall
establish a schedule of reasonable fees to defray the administrative costs
connected with:



            1.   Processing and hearing administrative appeals
and petitions for rezoning, special exceptions, special uses, contingent
uses, and variances;



            2.   Issuing permits; and



            3.   Other official action under the Indiana
Code’s planning and zoning laws;



         (c)   The fee schedule shall be established at the first
meeting each year of the Area Plan Commission. In the event the fee schedule
is not reviewed by the Area Plan Commission at the first meeting of the year,
the existing fee schedule shall remain in full force and effect until
modified by the Area Plan Commission; and



         (d)   The fee schedule shall be posted in the Area Plan
Commission office in an area of public access;



      (6)   Include an address and telephone number of an agent
located within the territory of the Area Plan Commission who shall be
authorized to receive all notices required by this chapter; and



      (7)   Include a listing signed by the checkpoint agencies
indicating that they have received a copy of the proposed sketch plan or a
certification that it has been sent.



   (B)   Checkpoint submission.  In order to fulfill this last
application requirement, a copy of the proposed plan shall be submitted to
each of the agencies appropriate to the plan’s location so that their
comment may be made to the Administrator. The checkpoint agencies appropriate
to each participating jurisdiction in which a plat may be located are listed
in Figure 3-1. The Administrator shall request that all officials and all
agencies to which a request for review has been made submit a written report
to him or her within 15 days after receipt of the request. No response from
any agency shall be interpreted as meaning “no objection”.



   (C)   Classification of subdivision. After an application for sketch
plan approval has been submitted and at the time of sketch plan review the
Administrator shall classify the proposed subdivision as either major or
minor as defined in this chapter. The required procedures and approvals for
major subdivisions are described in § 152.032; corresponding information
concerning the minor subdivision approval process is provided in § 152.033.



(Ord. 13-8, passed 5-16-13)



§ 152.032  MAJOR SUBDIVISIONS.



   (A)   General procedures for primary and secondary approval. Should
the Administrator, during sketch plan review, classify the proposed land
division as a major subdivision, the subdivider shall follow the procedures
and be subject to the processes outlined in Figure 3-2, and detailed in this
section. In addition to a sketch plan which is reviewed by the Administrator
and checkpoint agencies, the applicant seeking approval of a major
subdivision shall submit a preliminary subdivision plat to be approved,
conditionally approved, or rejected by the Area Plan Commission at a public
meeting, and a final subdivision plat which must be found in compliance with
the preliminary plat as approved by the Area Plan Commission or otherwise
approved in order to be signed and recorded.



   (B)   Official submission dates. The deadline for submittal of a
sketch plan and application for certificate of approval shall be 61 calendar
days prior to the date of the public meeting at which the subdivider intends
to have his or her preliminary plat submission heard, and 31 calendar days
prior to the deadline for the submission of the preliminary plat. Thus, as a
minimum, sketch plan submission shall precede preliminary plat submission by
no less than 31 calendar days, which in turn shall precede the public meeting
at which it is intended to be heard by no less than 30 calendar days.



   (C)   Sketch plan review process. Within 20 calendar days of the
subdivider’s sketch plan application submittal, the Administrator shall
have studied the proposal, reviewed checkpoint reports received, and met with
the subdivider to discuss pertinent aspects of the proposed subdivision and
possible modifications and/or changes that may be suggested or required by
this chapter. The Administrator shall request that a representative of each
checkpoint agency wishing to be involved in a sketch plan review be present
to participate in the sketch plan review meeting. In taking into
consideration the requirements of this chapter, particular attention shall be
given to the arrangement, location, and width of streets, their relation to
the topography of the land, sewage disposal, drainage, lot size and
arrangement, the further development of adjoining lands as yet unsubdivided,
and the requirements of the Official Map and Comprehensive Plan as adopted by
the participating jurisdictions. Subsequent to the meeting the Administrator
shall provide the participants with a written record of the proceedings of
that meeting.



   (D)   Preliminary plat procedures for primary approval.



      (1)   Submission requirements. Following the submission,
review, and report on the sketch plan application, the subdivider may file
for primary approval of a preliminary plat. This submission shall:



         (a)   Be made on forms available at the office of the
Area Plan Commission and be submitted with a fee established by the Area Plan
Commission for each lot which was not included in the initial sketch plan
application;



         (b)   Include all of land which the applicant proposes
to subdivide and all land immediately adjacent extending 100 feet there from
or of that directly opposite thereto, extending 100 feet from the street
frontage of such opposite land, with the names and addresses of the owners as
shown in the Auditor’s files. This information may be shown on a separate
current Plat Map reproduction from the Auditor’s Office showing the
boundaries of the subdivision superimposed thereon;



         (c)   Be presented in duplicate to the Administrator no
later than 30 calendar days prior to the regular meeting of the Area Plan
Commission at which it is intended to be heard;



         (d)   Be accompanied by ten copies of the preliminary
plat as described in this chapter; and



         (3)   Generally comply with the sketch plan as reviewed.



      (2)   Placement on the Area Plan Commission agenda. Subsequent
to the submission for primary approval, the Area Plan Commission shall place
the matter on its next regular meeting agenda for formal action.



      (3)   Administrative review. Subsequent to the placement on
the agenda and prior to the date of the public hearing, the Administrator and
other appropriate members of the Area Plan Commission’s staff including its
Executive Director shall review the proposal and prepare a written report to
the Area Plan Commission and applicant indicating a recommendation to the
subdivision being proposed.




Figure 3-1  Checkpoint Agencies




   Proposed Subdivision in Unincorporated Area of Posey County



      1.   Drainage Board (county surveyor)



      2.   County Soil and Water Conservation District



      3.   County Health Sanitation office



      4.   Appropriate Fire Departments



      5.   Metropolitan School District



      6.   County Commissioners



      7.   Utility Companies



      8.   Country-Mark Co-op (underground lines)



      9.   County Engineer or Designee



   Proposed Subdivision Within City of Mt. Vernon



      1.   City Engineer or Designee



      2.   County Soil and Water Conservation District



      3.   City Council



      4.   City Board of Parks and Recreation



      5.   City Fire Chief



      6.   City Police Chief (traffic)



      7.   Metropolitan School District



   Proposed Subdivision Within Incorporated Towns, Including Poseyville or
Cynthiana



      1.   City Engineer or Designee



      2.   County Health Board



      3.   School Board



      4.   Local Fire Department



      5.   Town Marshall



      6.   County Soil and Water Conservation District







Figure 3-2  Approval Process For Major Subdivision



      (4)   Public hearing notification. The Area Plan Commission
shall hold a public hearing on the preliminary plat and notice of such
hearing shall be in two local newspapers of general circulation ten days
prior to the hearing (per I.C. 5-3-1) at the applicant’s expense. At the
time of the public hearing, the applicant shall submit an affidavit stating
that the applicant has placed posters provided by the Administrator (advising
interested parties of the hearing) at the locations designated by him or her
on the proposed subdivision property at least ten days prior to the public
hearing and show proofs of publication that the notices of public hearing
were published at least ten days prior to the public hearing. Interested
parties (see § 152.017) shall be notified by the applicant of the date,
time, place, and purpose of the public hearing on the subdivision at least
ten days prior to the hearing by certified mail. The applicant shall file
with the Area Plan Commission at the line, of the public hearing an affidavit
so testifying.



      (5)   Primary approval of the preliminary plat. After the Area
Plan Commission has held a hearing upon the preliminary plat, the
Administrator’s report, checkpoint recommendations, testimony, and exhibits
submitted at the public hearing, the applicant shall be advised of any
required changes and/or additions. The Area Plan Commission shall at a public
meeting, grant primary approval, conditional approval or disapprove the
preliminary plat. One copy of the preliminary plat shall be returned to the
applicant with the date of approval, conditional approval or disapproval and
with the reasons therefore accompanying the plat within five days of the
public hearing. Before the Area Plan Commission approves a preliminary plat
showing a park reservation or land for other local government unit, the Area
Plan Commission shall obtain approval of the park or land reservation from
the participating jurisdiction. Primary approval by the Area Plan Commission
is subject to review by certiorari. Secondary approval of a subdivision
cannot occur until a minimum of 30 days has elapsed since the granting of
primary approval, per I.C. 36-7-4-708(d).



      (6)   Field trip. The Area Plan Commission, at its discretion,
upon hearing the request for primary approval, may elect to continue the
matter until its next regularly scheduled public meeting, and may schedule a
field trip to the site of the proposed subdivision, accompanied by the
applicant or his or her representative.



      (7)   Effective period of primary approval. Unless extended
the primary approval of a preliminary plat shall be effective for a period of
two years at the end of which time secondary approval of the subdivision for
at least one section must have been obtained and certified by the designated
officials. Secondary approval of any section of the preliminary plat shall
extend primary approval of the preliminary plat for another two years. Any
preliminary plat not receiving secondary approval of a section of the
preliminary plant within the period of time set forth herein shall be null
and void, and the developer shall be required to submit new application for
sketch plan review and certificate subject to all the zoning restrictions and
subdivision regulations in effect at the time of resubmission. Upon request
of the applicant, the Area Plan Commission may extend the primary approval of
a preliminary plat in increments of two years beyond the expiration date
without further notice and public hearing, provided the request of extension
if made at least 30 days before the expiration of the primary approval.
However, if secondary approval of any section the preliminary plat has not be
approved after two years, the applicant must comply with the subdivision
requirements in effect at the time of each two extension of the preliminary
plat.



   (E)   Approval of construction plans.



      (1)   Submission procedure and requirements. Following the
review of the sketch plan and prior to submission of the final plat for
secondary approval, the applicant, if he or she wishes to proceed with the
subdivision, shall file with the Administrator before starting work on any
improvements three sets of the detailed plans and specifications thereof for
approval, prepared by a licensed professional engineer or land surveyor in
the State of Indiana. (Four or five sets may be necessary if the Drainage
Board is involved or the City Engineer or designee where a subdivision is
located in the county but city or town sewer and water is used).



      (2)   Review process. The Administrator shall immediately
refer these plans to the appropriate agencies of the affected participating
jurisdictions for review. Once these agencies indicate their approval of the
construction plans or 14 working days have elapsed since their distribution
without a written response, the Administrator shall stamp the plans approved
and return one set to the applicant. In no event shall secondary approval of
the final plat be given prior to approval of the construction plans.



      (3)   Installation of improvements. The installation of
improvements shall be inspected by the appropriate participating
jurisdiction. Such inspections are required in all instances regardless of
whether the work is performed before or after secondary approval. Failure to
request inspection of work performed after the date of this chapter and
before secondary approval may be the cause for denial of secondary approval.



   (F)   Final plat procedures for secondary approval.



      (1)   Submission requirements. Following primary approval of
the preliminary plat and construction plans, the applicant, if he wishes to
proceed with the subdivision, shall file with the Administrator a request for
secondary approval of a final plat. The application shall:



         (a)   Be submitted on forms available at the Office of
the Area Plan Commission;



         (b)   Include the entire subdivision, or section thereof
which derives access from an existing state, county, or municipal roadway;



         (c)   Be accompanied by ten copies of the final plat as
described in this chapter;



         (d)   Totally comply with the chapter and the terms and
conditions of primary approval;



         (e)   Be accompanied by the performance bond (or
equivalent financial instrument) per § 152.070, if required, in a form
satisfactory to the Area Plan Commission Attorney and in an amount
established by the Area Plan Commission upon recommendation of the
participating jurisdiction, and shall guarantee the completion of all
required subdivision and offsite improvements; and



         (f)   Be accompanied by any restrictive covenants in a
form proved by the Area Plan Commission, whether they have been proposed by
the subdivider or required by the Area Plan Commission.



      (2)   Determination of conformance (secondary approval). In
order to be recorded, a final plat shall either be found to be in conformance
with the primary approval by the Administrator, or by the Area Plan
Commission at a public meeting. If the final subdivision plat deviates from
the preliminary plat that received primary approval, the subdivision shall be
resubmitted to the Area Plan Commission at a public meeting for a new primary
approval. If all improvements have been satisfactorily completed, the
subdivider submitting a final plat conforming to the primary approval shall
choose whether this review is to be performed by the Administrator or by the
Area Plan Commission at a public meeting. If all improvements have not been
completed and a performance bond (or equivalent financial instrument) is
required, the subdivider shall submit the final plat for approval to the Area
Plan Commission at a public meeting.



         (a)   Should the subdivider not choose Area Plan
Commission review, the Administrator shall within ten working days, review
the items submitted as per division (F)(1) of this section in order to
ascertain the sufficiency as to conformance with the primary approval. If the
submission is found to be in conformance and complete, the Administrator
shall recommend the signing of the certificate granting secondary approval.



         (b)   Should the subdivision require a performance bond
(or equivalent financial instrument) or the subdivider chooses Area Plan
Commission review, the Area Plan Commission shall perform the same function
by a public meeting. The subdivider shall request Area Plan Commission review
in writing no less than 30 calendar days prior to the date of the public
meeting at which he or she intends to have his or her final plat reviewed.
The Area Plan Commission shall place the matter on its next regular meeting
agenda. The Administrator shall review the proposal and submit a written
report and recommendation to the Area Plan Commission and the applicant and
the Area Plan Commission at the public meeting shall approve or disapprove
(with reasons) the final plat. If granted secondary approval and the
performance bond (or equivalent financial instrument) has been posted, it
shall be signed by the designated officials. If not granted secondary
approval, the subdivider shall be informed as to the insufficiency of his
submittal.



      (3)   Sectioning plats. Prior to granting secondary approval
of a major subdivision plat, the Area Plan Commission may permit the plat to
be divided into two or more sections, and may impose such conditions upon the
filing of the sections as it may deem necessary to assure the orderly
development of the plat. If all improvements have not been completed, the
Area Plan Commission shall require that the performance bond (or equivalent
financial instrument) be in such amount as is commensurate with the section
or sections of the plat to be filed for secondary (final) plat approval, but
may defer the remaining required performance bond principal amount until the
remaining sections of the plat are offered for secondary (final) plat
approval. Such sections must contain at least 20 lots or 10% of the total
number of lots contained in the approved plat, whichever is less. The
approval of all remaining sections not filed with the Administrator shall
automatically expire after two from the date of primary approval of the
preliminary plat, unless the approval of the preliminary plat has been
automatically extended by two years through the secondary approval of a
section of the preliminary plat or unless the expiration date has been
extended.



      (4)   Bond forfeiture. If a bond (or equivalent financial
instrument) has been posted for the completion of improvements and the
improvements have not been completed within two years, the Area Plan
Commission shall review the adequacy of the bond (or equivalent financial
instrument), determine if the amount of the bond (or equivalent financial
instrument) should be increased or decreased based on the improvements to be
completed or declare the bond (or equivalent financial instrument) forfeit.



   (G)   Signing and recording a plat.



      (1)   Signing of plat.



         (a)   When all improvements have not been completed and
a bond (or equivalent financial instrument) is required, the designated
officials of the Area Plan Commission shall endorse approval on the plat by
signing the certificate after the bond (or equivalent financial instrument)
has been approved, and all conditions of the primary approval have been
satisfied.



         (b)   When installation of improvements is required in
lieu of posting a bond (or equivalent financial instrument), the designated
officials of the Area Plan Commission shall endorse secondary approval of the
plat by signing the certificate after all conditions of the primary approval
have been satisfied and all improvements satisfactorily completed. There
shall be written evidence that the required public facilities have been
installed in a manner satisfactory to the participating jurisdiction as shown
by a certificate signed by the appropriate Board of Works, County
Commissioners, Town Board or the County Drainage Board that the necessary
improvements have been accomplished.



      (2)   Assurance to subdivider. If the subdivider elects to
install all improvements before he or she applies for secondary approval and
it is shown that the conditions of the ordinance have been met, and if the
final plat completely conforms to the primary approval and all improvements
have been satisfactorily installed, the Area Plan Commission shall have no
other recourse than to grant secondary approval.



      (3)   Recording of final plat.



         (a)   The designated officials shall sign the
certificate which shall be part of the tracing cloth or reproducible mylar of
the subdivision plat, plus two mylar prints of the subdivision plat. The
mylar prints shall be returned to the subdivider and his engineer or surveyor.



         (b)   It shall be the responsibility of the subdivider
in the presence of the Executive Director or his or her designee to file the
final plat with the County Recorder within 30 days of the date of signature.
After 30 days of the date of signature of the final plat, the final plat
shall be resubmitted for approval by the Area Plan Commission.



(Ord. 13-8, passed 5-16-13)



§ 152.033  MINOR SUBDIVISIONS.



   (A)   General procedures for primary approval. Should the
Administrator, upon examination of the sketch plan application, classify the
proposed land division as a minor subdivision, the subdivider shall follow
the procedures and be subject to the process outlined in Figure 3-3 and
detailed in this section. In addition to a sketch plan which is reviewed by
the Administrator and checkpoint agencies for primary approval, by the Area
Plan Commission, or its Executive Committee, where applicable, the applicant
seeking approval of a minor subdivision shall submit for secondary approval a
final subdivision plat which must be found in compliance with the sketch plan
or otherwise approved in order to be signed and recorded.



   (B)   Official submission date and placement on the agenda. An
application for sketch plan approval shall be submitted no less than 30
calendar days prior to either a regularly scheduled public meeting of the
Area Plan Commission, or a regularly scheduled meeting of the Area Plan
Commission’s Executive Committee, where applicable, at which the proposal
is intended to be acted upon. The Administrator shall place such application
on the agenda of the first regularly scheduled meeting of the Area Plan
Commission, or its Executive Committee, where applicable, to occur 30 days
after the date the application is submitted.



   (C)   Sketch plan review process. Within 20 calendar days of the
subdivider sketch plan application submittal, the Administrator shall have
studied the proposal, reviewed checkpoint reports received, and met with the
subdivider to discuss pertinent aspects of the proposed subdivision and
possible modifications and/or changes that may be suggested or required by
this chapter. The Executive Director shall request that a representative of
each checkpoint agency that wishes to be involved in a sketch plan review be
present to participate in the sketch plan review meeting. In taking into
consideration the requirements of this chapter, particular attention shall be
given to sewage disposal, drainage, lot size, and arrangement, the further
development of adjoining lands as yet unsubdivided, and the requirements of
the Official Map and Comprehensive Plan as adopted by the participating
jurisdictions. Subsequent to the meeting, the Administrator shall provide the
participants with a written record of the proceedings of that meeting.



   (D)   Administrative review. Subsequent to placement on the agenda,
and prior to the date of public hearing, the Administrator and other
appropriate members of the Area Plan Commission’s staff including its
Executive Director shall review the proposal and prepare a written report to
the Area Plan Commission and applicant indicating a recommendation with
regard to the subdivision being proposed.



   (E)   Public hearing notification. The Area Plan Commission shall
hold a public hearing on the sketch plan and notice of such hearing shall be
in two local newspapers of general circulation ten days prior to the hearing
(per I.C. 5-3-1) at the applicant’s expense. At the time of the public
hearing, the applicant shall submit an affidavit stating that the applicant
has placed posters provided by the Administrator advising interested parties
of the hearing at the locations designated by him or her on the proposed
subdivision property at least ten days prior to the public hearing and show
proofs of publication that the notices of public hearing were published at
least ten days prior to the public hearing. Interested parties (see §
152.017) shall be notified by the applicant of the date, time, place, and
purpose of the public hearing by certified mail. The applicant shall file
with the Area Plan Commission at the time of the public hearing an affidavit
so testifying.



   (F)   Primary approval of the sketch plan. After the Area Plan
Commission, or its Executive Committee, where applicable, has, at a regularly
scheduled meeting, examined the sketch plan, Administrator’s report,
checkpoint recommendations, testimony, and exhibits submitted, the Area Plan
Commission or its Executive Committee, where applicable, shall, at a
regularly scheduled meeting, approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove
the sketch plan. One copy of the sketch plan shall be returned to the
applicant with the date of approval, conditional approval, or disapproval and
the reasons therefore accompanying the sketch plan within five days after the
public meeting. Primary approval by the Area Plan Commission is subject to
review by certiorari. Secondary approval of a subdivision cannot occur until
the minimum of 30 days has elapsed since the granting of primary approval per
secondary approval I.C. 36-7-4-708(d).



   (G)   Final subdivision plat procedure for secondary approval.



      (1)   Application requirements. Following approval of the
sketch plan, the applicant, if he or she wishes to proceed with the
subdivision, shall file with the Administrator an application for secondary
approval of a subdivision plat. The application shall:



         (a)   Be submitted on forms available at the Office of
the Area Plan Commission;



         (b)   Include the entire subdivision;



         (c)   Be accompanied by 15 copies of the subdivision
plat as described in this chapter; and



         (d)   Totally comply with the chapter and the terms and
conditions of approval.



      (2)   Determination of conformance (secondary approval). In
order to be recorded, a final subdivision plat shall either be found to be in
conformance with the approved sketch plan by the Administrator, or by the
Area Plan Commission at a public meeting. If the final subdivision plat
deviates from the sketch plan that received primary approval, the subdivision
shall be resubmitted to the Area Plan Commission at a public meeting for a
new primary approval. The subdivider submitting a final plat conforming to
the primary approval shall choose as to whether this review is performed by
the Administrator, Executive Committee of the Area Plan Commission or by the
Area Plan Commission at a public meeting.







Figure 3-3  Approval Process For Minor Subdivisions



         (a)   Should the subdivider not choose Area Plan
Commission review, the Administrator shall within ten working days review the
items to be submitted as per §§ 152.105 through 152.120 in order to
ascertain conformance with the primary approval. If the submission is found
to be in conformance and complete, the Administrator shall recommend the
signing of the certificate granting secondary approval.



         (b)   Should the subdivider choose Area Plan Commission
review, the Area Plan Commission shall perform the same function by at a
public meeting. The subdivider shall request in writing Area Plan Commission
review no less than 30 calendar days prior to the date of the public meeting
at which he or she intends to have his or her final plat reviewed. The Area
Plan Commission shall place the matter on its next regular meeting agenda;
Administrator shall review the proposal and submit a written report and
recommendation to the Area Plan Commission and the applicant; and the Area
Plan Commission at public meeting shall give secondary approval or
disapproval of the final plat. If approved it shall be signed by the
designated officers of the Area Plan Commission. If not approved, the
subdivider shall be informed as to the insufficiency of his or her submittal.



   (H)   Signing and recording a plat.



      (1)   Signing of plat. The designated officials of the Area
Plan Commission shall endorse secondary approval on the plat after all of the
conditions of primary approval have been satisfied.



      (2)   Assurance to subdivider. If it is shown that the
conditions of the chapter have been met and if the final plat completely
conforms to the primary approval, the Area Plan Commission shall have no
recourse than to grant secondary approval.



      (3)   Recording of plat.



         (a)   The designated officials shall sign the
certificate granting secondary approval which shall be part of the tracing
cloth or reproducible mylar of the subdivision plat, plus two mylar prints of
the subdivision plat. The mylar prints shall be returned to the applicant and
his or her engineer or surveyor.



         (b)   It shall be the responsibility of the subdivider
in the presence of the Area Plan Commission’s Executive Director or his or
her designee to file the plat with the County Recorder within 30 days of the
date of signature. After 30 days of the date of signature of the final plat,
the final plat shall be resubmitted for approval by the Area Plan Commission.



(Ord. 13-8, passed 5-16-13)



§ 152.034  EXEMPT DIVISIONS.



   (A)   General procedure for Exempt “I” Divisions. In order for a
land division to be considered an Exempt “I” Division, the information
prescribed for the applicable type of division under § 152.089 shall be
submitted to the Administrator so he or she can determine whether the
division meets the provisions of the definition for this classification (§
152.017) and therefore can issue to the subdivider a statement of compliance
to the applicable provisions of this chapter. Both the subdivider and the
Administrator shall hold copies of the statement of compliance. When the
parcel so exempted by this statement is conveyed to another party the copy of
the instrument of such conveyance shall be recorded with the County Recorder
bearing a stamp of approval signed by the Administrator indicating that such
statement of compliance has been obtained as ascertained by the copy(s) of
the statement which have been held for this purpose.



   (B)   General procedure for Exempt “II” Divisions. In order for
a land division to be considered an Exempt “II” Division and thus be
exempted from all other provisions of this chapter (except the definitional
requirements in § 152.017 under the “Subdivision” definition and the
informational requirements of § 152.090, certain conditions shall be met and
verified by the Administrator after his or her determination of qualification
for this status has been made. See Discussion of Requirements, § 152.030.



   (C)   Necessary conditions for Exempt “II” Divisions. In
addition to definitional requirements, a land division qualifying as an
Exempt “II” Division shall be shown as meeting the following conditions:



      (1)   The lot of record shall NOT be located in the service
area of a municipal sanitary sewer system or water system, and there shall be
NO extension of public sanitary sewers or water lines to provide liquid waste
disposal for the parcels being created.



      (2)   The dedication of public right-of-way is NOT required
for any abutting roadway to the lot of record or for a specific public road
as indicated on the County Thoroughfare Plan portion of the Official Map or
Comprehensive Plan.



      (3)   The provision of access from the parcels created by the
lot of record to a public roadway is the sole responsibility of the land
owner(s) who may create and record a private access easement to be maintained
by private land owners. Unless such private access easement subsequently
fulfills all requirements of the subdivision regulations, it shall NOT be
accepted for maintenance by any public agency.



      (4)   Certification of Exempt “II” Divisions. As the
conditions in division (B) of this section apply, the land divider shall
provide a plot plan and a metes and bound description of all parcels being
created per § 152.090 to the Administrator, and shall add the following
notes to the plot plan:



         (a)   The signature of the Administrator of the Posey
County Area Plan Commission certifies that this is a division of land exempt
from the KKgulations of the Posey County Area Plan Commission;



         (b)   The Posey County Area Plan Commission provides no
warranty nor guarantee that the parcels are buildable sites, that the parcels
have access to a public roadway, that public sanitary service is available to
the parcels created, that on-site sewage disposal systems may be constructed
without extra-ordinary costs, that public potable water is available to the
parcels created, that fire insurance is available without extra-ordinary
costs, that the parcels have adequate stormwater drainage, that the parcels
are free from wet soils or geological impediments, that the parcels are
outside known flood hazard areas including the 100-year floodplain, and that
the parcels do NOT require fill and compaction to create a suitable building
site;



         (c)   Before any building permit is issued, the Posey
County Area Plan Commission hereby provides notice that access to a public
road is at the discretion of the property owners for any parcels created,
that a permit from the Posey County Health Department will be necessary for
an on-site septic system, that a permit from the Posey County Health
Department will be necessary for any on-site potable water well, and that a
location improvement permit under the zoning ordinance will be necessary from
the Area Plan Commission to verify compliance with all zoning requirements,
including any applicable floodplain regulations; and



         (d)   These lots may NOT be further divided under exempt
divisions, but may go through the non-exempt subdivision process requiring
approval of the Area Plan Commission in accordance with these subdivision
regulations.



      (5)   Any conveyance by the owner or developer of an Exempt I
or II Division shall be required to add a deed restriction stating that:
“This is an Exempt I or II Division”.



      (6)   Exempt division review process. Within three working
days of the land divider’s complete submission of the required information
in the case of Exempt “I” Divisions (§ 152.089) or the required
information and certification (division (D) of this section) in the case of
Exempt “II” Divisions, the Administrator shall review the submission and
notify the land divider that his proposed land division either qualifies as
an exempt division and is thus exempt from all other provisions of this
chapter, or does not qualify as an exempt division and is thus subject to the
relevant subdivision processes described in this chapter.



(Ord. 13-8, passed 5-16-13)



IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS



§ 152.045  GENERAL IMPROVEMENTS.



   (A)   Conformance to applicable rules and regulations.  In addition
to the requirements established



herein, all subdivision plats shall comply with the following laws, rules,
and regulations:



      (1)   All applicable federal, state and local statutory
provisions (such those of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers concerning the
alteration of floodplains, stream channels and wetlands, and the Indiana
Department of Environmental Management concerning best management practices
for construction including Rule 5) as well as other federal and state permit
requirements that may be triggered;



      (2)   The county and participating jurisdictions zoning
ordinance, building and housing codes, and all other applicable laws of the
appropriate jurisdictions;



      (3)   The Comprehensive Plan, Official Map, Public Utilities
Plan, and Capital Improvements Program of the county, city or town including
all streets, drainage systems, and parks shown on the Official Map or
Comprehensive Plan as adopted;



      (4)   The special requirements of these regulations and any
rules of the Health Department and/or appropriate state agencies;



      (5)   The rules and regulations of the Indiana Department of
Highways if the subdivision or any lot contained therein abuts a
state-maintained roadway or connecting street;



      (6)   The highway and drainage standards and regulations
adopted by the county, city or town and its boards, commissions, and agencies;



      (7)   All pertinent standards contained within still valid
planning guides published by the Area Plan Commission; and



      (8)   Plat approval may be withheld if a subdivision is not in
conformity with the above guides and requirements or with the policies and
purposes of these regulations established in § 152.003.



   (B)   Self-imposed restrictions. If the owner places restrictions on
any of the land contained in the subdivision greater than those required by
the zoning ordinance or these regulations, such restrictions or reference
thereto may be required to be indicated on the subdivision plat, or the Area
Plan Commission may require that restrictive covenants be recorded with the
County Recorder in the form to be approved by the Area Plan Commission
Attorney.



   (C)   Plats straddling municipal boundaries. Whenever access to the
subdivision is required across land in another jurisdiction the Area Plan
Commission may request assurance from the County Attorney that such access is
legally established, and from the County Highway Department, City Street
Department or Town Public Works Board or their engineer or designee that the
access road is adequately improved, or that a performance bond (or equivalent
financial instrument) has been duly executed and is sufficient in the amount
to insure the construction of the access road. In general, lot lines should
be laid out so as not to cross municipal boundary lines.



   (D)   Boundary improvements.



      (1)   The subdivider shall have placed, under the supervision
of a registered land surveyor, concrete monuments four inches square or four
inches in diameter and 40 inches long with an iron pipe cast in the center,
at each corner or angle of the ultimate outside boundary. They shall be set
following the grading of each phase or section of the subdivision.



      (2)   The subdivider shall have placed, under the supervision
of a registered land surveyor, pipes or steel rods, three fourths of an inch
in diameter by 30 inches in length at the corners of each lot. They shall be
set prior to the issuance of any building permit.



   (E)   Character of the land. Land which the Area Plan Commission
finds to be unsuitable for subdivision or development because of flooding,
improper drainage, steep slopes, rock formations, adverse earth formations or
topography, utility easements, or other features which might reasonably be
harmful to the safety, health, and general welfare of the present or future
inhabitants of the subdivision and/or its surrounding areas, shall not be
subdivided or developed unless adequate methods are formulated by the
developer and approved by the Area Plan Commission, upon recommendation of
the City, Town or County Highway Department, City Street Department or Town
Public Works Board or their engineer or designee, to solve the problems
created by the unsuitable land conditions. Such land shall be set aside for
such uses permitted by the zoning ordinance that shall not involve any such
danger.



   (F)   Subdivision name. The proposed name of the subdivision shall
not duplicate, or too closely approximate phonetically, the name of any other
subdivision in the area covered by these regulations. The Area Plan
Commission shall have final authority to designate the name of the
subdivision which shall be determined at the time of primary approval.



(Ord. 13-8, passed 5-16-13)



§ 152.046  LOT IMPROVEMENTS.



   (A)   Lot arrangement. The lot arrangement shall be such that there
will be no foreseeable difficulties fo reasons of topography or other
conditions in securing building permits to build on each of the created lots
in compliance with the zoning ordinance and health regulations and in
providing driveway access to buildings on such lots from the appropriate
approved street.



   (B)   Lot dimensions. Lot dimensions shall comply with the minimum
standards in the zoning ordinance. Where lots are more than double the
minimum required area for the zoning district, the Area Plan Commission may
require that such lots be arranged so as to allow further subdivision and the
opening of future streets where they would be necessary to serve all such
potential lots in compliance with the zoning ordinance and these regulations.
In general, side lot lines shall be at right angles to the street lines (or
radial to curving street lines) unless a variation from this rule will give a
better street or lot plan. Dimensions of corner lots shall be large enough to
allow for erection of buildings, observing the minimum front yard set back
from both streets. Depth and width of properties reserved or laid out for
business, commercial, or industrial purposes shall be adequate to provide for
all of the off-street parking and loading facilities, building setbacks,
landscaping/buffering, and other features requirements for the type of use
and development contemplated, as established in the zoning ordinance.



   (C)   Double frontage lots and access to lots.



      (1)   Double frontage lots. Double frontage lots and reversed
frontage lots shall be avoided except where necessary to provide the
separation of residential development from the traffic on bordering
arterials, to control access to arterials through the prevention of direct
access by individual lots, or to overcome specific disadvantages of
topography and orientation affecting the subdivided lots.



      (2)   Access from primary and secondary arterials. Lots shall
not, in general, derive direct access from a primary or secondary arterial
street. Where driveway access from a primary or secondary arterial street may
be the only possible access for several adjoining lots, the Area Plan
Commission may require that such lots be served by a combined access drive or
frontage road in order to limit possible traffic hazards from multiple
accesses to such streets. Where possible, driveways should be designed with a
turn-around and arranged so as to avoid requiring vehicles to back into
traffic on primary or secondary arterials.



   (D)   Soil preservation, grading, and seeding.



      (1)   Soil preservation and final grading. Before grading of
the tract or lot begins, all necessary permits shall be obtained from the
U.S. Corps of Engineers and the Indiana Department of Environmental
Management (IDEM) relative to the alternation of any floodplain, stream or
wetland. During grading, construction shall be in accordance with all best
management practices for erosion and sedimentation control including, but
limited to, IDEM Rule 5 and any locally adopted stormwater management and
best management practices for erosion and sedimentation control. No
certificates of occupancy shall be issued until final grading has been
completed, in accordance with the approved construction plans and the lot
pre-covered with top soil having an average depth of at least six inches
which shall contain no particles over two inches in diameter over the entire
area of the lot, except that portion covered by buildings or included in
streets, or where the grade has not been changed or natural vegetation
seriously damaged. Topsoil shall not be removed from residential lots or used
as spoil, but shall be redistributed so as to provide at least six inches of
cover between the sidewalk and curbs, and shall be stabilized by seeding or
planting.



      (2)   Lot drainage. Lots shall be laid out so as to provide
positive drainage away from all buildings, and individual lot drainage shall
be coordinated with the general storm water drainage pattern for the area.
Drainage shall be designed so as to avoid the accumulation of storm water on
any one or more lots from adjacent lots. Further, the subdivision shall
provide for adequate storm water retention and detention to hold the first
inch of rainfall for release after filtering of pollutants from impervious
surfaces from the first flush of rainfall and to detain stormwater so that
the rate and volume of stormwater runoff is not increased onto or through
adjacent properties.



      (3)   Lawn-grass seed and sod. Grass seed shall be sown at not
less than four pounds to each 1,000 square feet of land area. The seed shall
be sown between March 15 and September 30. The seed shall consist of a
minimum of 10% rye grass by weight and a minimum of 90% of permanent
bluegrass and/or fescue grass by weight. All seed shall have been tested for
germination within one year of the date of seeding, and the date of testing
shall be on the label containing the seed analysis. All lots shall be seeded
front the roadside edge of the unpaved right-of-way back to a distance of 25
feet behind the proposed location of the principal structure on the lot. No
certificate of occupancy shall be issued until re-spreading of soil and
seeding of lawn has been completed; except that between October 15 and March
15 and between May 15 and August 15, the applicant shall submit an agreement
in writing signed by the developer and the property owner, with a copy to the
Building Permit Official, that respreading of soil and seeding of the lawn
will be done during the immediately following planting season as set forth in
this section, and leave a cash escrow for performance in such amount as shall
be determined by the Building Permit Official. Sod may be used to comply with
any requirement of seeding set forth herein.



   (E)   Debris and waste. No cut trees, timber, debris, earth, rocks,
stones, soil, junk, rubbish, or other waste material of any kind shall be
buried in any land, or left or deposited on any lot or street at the time of
occupancy within a subdivision, nor shall any be left or deposited in any
area of the subdivision at the time of expiration of the performance bond (or
equivalent financial instrument) or dedication of public improvements,
whichever is sooner.



   (F)   Fencing. Each subdivider and/or developer shall be required to
furnish and install fences wherever the Area Plan Commission determines that
a hazardous condition may exist. The fences shall be constructed according to
standards established by the engineer or designee for the county, city or
town; and shall be noted as to height and material on the final plat. No
certificate of occupancy shall be issued until said fence improvements have
been duly installed.



   (G)   Water bodies and watercourses. If a tract being subdivided
contains a water body, or portion thereof, lot lines shall be drawn so as to
distribute the entire ownership of the water body among the fees of adjacent
lots. The Area Plan Commission may approve an alternative allocation of
interest, whereby the ownership of and responsibility for safe maintenance of
the water body is so placed that it will not become a local government
responsibility. No more than 25% of the minimum area of a lot required under
the zoning ordinance may be satisfied by land which is under water. Where a
watercourse separates the buildable area of a lot from the sheet from which
it has access, provisions shall be made for installation of a culvert or
other construction, of a design approved by the engineer or designee of the
county, city or town.



   (H)   Performance bond to include lot improvement. The performance
bond (or equivalent financial instrument) shall include an amount to
guarantee completion of all requirements contained in this section of these
regulations including, but not limited to, soil conservation, final grading,
lot drainage, lawn-grass seeding, removal of debris and waste, fencing, and
all other lot improvements required by the Area Plan Commission. Whether or
not a certificate of occupancy has been issued, at the expiration of the
performance bond (or equivalent financial instrument), the county, city or
town may enforce the provisions of the conditions where the provisions of
this section or any other applicable law, ordinance, or regulation have not
been met.







Figure 4-1  Lot and Frontage Examples







Figure 4-2  Yard Areas and Street Improvements



(Ord. 13-8, passed 5-16-13)



§ 152.047  STREETS.



   (A)   General requirements.



      (1)   Frontage on improved streets. No subdivision shall be
approved unless the area to be subdivided shall have frontage on and access
from an existing street on the Official Map, unless such as street is:



         (a)   An existing state, country, or municipal street; or



         (b)   A street shown upon a plat approved by the Area
Plan Commission and recorded in the office of the County Recorder of Deeds.
Such streets or highways must be suitable and improved as required by the
highway rules, regulation specifications, or orders; or be secured by a
performance bond (or equivalent financial instrument) per § 152.070 .
Further, such streets and highways must have the width and right-of-way
required by these regulations or as indicated on the Official Map or
Thoroughfare Plan. Whenever the area to be subdivided and uses an existing
street frontage, such street shall be suitably improved as provided herein.



   (B)   Minimum street standards. All subdivision streets shall meet
the minimum specifications as set forth in Tables 4-1 and 4-2, and shall
further be approved as to design and specifications by the County Highway
Department, City Street Department or Town Public Works Board.



      (1)   It shall be the policy of the Area Plan Commission to
discourage the installation of private roads. Private roads that are
installed shall conform to the standards set forth in this section that are
the same as roads to be dedicated.



      (2)   The subdivider shall notify the County Highway
Department, City Street Department or Town Public Works Board when streets
are to be constructed and the Superintendent or his or her designee shall
have the opportunity to inspect the construction. Before accepting the
streets for maintenance, the county, city or town may inspect and perform
tests (at the subdivider’s expense) to determine compliance with the
specifications. Streets not meeting the specification will not be accepted
for maintenance. Further, prior to acceptance for maintenance and release of
any performance bond (or equivalent financial instrument), the agency
maintaining the street or road may request a maintenance bond per §
152.072(B).



   (C)   Topography and arrangement.



      (1)   Streets shall be related appropriately to the
topography. All streets shall be arranged so as to obtain as many as possible
of the building sites at, or above, the grades of the streets. Grades of the
streets shall conform as closely as possible to the original topography.
However, a combination of steep grades and sharp curves shall be avoided in
the street layout. Specific street standards are contained in the design
standards of these regulations.



      (2)   All streets shall be properly integrated with the
existing and proposed system of thoroughfares and dedicated rights-of-way as
established on the Official Map, Thoroughfare Plan and/or Comprehensive Plan.



      (3)   All arterial and collector streets shall be properly
related to special traffic generators (such as industries, business
districts, schools, churches and shopping centers), to population densities,
and to the pattern of existing and proposed land uses.



      (4)   Minor or local streets shall be laid out to conform as
much as possible to the topography, to discourage use by through traffic, to
permit efficient drainage and utility systems, and to require the minimum
number of streets necessary to provide convenient and safe access to the
proposed subdivision and surrounding property which is presently or may be
developed in the future. The intent is to create a system of streets and
easements to provide for the adequate and efficient delivery of
infrastructure to supporting the development of the community.



      (5)   Rigid, rectangular “gridiron” street patterns are
generally to be avoided, and the use of casual curvilinear streets,
cul-de-sacs, or loop streets shall be encouraged where such use will result
in a more desirable layout and relate better to the existing topography. On
flat land, innovative and varied geometrical street patterns shall be
encouraged where they are likely to enhance visual interest and a sense of
order for those using them (e.g., non-grid rectilinear, trapezoidal,
polygonal, or other geometric patterns). However, connectivity with the
surrounding street system at present and in the future through streets stubs
is of paramount importance to distribute traffic to the surrounding arterial
and collector systems and to provide adequate and multiple access points for
emergency vehicles.



      (6)   Proposed collector streets shall, where appropriate, be
extended to the boundary lines of the tract to be subdivided unless this is
prevented by topography or other physical conditions, or unless in the
opinion of the Area Plan Commission such extension(s) is/are not necessary or
desirable for the coordination of the layout of the subdivision under
consideration with the existing street layout for the most advantageous
future development of adjacent tracts (see division (K)(1) of this section).



      (7)   In business and industrial developments, the streets and
other access ways shall be planned in connection with the grouping of
buildings, location of rail facilities, and the provision of alleys, truck
loading and maneuvering areas, walkways, bikeways, and parking; areas so as
to minimize conflict of movement between the various types of vehicular and
pedestrian traffic.



   (D)   Blocks.



      (1)   Blocks shall have sufficient width to provide for two
tiers of lots of appropriate depths. Exceptions to this prescribed block
width shall be permitted in blocks adjacent to major streets (i.e.,
interstates, expressways and arterials), railroads, and waterways.



      (2)   The lengths, widths, and shapes of blocks shall be such
as are appropriate for the locality and the types of development
contemplated. In the case of residential subdivisions, no lot should be more
than 1,800 feet from an arterial or collector street. Block lengths in
residential area shall not exceed 1,800 feet nor less than 400 feet in
length. Wherever practicable, blocks along arterials and collector streets
shall not be less than 1,000 feet in length. This applies to the length of
any block face as measured between the centerlines of the intersecting
streets. When streets have access from both ends, longer blocks (not
exceeding the maximum length) are permissible. However when streets have
access only from one end (such as a cul-de-sac or temporary dead end),
shorter blocks are desirable and such streets are subject to shorter maximum
block lengths (i.e., 500 feet for a cul-de-sac or 300 feet for a dead end
street unless a greater length (not to exceed 1,200 feet) is approved through
the granting of a variance by the Area Plan Commission).



      (3)   In long blocks the Area Plan Commission may require the
reservation of easements through the block to accommodate utilities, drainage
facilities, or pedestrian traffic. Pedestrian ways or crosswalks not less
than ten feet wide, may be required by the Area Plan Commission through the
center of blocks more than 800 feet long or at other appropriate locations
and at the ends of cul-de-sacs where deemed essential to provide for
circulation or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers,
transportation, or other community facilities. Blocks designed for industrial
uses shall be of such length and width as may be determined to be suitable by
the Area Plan Commission for prospective uses.



   (E)   Access to collector streets. Where possible, lots in single
family residential subdivisions fronting on collector streets shall be
avoided and lots at the corners of intersections between local and collector
streets shall front on the local street and have driveway access to it only
and not to the collector street. In multiple family residential areas,
entrances to group parking lots shall have access only to collector streets
where possible and such entrances shall be widely spaced.



   (F)   Access to primary arterial. Where a subdivision borders on or
contains an existing or proposed primarily arterial, the Area Plan Commission
may require that access to it be limited by one of the following means:



      (1)   The subdivision of the lots so as to back onto the
primary arterial and front onto a parallel local street; no access shall be
provided from the primary arterial and screening shall be provided within a
strip of land along the rear property line of such lots.



      (2)   A series of cul-de-sacs, or loop streets entered from,
and designed generally to be at right angles to an access street at some
distance from and parallel to the arterial street, with the rear lines of
their terminal lots backing onto the major arterial. Intersections onto the
arterial street shall lot be less than 1,000 feet.



      (3)   A marginal access, frontage road or service road
separated from the primary arterial by a landscaped and/or decoratively
fenced grass strip and having access there to at widely spaced suitable
points.



   (G)   Street names. The sketch plan, as submitted, shall indicate
names of proposed streets. As part of his or her review, the Administrator
shall refer proposed street names to the local postmaster for his or her
comments regarding duplication of names and possible confusion. After
reviewing them the Administrator shall inform the subdivider of his or her
recommendations for their possible revision during the sketch plan review.
Names shall be sufficiently different in sound and in spelling from other
street names in the county, city, towns or other nearby areas so as to avoid
confusion. A street, which is, or is planned as a continuation of an existing
street, shall bear the same name.



   (H)   Street regulatory signs. The applicant shall be responsible
for installation of all street and regulatory signs. Signage design shall
conform to the most current edition of the Manual on Uniform Control Devices.
The applicant shall install all street signs before issuance of certificates
of occupancy for any residence on the approved streets.



   (I)   Reserve strips. The creation of reserve strips shall not be
permitted adjacent to a proposed street in such a manner as to deny access to
it from adjacent property if such street is a local service street rather
than a collector or arterial street. See divisions (E) and (F) of this
section.



   (J)   Construction of streets.



      (1)   Construction of streets other than cul-de-sacs. The
arrangement of streets shall provide for the continuation of principal
streets between adjacent subdivisions or other properties when such
continuation is necessary for the convenient movement of traffic, effective
fire protection, for efficient provisions of the utilities, and where such
continuation is in accordant with the Comprehensive Plan or Thoroughfare
Plan. If the adjacent property is undeveloped and the street must be a
dead-end street temporarily, the right-of-way shall be provided for all such
temporary dead end streets and turnarounds, with the notation on the
subdivision plat that the land outside the normal street right-of-way shall
revert to abutting properties whenever the street is continued. Temporary
turnarounds must be provided at the ends off such stub streets. The Area Plan
Commission may limit the length of temporary dead end streets in accordance
with the design standards in these regulations. In general, temporary dead
end streets or street stubs should not exceed 200 feet. Any temporary dead
end street in excess of 300 feet shall have a temporary turnaround. Dead end
streets shall not exceed 500 feet.



      (2)   Cul-de-sacs (permanent dead-end streets). Where a street
does not extend beyond the boundary of the subdivision and its continuation
is not required by the Area Plan Commission for access to adjoining property,
its terminus shall normally not be nearer to such boundary than 50 feet.
However, the Area Plan Commission may require the reservation of an
appropriate easement to accommodate drainage facilities, pedestrian traffic
or utilities. A cul-de-sac turnaround shall be provided at the end of a
permanent dead-end street in accordance with Table 4-1. For greater
convenience to traffic and more effective police and fire protection,
permanent dead-end streets shall, in general, be limited in length in
accordance with the design standards in these regulations, Cul-de-sacs of
greater than 150 feet may require greater pavement width and shall not exceed
500 feet in length unless a variance is granted by the Area Plan Commission
due to topography. If a variance is granted, in no circumstances shall the
cul-de-sac exceed 1,000 feet due to emergency access issues.



   (K)   Design standards.



      (1)   General. In order to provide for streets of suitable
location, width, and improvement to accommodate prospective traffic and
afford satisfactory access for police, firefighting, snow removal,
sanitation, and street-maintenance equipment, and to coordinate street
location in order to achieve a convenient system and avoid undue hardships to
adjoining properties, the design standards for streets are hereby required as
set forth in Tables 4-1 and 4-2 and Figures 4-3 and 4-4. Street
classifications may be indicated in the Comprehensive Plan, Thoroughfare Plan
or the Official Map; otherwise, they shall be determined by the Area Plan
Commission. The urban cross section standards of Tables 4-1 and 4-2 and
Figures 4-3 and 4-4 shall apply to any proposed subdivision within two miles
of an incorporated area unless waived through a variance by the Area Plan
Commission, unless adjoining subdivision streets use a rural cross section.
Referring to Table 4-1, the jurisdiction may request additional pavement and
right-of-way width if turn lanes are needed now or reasonably anticipated in
the future. Relative to the minimum pavement and right-of-way width in Table
4-1, the jurisdiction may request the pavement and right-of-way widths to
match existing street pavement widths when the proposed street is a
continuation of an existing street of at least 24 feet or greater in pavement
width in the urban area and 20 feet or greater in pavement width in the rural
area. Further, in the case of a residential collector, the Area Plan
Commission may, with the concurrence of the jurisdiction, approve a variance
of the pavement width to 28 feet in the urban area and to 24 feet in the
rural area.



      (2)   Street surfacing and improvements. After sanitary sewer
and water utilities and stormwater drainage systems have been installed by
the developer, the applicant shall construct curbs and gutters, and shall
surface or cause the roadways to be surfaced to the widths prescribed in
these regulations. The surfacing shall be of such character as is suitable
for the expected traffic and in harmony with similar improvements in the
surrounding areas. Types of pavement shall be as approved by the County
Highway Department, City Street Department or Town Public Works Board.
Referring to Figure 4-4, the 30-inch curb-and-gutter section normally
requited for state-maintained facilities may be substituted with a different
curb-and-gutter type, but not less than an 18-inch roll curb-and-gutter
section, as directed by the County Highway Department, City Street Department
or Town Public Works Board. Adequate provision shall be made for culverts,
drains, and bridges. All street pavement, shoulders, drainage improvements
and structures, curbs, turnarounds, and sidewalks shall conform to all
construction standards and specifications adopted by the Area Plan Commission
and the County Highway Department, City Street Department or Town Public
Works Board; and shall be incorporated into the construction plans required
to be submitted by the developer for plat approval. Referring to Figure 4-4,
there shall be a planting strip of a minimum of two feet between the outside
edge of curb and the edge of the walkway to accommodate regulatory and
information signs and mail boxes. While sidewalks are a minimum of four feet
in width, sidewalks of five feet are the minimum for apartments, community
facilities (such as schools and libraries), and sidewalks of greater width
may be required by the jurisdiction.



      (3)   Excess right-of-way. Right-of-way widths in excess of
the standards designed in these regulations shall be required whenever, due
to topography, additional width is necessary to provide for adequate and
stable earth slopes and side ditches. Such slopes shall not be in excess of
three to one. Further, additional right-of-way may be requested where turn
lanes are reasonably anticipated either at present or in the future.



      (4)   Railroads and limited access highways. Railroad
right-of-way and limited access highways where so located as to affect the
subdivision of adjoining lands shall be treated as follows:



         (a)   In residential districts, a buffer strip at least
25 feet in depth in addition to the normal depth of the lot required in the
district shall be provided adjacent to the railroad right-of-way or limited
access highway. This strip shall be part of the platted lots, and shall be
designated on the plat: “This strip is reserved for screening. The
placement of structures hereon other than earth berms, walls, fences, and
other landscape screening devices approved by the Area Plan Commission is
prohibited.”



         (b)   In districts zoned for business, commercial, or
industrial uses, the nearest street extending parallel or approximately
parallel to a railroad shall, where practicable, be at sufficient distance
therefrom to ensure a suitable depth for commercial or industrial sites.



         (c)   Streets parallel to a railroad when intersecting a
street which crosses the railroad at grade shall, to the extent practicable,
be at a distance of at least 150feet from the railroad right-of-way. Such
distance shall be determined with due consideration of the minimum distance
required for future separation of grade by means of appropriate approach
gradients.



      (5)   Intersections.



         (a)   Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as
nearly as possible at right angles. A proposed intersection of two new
streets at an angle of less than 75 degrees shall not be acceptable. An
oblique street should be approximately at right angles for at least 100 feet
from the intersection. Not more than two streets shall intersect at any ore
point that creates more than four intersection legs.



         (b)   Proposed new intersections along one side of an
existing street shall, where practicable, coincide with any existing
intersection on the opposite side of such street. Street jogs with centerline
offsets of less than 150 feet shall not be permitted except where the
intersected street has a separated, dual-drive, without median breaks at
either such intersection. Where local streets intersect with major streets,
their alignment shall be continuous. Intersections of major streets shall be
at least 800 feet apart and preferably 1,000 feet apart.



         (c)   Minimum curb radius at the intersection of two
local streets shall be at least 20 feet; and minimum curb radius at an
intersection involving a collector street shall be at least 25 feet. Alley
intersections and abrupt changes in alignment within a block shall have the
corners cut off in accordance with standard engineering practices to permit
safe vehicular movement.



         (d)   Intersections shall be designed with a flat grade
wherever practical. In hilly or rolling areas at the approach to an
intersection, a leveling area shall be provided having not greater than a 2%
grade at a distance of 60 feet, measured from the nearest right-of-way line
of the intersection street.



         (e)   Where any street intersection will involve earth
banks, hills, or existing vegetation inside any lot corner that would create
a traffic hazard by limiting visibility, the developer shall cut such ground
and/or vegetation (including trimming trees) in connection with the grading
of the public right-of-way to the extent deemed necessary by the County
Highway Department, City Sheet Department or Town Public Works Board to
provide an adequate sight distance. Site distance issues shall be verified by
the developer in accordance with the most current edition of A Policy on
Geometric Design of Highways and Streets as published by AASHTO. Without
traffic control devices, the clear sight distance triangle intersecting the
center of the approaching lanes is 90 feet for 20 mph, 115 feet for 25 mph
and 150 feet for 30 mph. With yield and stop controlled intersections, the
clear sight distance is established by the AASHTO design standards.



         (f)   The cross-slopes on all streets, including
intersections shall be 2% or less. However, the least slope shall be that
necessary to ensure adequate pavement surface drainage.



      (6)   Bridges of primary benefit to the applicant, as
determined by the Area Plan Commission, shall be constructed at the full
expense of the applicant without reimbursement from the county, city or town.
The sharing of expense for the construction of bridges not of primary benefit
to the applicant as determined by the Area Plan Commission, will be fixed by
special agreement between the county, city or town and the applicant. The
cost shall be charged to the applicant prorated as the percentage of his land
developed and so served.



   (L)   Street dedications and reservations.



      (1)   New perimeter streets. Street systems in new
subdivisions shall be laid out so as to eliminate or avoid new perimeter
half-streets. Where an existing half-street is adjacent to a new subdivision,
the abutting half of the street shall be improved and dedicated by the
subdivider. The Area Plan Commission may authorize a new perimeter street
where the subdivider improves and dedicates the entire required right-of-way
width within his or her own subdivision boundaries.



      (2)   Widening and realignment of existing streets. Where a
subdivision borders an existing narrow street or when the Comprehensive Plan,
Thoroughfare Plan, Official Map, or zoning setback regulations indicate plans
for realignment or widening of a street that would require use of some of the
land in the subdivision, the applicant shall be required to improve and
dedicate such streets at his or her own expense to the full width required by
these subdivision regulations. Land reserved for any street purposes may not
be counted in satisfying the minimum yard or area requirements of the zoning
ordinance.



TABLE 4-1  GEOMETRIC DESIGN STANDARDS FOR PUBLIC STREETS



 

 

Street Type

 

Min. Width R-O-W

 

Min. Pavement Width(1)

 

Min. Side Ditch Width

 

Min. Shoulder Width

 

Max. Grade

 

Min. Radius of Curve

 

Min. Length of Tangent(3)

 

Min. Sight Distance

 

Min. Corner Radius(4)

 

Min Turn Around(5)



Urban Cross Section
 
Residential(6)
 
1. Cul-de-sac

2. Local street

3. Collector
 

50 ft.



50 ft.



60 ft.

 

24 ft.



24 ft.



40 ft.

 

N/A



N/A



N/A

 

N/A



N/A



N/A

 

7.5%



7.5%



7.0%

 

100 ft.



100 ft.



150 ft.

 

100 ft.



100 ft.



240 ft.

 

200 ft.



200 ft.



240 ft.

 

20 ft.



20 ft.



25 ft.

 

80/60 ft.



100/80 ft.



N/A



Arterial
 
1. Secondary

2. Primary

3. Divided primary
 

70 ft.



80 ft.



100 ft.

 

44 ft.



54 ft.



2-24 ft.

 

N/A



N/A



N/A

 

N/A



N/A



N/A

 

(2)



(2)



(2)

 

(2)



(2)



(2)

 

(2)



(2)



(2)

 

(2)



(2)



(2)

 

(2)



(2)



(2)

 

N/A



N/A



N/A



Rural Cross Section
 
Residential(6)
 
1. Cul-de-sac

2. Local street

3. Collector
 

50 ft.



50 ft.



80 ft.

 

20 ft.



20 ft.



48 ft.

 

10 ft.



10 ft.



10 ft.

 

4 ft.



4 ft.



6 ft.

 

7.5%



7.5%



7.0%

 

100 ft.



100 ft.



100 ft.

 

100 ft.



100 ft.



150 ft.

 

200 ft.



200 ft.



240 ft.

 

20 ft.



20 ft.



25 ft.

 

100/76 ft.



100/76 ft.



N/A



Arterial
 
1. Secondary

2. Primary

3. Divided primary
 

80 ft.



120 ft.



150 ft.

 

24 ft.



48 ft.



2-24 ft.

 

22 ft.



28 ft.



31 ft.

 

6 ft.



8 ft.



10 ft.

 

(2)



(2)



(2)

 

(2)



(2)



(2)

 

(2)



(2)



(2)

 

(2)



(2)



(2)

 

(2)



(2)



(2)

 

N/A



N/A



N/A



GEOMETRIC STANDARDS APPLIED TO ALL PUBLIC STREETS

Minimum grade (uncurbed with side ditches   0.0%

Minimum grade (curbed)   0.50%


(Note: a grade of 0.30% may be allowed provided proper storm drainage and
approval by the Area Plan Commission)


Minimum block length:   400 ft.


(1,000 ft. between collectors along arterials)


Maximum block length:   1,800

Maximum cul-de-sac length:   500(7)

Maximum length of temporary dead end road:   500(8)

Minimum length of vertical curves:   100 ft.


Not less than 20 ft. for each percent of algebraic difference in grade)




 

FOOTNOTES


(1)   The curb and gutter section may range from 18" to 30" depending on
the type preferred by the jurisdiction.



(2)   As required by the city, town or county engineer and/or Indiana
Department of Transportation.



(3)   Between reverse curves.



(4)   Measured at curb on urban cross section, at edge on rural cross
sections, transitional curve into the turnaround within cul-de-sacs;
residential - 50 ft., non-residential - 100 ft.



(5)   Diameter, measured at edge of right-of-way/edge of pavement, or back
to back of curb on urban cross sections.



(6)   Includes subdivisions of uses permitted in residential districts as
a matter of right or through special exception. The jurisdiction may request
the pavement and right-of-way width of any street to be continued as long as
the pavement width is 24 feet or greater in urban areas and 20 feet or
greater in rural areas. The jurisdiction may request additional pavement and
right-of-way width where turn lanes are needed now or anticipated in the
future. The Area Plan Commission, with the concurrence of the jurisdiction,
may grant a variance of the pavement width for residential collectors down to
28 feet in urban areas and 24 feet in rural areas.



(7)   Up to 1,000 feet with variance.



(8)   Dead-end street of 300 feet or more requires a turnaround.




 



TABLE 4-2  MINIMUM PAVEMENT DESIGN STANDARDS FOR PUBLIC STREETS



 

 

Street Type

 

Subgrade Treatement Type IIA(2)

 

Compacted Aggregate Base #53

 

HMA Base

 

HMA Intermediate

 

HMA Surface

 

Total Thickness

 

Subgrade Treatment Type IIA(2)

 

Compacted Aggregate Base #53

 

Uniform Concrete Design Thickness

 

Total Thickness



Urban Cross Section
 
Residential
 
1. Cul-de-sac

2. Local street

3. Collector
 

6"



6"



6"

 

4"



4"



6"

 

3"



3"



3"

 

- -



- -



2"

 

1 ½”



1 ½”



1 ½”

 

13 ½”



13 ½”



18 ½”

 

6"



6"



6"

 

4"



4"



6"

 

7"



7"



8"

 

17"



17"



20"



Arterial
 
1. Secondary

2. Primary

3. Divided primary
 

(1)



(1)



(1)

 

(1)



(1)



(1)

 

(1)



(1)



(1)

 

(1)



(1)



(1)

 

(1)



(1)



(1)

 

(1)



(1)



(1)

 

(1)



(1)



(1)

 

(1)



(1)



(1)

 

(1)



(1)



(1)

 

(1)



(1)



(1)



Rural Cross Section
 
Residential
 
1. Cul-de-sac

2. Local street

3. Collector
 

6"



6"



6"

 

4"



4"



6"

 

3"



3"



3"

 

- -



- -



2"

 

1 ½”



1 ½”



1 ½”

 

13 ½”



13 ½”



18 ½”

 

6"



6"



6"

 

4"



4"



6"

 

7"



7"



8"

 

17"



17"



20"



Arterial
 
1. Secondary

2. Primary

3. Divided primary
 

(1)



(1)



(1)

 

(1)



(1)



(1)

 

(1)



(1)



(1)

 

(1)



(1)



(1)

 

(1)



(1)



(1)

 

(1)



(1)



(1)

 

(1)



(1)



(1)

 

(1)



(1)



(1)

 

(1)



(1)



(1)

 

(1)



(1)



(1)




(1)   As required by the county engineer and/or Indiana Department of
Transportation but not less than the standard required for residential
collector.



(2)   Type IIA - 8 in. chemical soil modification or 5 in. of the subgrade
excavated and replaced with compacted coarse aggregate No. 53.



(3)   Polypropylene fiber reinforced Portland cement concrete with a 28
day compressive strength of 4,000 psi. Fiber length shall be 0.75" in length
and mixed at a rate of 1.5 pounds per cubic yard of concrete. No steel welded
wire fabric shall be used. Two inch deep saw cut joints shall be placed not
more than 20 feet apart and ½ inch expansion joints shall be placed not more
than 200 feet apart. Lugs shall be constructed in areas where the grade
exceeds 7% or as directed by the County Highway Department.




 







Figure 4-3  Typical Rural Residential Cross Sections



 

Please note that the jurisdiction determines the type of curb-and-gutter
section ranging from 18" to 30", that a minimum planting strip of 2' is
required between the outside edge of curb and the sidewalk, and that the
jurisdiction may dictate greater sidewalk widths



 







 



 




A

 
Flexible Pavement Section
 

A

 
Rigid Pavement Section


1½” HMA surface
 
7" Fiber reinforced concrete


3" HMA base
 
4" Compacted aggregate base, No. 53 Stone


4" Compacted aggregate base, No. 53 Stone
 
4" Subgrade treatment, Type IIA


6" Subgrade treatment, Type IIA
 




 
 


 



B

 
1½” HMA surface
 

B

 
8" Fiber reinforced concrete


2" HMA intermediate
 
6" compacted aggregate base, No. 53 Stone


3" HMA base
 
4" Subgrade treatment, Type IIA


6" Compacted aggregate base, No. 53 Stone
 


6" Subgrade treatment, Type IIA
 




 



Figure 4-4  Typical Urban Residential Cross Sections



(Ord. 13-8, passed 5-16-13)



§ 152.048  DRAINAGE AND STORM SEWERS.



   (A)   General requirements. The Area Plan Commission shall not
recommend for approval any subdivision plat which does not make adequate
provision for storm or flood water runoff channels or basins. The storm water
drainage system shall be separate and independent of any sanitary sewer
system. Storm sewers, where required, shall be designed by the rational
method, or other methods as approved by the Area Plan Commission and the
County Drainage Board (city or town public works board), and a copy of the
design computations shall be submitted along with the plans. The “rational
method” is described in chapter three of the County Storm Drainage Manual
by Chris B. Burke, project for Indiana counties and cities, school of civil
engineering, Purdue University, West Lafayette, May 1981, hereinafter
referred to as “drainage manual”. Inlets shall be provided so that
surface water is not carried across or around any intersection, or for a
distance of more than 600 feet in the gutter or when the encroachment of
storm water into the street disrupts traffic. See drainage manual p. 5-27.
When calculations indicate that curb capacities are exceeded at a point, no
further allowance shall be made for flow beyond that point and catch basins
or inlets shall be used to intercept flow at that point. Surface water
drainage patterns shall be shown for each and every lot and block, if an
existing stormwater sewer is available and has adequate capacity, it may be
used as en alternative in the affected jurisdiction. In general, the rate and
volume of stormwater runoff onto adjacent properties shall not be increased
as a result of the increase in impervious surface of the proposed
subdivision; this stormwater detention is required on the proposed
subdivision site unless an off-site detention facility is demonstrated to be
adequate or made adequate by the subdivider. Further, the stormwater
generated by the first ten minutes of the one-year (100%) storm shall be
retained on-site or at an adequate off-site retention facility where water
pollutants resulting from the first flush of impervious surfaces due to the
storm are appropriately filtered.



   (B)   Nature of storm water facilities.



      (1)   Location. The applicant may be required by the Area Plan
Commission to carry away by pipe or open ditch any spring or surface water
that may exist, either previously to, or as result of the subdivision. Such
drainage facilities shall be located in the street right-of-way where
feasible, or in perpetual, unobstructed easements of appropriate width, and
shall be constructed in accordance with the county’s, city’s or town’s
construction standards and specifications.



      (2)   Accessibility to public storm sewers.



         (a)   Where a public storm sewer is accessible, the
applicant shall install storm sewer facilities; or, if no outlets are within
a reasonable distance, adequate provision shall be made for the disposal of
storm water, subject to the specifications of the county (city or town)
engineer or drainage engineer or designee of the applicable jurisdiction.
However, in subdivisions containing lots of less than 15,000 square feet in
area and in business and industrial districts, underground storm sewer
systems shall be constructed throughout the subdivision and be conducted to
an approved outfall. Inspection of facilities shall be conducted by the
county (city or town) engineer or drainage engineer or designee.



         (b)   If a connection to a public storm sewer will be
approved eventually, as determined by the county (city or town) engineer or
drainage engineer or designee and the Area Plan Commission, the developer
shall make arrangements for future storm water disposal by the public utility
system at the time the plat receives final approval. Cost provision(s) for
such connection(s) shall be incorporated by inclusion in the amount of
performance bond (or equivalent financial instrument) required for the
subdivision plat.



         (c)   If the public storm sewer has limited capacity,
the subdivider shall provide adequate detention and retention facilities on
site or make off-site improvements so as not to increase the rate and volume
of stormwater runoff and retain the first ten minutes of the one-year storm
for adequate filtering of water pollutants.



      (3)   Accommodation of upstream drainage areas. A culvert or
other drainage facility shall in each case be large enough to accommodate
potential runoff, from its entire upstream drainage area, whether inside or
outside the subdivision. The county (city or town) engineer of drainage
engineer or designee shall determine the necessary size of the facility,
based on the provisions of the required construction standards and
specifications assuming conditions of maximum potential watershed development
permitted by the zoning ordinance.



      (4)   Effect on downstream drainage areas. The proposed
subdivision shall not increase the rate or volume of stormwater flow onto
downstream properties, and shall retain the first ten minutes of runoff from
the one-year storm for the adequate filtering of water pollutants. The county
(city or town) engineer or drainage engineer or designee shall determine the
effect of each proposed subdivision on existing drainage facilities outside
the area of the subdivision. County (city or town) drainage studies together
with such other studies as shall be appropriate, shall serve as a guide to
needed improvements. Where it is anticipated that the additional runoff
incident to the development of the subdivision will overload an existing
downstream drainage facility, the Area Plan Commission may withhold secondary
approval of the subdivision until provision such as storage facility has been
made for the improvement of the potential condition in such sum as the Area
Plan Commission shall determine. No subdivision shall be approved unless
adequate drainage from it will be provided to an adequate drainage water
course or facility.



      (5)   Areas of poor drainage. Areas which are not in the flood
plain but contain soils which are subject to flooding may be approved for
subdivision by the Area Plan Commission, provided that the subdivider fills
the affected areas of the subdivision to an elevation sufficient to place
building sites and streets two feet above ponding levels. The volume of any
filling in the floodplain shall be offset by an equal volume of cutting so as
not to increase the base flood elevation (1% annual chance flood or 100-year
flood). Further, all necessary local, state and federal permits are necessary
for excavation and filling in the FEMA 100-year flood plain.



      (6)   Areas of high seasonal water tables. In areas
characterized by soils having a high seasonal water table as determined by
the Posey County Soil and Water Conservation District, lots shall be limited
to slab type construction unless the Area Plan Commission determines that
appropriate engineering techniques shall be applied to alleviate the
subsurface problem.



      (7)   Floodway areas. If a subdivision of land is proposed
within the flood plain, floodways shall be preserved and not diminished in
capacity by filling or obstruction, except as approved by the Indiana
Department of Natural Resources and Corps of Engineers in writing. No
residential or commercial building site may be located within the floodway.



      (8)   Floodway fringe areas. Where a subdivision is proposed
in an area of the flood plain designated as a floodway fringe, the Area Plan
Commission may approve such subdivision provided that: all lots for
residential usage have a flood protection grade two feet above the regulatory
flood elevation; where provided, water and sanitary sewer facilities are
constructed to eliminate contamination of or by, flood water; and approval to
fill the area from the Indiana Department of Natural Resources has been
obtained in writing. Lands below the regulatory flood elevation shall not be
used for computing the area requirement for any lot.



      (9)   Flood plain areas. Where a subdivision is proposed
within an area of the flood plain for which floodway and floodway fringe
designations have not been made, the Area Plan Commission shall not approve
such subdivision unless all streets are raised sufficiently to be above the
regulatory flood elevation; all lots for residential usage have a flood
protection grade of two feet above the regulatory flood elevation; where
provided, public water and sanitary sewer facilities are constructed to
eliminate contamination of or by flood water; and filling to achieve the
above will not raise the level of the regulatory flood elevation more than
one-tenth of one foot for that  reach of the stream. All filling in the
flood plain must be approved in writing by the Indiana Department of Natural
Resources. Lands below the regulatory flood elevation shall not be used for
computing the area requirement for any lot.



      (10)   Recording of plats in the flood plain and floodway
fringe. All final plats having within their boundaries areas whose elevation
is below that of the regulatory f lood elevation, shall be show and labeled
the regulatory flood boundary and elevation, as of the date the final plat is
drawn, on the final plat for recording.



   (C)   Dedication of drainage easements.



      (1)   General requirements. Where a subdivision is traversed
by a drainage course, drainage way, channel, or stream, a storm water
easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially to the lines of
such watercourse and of such width and construction or both as will be
adequate for the purpose provided. Wherever possible, it is desirable that
the drainage be maintained by an open channel with landscaped banks and
adequate width for the maximum potential volume of flow.



      (2)   Drainage easements.



         (a)   Where topography or other conditions are such as
to make impractical the inclusion of drainage facilities within street
rights-of-way, perpetual unobstructed easements of at least 15 feet in width
for such drainage facilities shall be provided across properly outside the
right-of-way lines and with satisfactory access to the street. Easements
shall be indicated on the plat. Drainage easements shall be carried from the
street to a natural watercourse or to other facilities.



         (b)   The applicant shall dedicate, either in fee or by
drainage or conservation easement land on both sides of existing watercourses
of a width to be determined by the Area Plan Commission and the County
Drainage Board (city or town public works board) in the case of legal drains
(or storm sewers). The easement width shall be a minimum of 25 feet from the
observed high-water mark or the watercourse embankment, which ever is
greater, on each side of the watercourse.



         (c)   When a proposed drainage system will carry water
across private land outside the subdivision, appropriate drainage easement
rights must be secured and indicated on the plat.



         (d)   Low lying lands along watercourses subject to
flooding or overflowing during storm periods, whether or not included in
areas for dedication, shall be preserved and retained in their natural state
as drainage ways. Such land or lands subject to periodic flooding shall not
be included in the computations for determining the number of lots allowable
under average density procedures nor for computing the area requirement for
any individual lot. Further, such low lying lands shall be placed in drainage
or conservation easements.



(Ord. 13-8, passed 5-16-13)



§ 152.049  WATER FACILITIES.



   (A)   General requirements.



      (1)   Necessary action shall be taken by the applicant to
extend or create a water supply district for the purpose of providing a water
supply system capable of providing for domestic water use and fire protection.



      (2)   Where a public water main is accessible, the subdivider
shall install adequate water facilities including fire hydrants subject to
the specifications of the State and local authorities. All water mains shall
be at least six inches in diameter.



      (3)   Water main extensions shall be approved by the
officially designated agency of the state, county, or municipality concerned.



      (4)   To facilitate the above, the location of all fire
hydrants, water supply improvements, and the boundary lines of proposed
districts, indicating all improvements proposed to be served, shall be shown
on the preliminary plat, and the cost of installing the same shall be
included in the performance bond (or equivalent financial instrument) to be
furnished by the subdivider.



      (5)   The design of all water facilities shall conform to or
exceed the standards described in the latest edition of Recommended Standards
for Water Works as published by Health Education, Inc., Albany, New York.



      (6)   Water mains should be located in easements where
possible adjacent to the street right-of-way and should be separated at least
ten feet from any storm or sanitary sewer. If water mains must be located in
street rights-of-way, they should be located between the outside edge of curb
and sidewalk if a planting area of adequate width occurs, otherwise located
beyond the outside edge of sidewalk or drainage swale.



   (B)   Individual wells and central water system.



      (1)   In low density zoning districts, if a public water
system is not available, at the discretion of the Area Plan Commission,
individual wells may be used or a central water system provided in such a
manner that an adequate supply of potable water will be available to every
lot in the subdivision. Water sample test results shall be submitted to the
Health Department for its approval, and individual wells and central water
systems shall be approved by the appropriate health authorities. Orders of
approval shall be submitted to the Area Plan Commission.



      (2)   If the Area Plan Commission requires that a connection
to a public water main eventually be provided as a condition for approval of
an individual well or central water system, the applicant shall make
arrangements for future water service at the time the plat receives secondary
approval. Performance or cash bond (or equivalent financial instruments) may
be required to insure compliance.



      (3)   Fire hydrants. Hydrants should be provided at each
street intersection and at intermediate points between intersections as
recommended by the state Insurance Services Office and the local fire
department. Generally, hydrant spacing may range from 350 to 600 feet
depending on the land uses served and on the street configuration. Fire
hydrants may be required to be closer due to topography, configuration of
buildings and the layout of streets.







Figure 4-5  Floodway and Buildable Lot Area







Figure 4-6  Flood Plain Delineation



(Ord. 13-8, passed 5-16-13)



§ 152.050  SEWERAGE FACILITIES.



   (A)   General requirements. The subdivider shall install sanitary
sewer facilities in a manner prescribed by the county (city or town)
construction standards and specifications. All plans shall be designed in
accordance with the rules, regulations, and standards of the county, city or
town engineer or designee, health department, and other appropriate state and
federal agencies, In the case of a city or town system being extended into
the county, the city’s (town’s) engineering standards, and the like,
would prevail. In any case, the design shall meet or exceed the minimum
standards described in the latest edition of Recommended Standards for Sewage
Works as published by the Health Education Service, Albany, New York, and
plans shall be approved by the above agencies where required by those
agencies. The cost of installing any sanitary sewer facilities (including,
but not limited to, sewerage, manholes, lift stations, force mains, and the
like) shall be included in the performance bond (or equivalent financial
instrument) to be provided by the subdivider.



   (B)   Sanitary sewer system requirements. Where provided, sanitary
sewerage facilities shad connect with public sanitary sewerage systems, and
shall be installed to serve each lot and to grades and sizes required by
approving officials and agencies. Sanitary sewerage facilities including the
installation of laterals in the right-of-way shall be subject to the
specifications, rules, regulations, and guidelines of the health officer,
participating jurisdiction, and appropriate state agency.



   (C)   Individual disposal system requirements. If public sewer
facilities are not available and individual disposal systems are proposed,
minimum lot areas shall conform to the requirements of the zoning ordinance
and any ordinance of any participating jurisdiction establishing lot areas
for individual sewerage disposal systems.



   (D)   Selected design criteria.



      (1)   Alignment. All sewers shall be laid with a straight
alignment between manholes, unless otherwise directed or approved by the
county, city or town engineer or designee.



      (2)   Manhole location. Manholes shall be installed at the end
of each line; and at distances not greater than 400 feet for sewers 18 inches
in diameter and larger.



      (3)   Manholes. The difference in elevation between any
incoming sewer and the manhole invert shall not exceed 12 inches where
required to match crowns. The use of drop manholes will require approval by
the county, city or town engineer or designee. See § 152.048(A). The minimum
inside diameter of the manholes shall conform to those specified by the
county, city or town engineer or designee. Inside drop manholes will require
special consideration; however, in no case shall the minimum clear distance
be less than that indicated above. The relationships between intersecting
sewer lines shall meet the standards required by the county, city or town
engineer or designee.



      (4)   Sewerage locations. Sanitary sewers shall be located
within street or alley rights-of-way unless topography dictates otherwise.
Then located in easements on private property, access shall be provided for
all manholes. Where sewer lines in private easements cross public streets or
alley rights-of-way, a manhole shall be provided in such rights-of-way where
possible. Imposed loading shall be considered at all manhole locations. Not
less than six feet of cover shall be provided over the top of pipe in street
and alley rights-of-way, or three feet in all other areas.



      (5)   Clean-outs will not be permitted.



      (6)   Water supply interconnections prohibited. There shall be
no physical connection between a public or private potable water supply
system and a sewer which will permit the passage of any sewage or polluted
water into the potable water system. Sewers shall be kept removed from water
supply wells or other water supply sources and structures.



      (7)   Relation of sanitary sewers to water mains. A minimum
horizontal distance of ten feet shall be maintained between parallel water
and sanitary sewer lines. At points where sewers cross water mains, the sewer
shall be constructed of cast iron pipe or encased in concrete for a distance
of ten feet in each direction from the crossing, measured perpendicular to
the water line. This will not be required when the water lines are at least
two feet above the sewer line.



(Ord. 13-8, passed 5-16-13)



§ 152.051  SIDEWALKS.



   (A)   Required improvements.



      (1)   Sidewalks are required for residential and commercial
development inside and within two miles of incorporated areas; may be waived
by a variance approved by the Area Plan Commission outside the two-mile
fringe upon request and approval of a variance; and may be waived by a
variance anywhere approved by the Area Plan Commission upon request and
approval of a variance when dwelling unit densities are at or less than two
dwelling units per net acre unless schools, community centers or other public
facilities are nearby.



      (2)   Sidewalks shall be included within the dedicated,
unpaved portions of the rights-of-way of all streets as shown in Table 4-3.
Sidewalks should be located a minimum of two feet from the outside edge of
curb unless directed otherwise by the applicable jurisdictions. Sidewalks
should generally be located one foot inside the right-of-way line except
where there are no building setbacks from the right-of-way line and where
topography and the roadway push the sidewalk into the utility easement
adjacent to the right-of-way.



      (3)   Concrete curbs are required for all streets where
sidewalks are required by these regulations or required at the discretion of
the Area Plan Commission; however, the Area Plan Commission may waive by a
variance the requirement for curbs beyond the two-mile fringe of incorporated
areas.



      (4)   Sidewalks shall be improved as required in §
152.047(C)(2). A grassed or landscaped median strip of at least two feet wide
shall separate all sidewalks from adjacent curbs.



      (5)   Pedestrian access. In order to facilitate pedestrian
access from the street to schools, parks playgrounds, or other nearby
streets, the Area Plan Commission may require perpetual unobstruted easements
at least ten feet in width. Such easements shall be indicated on both
preliminary and final plats. The party responsible for maintaining the
easement shall be identified on the subdivision plat.



   Table 4-3  Required Sidewalks in Urban Cross Sections



 


Street Type

 

Standard Width



All residential (place, local street, collector, arterial)
 

4 ft.



Non-residential (local, collector, arterial)
 

5 ft.




 



(Ord. 13-8, passed 5-16-13)



§ 152.052  UTILITIES AND EASEMENTS.



   (A)   Location. All utility lines and other facilities existing and
proposed throughout the subdivision shall be shown on the preliminary plat or
sketch plan in the case of a minor subdivision. Underground service
connections to the street property line of each platted plot shall be
installed at the subdivider’s expense. At the discretion of the Area Plan
Commission, the requirement for service connections to each lot may be waived
in the case of adjoining lots to be retained under single ownership intended
to be developed for the same primary use.



   (B)   Easements.



      (1)   A public utility and drainage easement (PUDE) of at
least 20 feet wide shall be provided adjacent to street right-of-way for
waterlines, sanitary sewers, stormsewers or side-ditch swales and other
utilities (private and municipal).



      (2)   Where necessary, easements on side and rear lot lines
shall be provided for utilities (private and municipal), such easements shall
be established at least 20 feet in width to be equally split between adjacent
lots interior to the subdivision or perimeter lots of recorded subdivisions,
but fully included on perimeter lots not adjacent to recorded subdivisions.
Proper coordination shall be established between the subdivider and the
applicable utility companies for the coordination of utility easements with
those established in adjoining properties.



      (3)   Where topographical or other conditions are such as to
make impractical the inclusion of utilities within the rear lot lines,
perpetual unobstructed easements at least ten feet in width shall be provided
along side lot lines with satisfactory access to the road or rear lot lines.



      (4)   Where rural cross sections are used for roadways and
where low density residential development is proposed, an easement of at
least five feet in width on the side property lines and at least ten feet in
width on the rear property lines shall be provided for a drainage ditch of
one foot in depth at the property line. Such drainage ditch shall be
installed at the discretion of the adjoining property owners. Such drainage
ditch (if any) shall be maintained by the property owner, and shall become a
permanent drainage easement to be maintained by the municipality when the
property becomes part of a municipality.



      (5)   All easements shall be indicated on preliminary and
final plats.



(Ord. 13-8, passed 5-16-13)



§ 152.053  PARKS, PLAYGROUNDS, AND RECREATION AREAS.



   (A)   Parks, playgrounds, and recreation areas.



      (1)   Recreation standards. The Area Plan Commission may
require that land be reserved for parks and playgrounds or other recreational
purposes in locations designated on the Comprehensive Plan or otherwise where
such reservations would be appropriate. Each reservation shall be of suitable
size, dimension, topography, and general character, and shall have adequate
road access, for the particular purpose envisioned by the Area Plan
Commission and the jurisdiction. The area shall be shown and marked on the
plat: “Reserved for Park and/or Recreational Purposes”. When recreation
areas are required, the Area Plan Commission shall determine the number of
acres to reserved from the following table, which has been prepared on the
basis of providing three acres of recreational area for every 100 dwelling
units. The Area Plan Commission may refer such proposed reservations to the
local government official or agency in charge of parks and recreation for
recommendation. If approved by such official or agency, the developer shall
dedicate all such recreation areas to the local government as a condition of
secondary approval.



         (a)   Recreation requirements:



   Table 4-4  Recreational Requirements



 


Single family lots
(Size of Lot)

 

Percentage of Total Land in Subdivision to be Reserved for Recreational
Purposes




80,000 & greater SF

 

1.5%




50,000 SF

 

2.5%




40,000 SF

 

3.0%




35,000 SF

 

3.5%




25,000 SF

 

5.0%




15,000 SF

 

8.0%




 



         (b)   Minimum size of park and playground reservations.
In general land reserved for recreation purposes shall have an area of at
least four acres. When the percentages from Table 4-4 above would create less
than four acres, the Area Plan Commission may require that the recreation
area be located in a suitable place on the edge of the subdivision so that
additional land may be added at such time as the adjacent land is subdivided.
In no case shall an area of less than two acres be reserved for recreational
purposes where it is impractical or impossible to secure additional lands in
order to increase its area. When recreational land in any subdivision is not
reserved, or the land reserved is less than the percentage indicated in
division (A)(1) of this section the provisions of division (A)(3) of this
section shall be applicable.



      (2)   Recreation sites. Land reserved for recreation purposes
shall be of a character and location suitable for use as playground, play
field, or other active recreational purposes and shall be relatively level
and dry. It shall be improved by the developer to the standards required by
the Area Plan Commission and the cost of the improvements shall be included
in the amount of the performance bond (or equivalent financial instrument).
Passive recreation areas along stream valleys may be acceptable to the Area
Plan Commission as part of the required area if adequate flat land is also
provided for space consuming recreation activities. A recreation site shall
have a total frontage on one or more streets of at least 200 feet, and no
part of the site shall be narrower or shallower than 200 feet except in
stream valley and other linear passive recreation areas which shall at no
point be narrower than 50 feet. The Area Plan Commission may refer any
subdivision intended to contain a dedicated park to the local government
official, department, or agency in charge of parks and recreation for a
recommendation. All land to be reserved for dedication to the county, city or
town for park purposes shall have prior approval of the county, city or town;
and shall be shown on the plat as “Reserved for Park and/or Recreation
Purposes”.



      (3)   Other recreation reservations. The provisions of this
section are minimum standards. None of the divisions above shall be construed
as prohibiting a developer from reserving other land for recreational
purposes in addition to the requirements of this section.



      (4)   Private open space and recreation facilities. The
subdivider may dedicate open space and recreation facilities (club houses,
swimming pools, walkways, trails, and other recreation facilities) to a
homeowners association to be maintained in perpetuity by the association. The
legal instrument creating the homeowners association shall be recorded with
the plat. The local government shall have the right to intervene and
reinstitute the homeowners association and fees in the even of the failure of
the homeowners association to carry out its responsibilities.



   (B)   Other public uses.



      (1)   Plat to provide for public uses. Except when an
applicant uses planned unit development procedures in which land is set aside
by the developer for public use as required under those procedures in the
zoning ordinance, whenever a tract to be subdivided includes a school,
recreation areas, in excess of the requirements in division (A) of this
section, or other public uses as indicated on the Comprehensive Plan or any
portion thereof, such space shall be suitably incorporated by the applicant
into his or her sketch plan. After proper determination of its necessity by
the Area Plan Commission and the appropriate county, city or town official or
other public agency involved in the acquisition and use of each such site and
a determination has been made to acquire the site by the public agency, the
site shall be suitably incorporated by the applicant into the preliminary and
final plats.



      (2)   Referral to public agency. The Area Plan Commission
shall refer the sketch plan to the public agency concerned with acquisition
for its consideration and report. The Area Plan Commission may propose
alternate areas for such acquisition and shall allow the public agency 30
days for reply. The public agency’s recommendation, if affirmative, shall
include a map showing the boundaries and area of the parcel to be acquired
and an estimate of the time within five years required to complete the
acquisition.



      (3)   Notice to property owner. Upon a receipt of an
affirmative report the Area Plan Commission shall notify the property owner
and the Administrator shall designate on the preliminary and final plats each
area proposed to be acquired by a public agency.



      (4)   Duration of land reservation. The acquisition of land
reserved by a public agency on the final plat shall be initiated within five
years of notification, in writing, from the owner that he or she intends to
develop the land. Such letter of intent shall be accompanied by a site plan
of the proposed development and a tentative schedule of construction. Failure
on the part of a public agency to initiate acquisition within the prescribed
five years shall result in the removal of the “reserved” designation from
the property involved and the freeing of the property for development in
accordance with these regulations.



(Ord. 13-8, passed 5-16-13)



§ 152.054  PRESERVATION OF NATURAL FEATURES AND AMENITIES.



   General. Existing features which would add value to the type of
intended development or to the county, city or town as a whole, such as
trees, as herein defined, watercourses and falls, beaches, historic spots,
and similar irreplaceable assets, shall be preserved in the design of the
subdivision. No trees shall be removed from any subdivision nor any change of
grade of the land be affected until primary approval of the preliminary plat
has been granted. All trees on the plat which ate required to be retained
shall be preserved, and all trees, where required, shall be welled and
protected against change of grade. The sketch plan shall show the number and
location of existing trees, as required by these regulations and shall
further indicate all those marked for retention and the location of all
proposed shade trees required along the street side(s) of each lot as
required by these regulations. The subdivider may dedicate such natural
features and amenities to a homeowners association to be maintained by the
homeowners association in perpetuity.



(Ord. 13-8, passed 5-16-13)



§ 152.055  NON-RESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISIONS.



   (A)   General. If a proposed subdivision includes land that is zoned
for commercial or industrial purposes, the layout of the subdivision with
respect to such land uses shall meet such special provisions as the Area Plan
Commission finds appropriate and may require. A non-residential subdivision
shall also be subject to all the requirements set forth in the zoning
ordinance. Site plan approval and non-residential subdivision plat approval
may proceed simultaneously at the discretion of the Commission. A
nonresidential subdivision shall be subject to all the requirements of these
regulations, as well as such additional standards required by the Area Plan
Commission, and shall conform to the proposed land uses and standards
established in the Comprehensive Plan, Thoroughfare Plan, Official Map, and
zoning ordinance except that where lot lines are to be established
incrementally they need not be shown on the sketch plan or the preliminary
plat for primary approval. All shopping centers and other non -residential
subdivisions of buildings for leasehold shall be subject to the relevant
provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   Standards. In addition to the principals and standards in
these regulations which are appropriate to the planning of all subdivision,
the applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Area Plan
Commission that the street, parcel, and block pattern proposed are
appropriate for the uses anticipated and adequately take into account other
uses in the vicinity. The following principals and standards shall be
observed:



      (1)   Proposed commercial or industrial parcels shall be
suitable in minimum area and dimensions to the types of industrial
development anticipated. Proposals for incremental lot by lot subdivision
must be made clear in a statement on the plat which is satisfactory to the
Area Plan Commission.



      (2)   Street rights-of-way and pavement construction shall be
adequate to accommodate to the type and volume of traffic anticipated to be
generated thereupon.



      (3)   Special requirements may be imposed by the Area Plan
Commission with respect to the installation of public utilities, including
water, sewer, and storm water drainage and preprocessing of sewage. Special
requirements may also be imposed regarding the storage and disposal of toxic
materials.



      (4)   Special requirements may be imposed by the Area Plan
Commission upon recommendation of the county, city or town with respect to
street, curb, gutter, and sidewalk design and construction.



      (5)   Every effort shall be made to protect adjacent
residential areas from potential nuisance from a proposed commercial or
industrial subdivision, including the provision of extra depth in parcels
backing onto existing or potential residential development and provision of a
permanently landscaped buffer strip where necessary.



      (6)   Streets carrying non-residential traffic, especially
truck traffic, shall not normally be extended to the boundaries of adjacent
existing or potentially residential area.



      (7)   Any subsequent subdivision of property shall be subject
to the approval of the Area Plan Commission in accordance with these
subdivision regulations.



(Ord. 13-8, passed 5-16-13)



§ 152.056  OFF-SITE PUBLIC FACILITIES.



   General. If off-site public facilities necessary to meet the standards
embodied in §§ 152.047 through 152.053 are not already in place or
programmed in the county, city or town capital improvement program to be in
place by the time the subdivision receives final plat approval, the developer
may, appropriately, have to provide such off-site facilities or supply funds
to enable the county, city or town to do so, in order to secure secondary
approval.



(Ord. 13-8, passed 5-16-13)



COMPLETION AND MAINTENANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS



§ 152.070  IMPROVEMENTS COMPLETION AND PERFORMANCE BOND.



   (A)   Completion of improvements. Before a final plat is signed by
the designated officials for recording, all applicants shall be required:



      (1)   To complete, in accordance with the Area Plan
Commission’s decision and to the satisfaction of the town, city or county
engineer or designee, all the streets, sanitary sewers, waterlines,
stormwater drainage and other public improvements, including lot improvements
on the individual lots of the subdivision as required in this chapter,
specified in the approved construction plans and on the final subdivision
plat, and as approved by the Area Flan Commission; and



      (2)   To dedicate the public improvements to the town, city or
county, free and clear, of all liens and encumbrances on the property and
public improvements thus dedicated.



   (B)   Performance bond (or equivalent financial instrument).



      (1)   The Area Plan Commission at its discretion may waive the
requirement that the applicant complete all public improvements prior to the
approval of the final subdivision plat, and that, in lieu thereof, the
applicant shall post a bond securable to appropriate local community or their
agency, hereinafter referred to as performance bond, in an amount equivalent
to 120% of the estimated cost of completion of the uncompleted portion of
required public improvements as provided for in §§ 152.032(G)(1)(a) and
152.033(H)(1)(a) if based on an estimate of a professional engineer based on
recent unit prices of similar improvements, or in an amount equivalent to
110% of the estimated cost of completion of the uncompleted portion of public
improvements if based on actual bids to construct the improvements.



      (2)   That in lieu of such a bond, the subdivider may submit
irrevocable letters of credit securable by the appropriate local community or
their agency in an amount equivalent to 120% of the estimated cost of
completion of the uncompleted portion of required public improvements as
provided in §§ 152.032(G)(1)(a) and 152.033(H)(1)(a) if based on an
estimate of a professional engineer based on recent unit prices of similar
improvements; or in an amount equivalent to 110% of the estimated cost of
completion of the uncompleted portion of public improvements if based on
actual bids to construct the improvements.



      (3)   That in lieu of such a bond, the subdivider may submit a
certificate of deposit made out to either Posey County other units of
government having jurisdiction and/or the subdivider, to be held by the
County Auditor or other units of government having jurisdiction over them;
and in an amount equivalent to 120% of the cost of completion of the
uncompleted portion of required public improvements as required in §§
152.032(G)(1)(a) and 152.033(H)(1)(a) if based on an estimate of a
professional engineer based on recent unit prices of similar improvements; or
in an amount equivalent to 110% of the estimated cost of completion of the
uncompleted portion of public improvements if based on actual bids to
construct the improvements . If the subdivider is named singly or jointly on
such certificate, then the subdivider must endorse it before submitting it to
the Area Plan Commission so that the county or other units of government
having jurisdiction may secure the funds.



      (4)   Such performance bond (or equivalent financial
instrument) shall comply with all statutory requirements, and shall be
satisfactory to the Area Plan Commission Attorney as to form, sufficiency,
and manner of execution as set forth in this chapter. See Appendix A for
forms. The period within which required public improvements must be completed
shall be specified by the Area Plan Commission in the primary approval of the
preliminary plat, and shall be incorporated into the bond and shall not in
any event exceed two years from date of secondary approval. Such bend (or
equivalent financial instrument) shall be approved by the participating
jurisdiction as to amount. The Area Plan Commission may upon proof of
difficulty, grant an extension of the completion date set forth in such bond
(or equivalent financial instrument) for a maximum period of one additional
year, provided that the bond (or equivalent financial instrument) submitted
for this extension period meets all other requirements herein. The Area Plan
Commission may at any time during the period of such bond (or equivalent
financial instrument) accept a substitution of principal or sureties on the
bond (or equivalent financial instrument).



   (C)   Temporary public improvements. The applicant shall build and
pay for all costs of temporary public improvements required by the Area Plan
Commission or as requested by the participating jurisdiction, and shall
maintain same for the period specified by the Area Plan Commission. Prior to
construction of any temporary public facility or improvement, the subdivider
shall file with the Area Plan Commission as separate suitable bond (or
equivalent financial instrument) for temporary facilities, which bond (or
equivalent financial instrument) shall insure that the temporary facilities
will be properly constructed, maintained, and removed, except for turn-around
at ends of the peripheral streets intended for connection into adjacent
future subdivisions.



   (D)   Cost of public improvements. All required public improvements
shall be made by the applicant at his or her expense without reimbursement by
the participating jurisdictions or any public improvement district therein,
unless sharing of expenses is agreed upon by the county or other
participating jurisdictions, where applicable.



   (E)   Government units. Government units to which these bond (or
equivalent financial instrument) provisions apply may file in lieu of the
bond (or equivalent financial instrument) a certified resolution or ordinance
from officers or agencies authorized to act in their behalf, agreeing to
comply with the provisions of this section.



   (F)   Failure to complete public improvements. For subdivisions for
which no performance bond (or equivalent financial instrument) has been
posted, if the public improvements are not completed within the period
specified by the Area Plan Commission in the primary approval of the
preliminary plat, the approval shall be deemed to have expired. In those
cases where a performance bond (or equivalent financial instrument) has been
posted and the required public improvements have pot been installed within
the terms of such performance bond (or equivalent financial instrument), the
participating jurisdiction may thereupon request the county, city or town to
declare the bond (or equivalent financial instrument) to be in default and
cause all public improvements to be installed according to secondary approval
regardless of the extent of the building development at the time the bond (or
equivalent financial instrument) is declared to be in default.



   (G)   Acceptance of dedication offers. The approval by the Area Plan
Commission of a subdivision plat shall not be deemed to constitute or imply
the acceptance by the county or other participating jurisdiction of any
street, easement, or park shown on the plat. The Area Plan Commission may
require the plat to be endorsed with appropriate notes to this effect. The
acceptance is that of only the real property itself.



(Ord. 13-8, passed 5-16-13)



§ 152.071  INSPECTION OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS.



   (A)   General procedure. If the participating jurisdiction finds
upon inspection per §§ 152.032(G)(1)(a) and 152.033(H)(1)(a) that any of
the improvements have not been constructed in accordance with the approved
construction plans, the applicant shall be responsible for completing the
public improvements according to such plans. Where the cost of the public
improvements is covered by a performance bond (or equivalent financial
instrument), the applicant and the bonding or financial company shall be
severally and jointly liable for completing the public improvements according
to specifications.



   (B)   Release or reduction of performance bond (or equivalent
financial instrument).



      (1)   Certificate of satisfactory completion. The county or
other participating jurisdictions shall not accept required public
improvements, nor the Area Plan Commission release nor reduce a performance
bond (or equivalent financial instrument), until the county or other
participating jurisdictions has submitted a certificate stating that all
required public improvements or a pro rata part in the case of a reduction
have been satisfactorily completed. The applicant’s engineer or surveyor
shall provide the participating jurisdiction with detailed “as built”
construction plans of the public improvements, indicating location,
dimensions, materials, and other information required by the Area Plan
Commission or participating jurisdictions. The Area Plan Commission, in
consultation with the applicable local jurisdiction, may retain a licensed
professional engineer in Indiana to inspect the construction of the
improvements to verify compliance with the “as built” plans and to
recommend reduction or release of the performance bond (or equivalent
financial instrument), and may include the cost of engineering services in
the final plat fees. If the “as built” construction plans of public
improvements meet the requirements of the subdivision regulations, the
county, city or town shall thereafter accept the public improvements for
maintenance in accordance with the established procedures.



      (2)   Reduction of performance bond (or equivalent financial
instrument). A performance bond (or equivalent financial instrument) shall be
reduced upon actual acceptance of public improvements and then only by the
amount originally estimated for the completion of the public improvements.



(Ord. 13-8, passed 5-16-13)



§ 152.072  MAINTENANCE OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS.



   (A)   The applicant shall be required to maintain all public
improvements on the individual subdivided lots and provide for snow removal
on streets and sidewalks, where required, until acceptance of the  public
improvements by the County or participating jurisdiction.



   (B)   The applicant shall be required to file a maintenance bond (or
equivalent financial instrument) with the Area Plan Commission, prior to
acceptance, in an amount not to exceed 10% of the cost of all public
improvements, and in a form satisfactory to the Area Plan Commission
Attorney, in order to assure the satisfactory condition of the required
public improvements, for a period of three years after the date of their
acceptance by the county or participating jurisdiction.



(Ord. 13-8, passed 5-16-13)



§ 152.073  WAIVER OF REQUIRED PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS.



   The Area Plan Commission may defer or waive at the time of primary
approval, subject to appropriate conditions, the provisions of any or all
such public improvements as in its judgment, are not requisite in the
interest of the public health, safety, and general welfare, or which are
inappropriate because of inadequacy or lack of connecting facility.



(Ord. 13-8, passed 5-16-13)



§ 152.074  ISSUANCE OF BUILDING PERMITS.



   No building permit shall be issued for the last 10% of lots in a final
subdivision plat or section thereof, or if 10% be less than two, for the last
two lots of the subdivision or section thereof, until all public improvements
required by the Area Flan Commission for the plat with the exception of
sidewalks have been fully completed and accepted for maintenance by the
participating jurisdiction.



(Ord. 13-8, passed 5-16-13)



SPECIFICATIONS FOR DOCUMENTS



§ 152.085  SKETCH PLAN.



   Sketch plans submitted to the Area Plan Commission, prepared in pen or
pencil, shall he drawn to a convenient scale of not more than 100 feet to one
inch (see Figure 6-1) and shall show the following information:



   (A)   Name.



      (1)   Name of subdivision if property is within existing
subdivision.



      (2)   Proposed name if not within a previously platted,
subdivision. The proposed name shall not duplicate the name of any
subdivision plat previously recorded.



      (3)   Name of property if no subdivision name has been chosen.
This is commonly the name by which the property is locally known.



   (B)   Ownership.



      (1)   Name and address, including telephone number, of legal
owner or agent of property, and citation of last instrument conveying title
to each parcel of property involved in the proposed subdivision, giving
grantor, grantee, date, and land records reference.



      (2)   Citation of any existing legal rights-of-way or
easements affecting the property.



      (3)   Existing covenants on the property, if any.



      (4)   Name and address, including telephone number, of the
professional person(s) responsible for subdivision design, for the design of
public improvements, and for surveys.



   (C)   Description. Location of property, name of local jurisdiction,
lot, section, township, range, county, graphic scale, north arrow, and date.



   (D)   Features.



      (1)   Location of property lines, existing easements, burial
grounds, railroad rights-of-ways, watercourses, and existing wooded areas or
trees eight inches or more in diameter, measured four feet above ground
level; location, width, and names of all existing or platted streets or other
public ways within or immediately adjacent to the tract, names of adjoining
property owners from the latest assessment rolls, within 500 feet of any
perimeter boundary of the subdivision. If the property of the proposed
subdivision is an adjoining property owner, the next abutting property owner
shall be identified.



      (2)   Location, sizes, elevations, and slopes of existing
sewers, water mains, culvers, and other underground structures within the
tract and immediately adjacent thereto, existing permanent buildings and
utility poles on or immediately adjacent to the site and utility
rights-of-way.



      (3)   Approximate topography, at the same scale as the sketch
plan. Normally showing two foot contour intervals, but the Administrator may
require one foot intervals on very flat land or permit five foot intervals on
very steep slopes.



      (4)   The approximate location and widths of proposed streets.



      (5)   Preliminary proposals for connection with existing water
supply and sanitary sewage systems, or alternative means of providing water
supply and sanitary waste treatment and disposal; preliminary provisions for
collecting and discharging surface water drainage.



      (6)   The approximate location, dimensions, and areas of all
proposed or existing lots.



      (7)   The approximate location, dimensions, and areas of all
parcels of land proposed to be set aside for park or playground use or other
public use, or for the use of property owners in the proposed subdivision.



      (8)   The location of temporary stakes to enable the Area Plan
Commission to find and appraise features of the sketch plan in the field.



      (9)   Whenever the sketch plan covers only a part of an
applicant’s contiguous holdings, the applicant shall submit, at the scale
of no more than 200 feet to one square inch, a sketch of the proposed
subdivision area, together with its proposed street system, and an indication
of the probable future street and drainage system of the remaining portion of
the tract.



      (10)   A vicinity map showing streets and other general
development of the surrounding area. The sketch plan shall show all school
and improvement district lines with the zones properly designated.



      (11)   The location of existing and proposed rights-of-way and
easements.



(Ord. 13-8, passed 5-16-13)



§ 152.086  PRELIMINARY PLAT.



   (A)   General. The preliminary plat shall be prepared by a licensed
land surveyor at a convenient scale of not more than 100 feet to an inch, may
be prepared in pen or pencil; and the sheets shall be numbered in sequence if
more than one sheet is used and shall be of such site, as is acceptable for
filing in the office of the County Recorder, but shall not be larger than 24
by 36 (24x36) inches. See figure 6-2. It should be noted that the map
prepared for the preliminary plat may also be used for the final subdivision
plat and therefore should be drawn on reproducible mylar.



   (B)   Features. The preliminary plat shall show the following:



      (1)   The location of the property with respect to surrounding
property and streets, the names of all adjoining property owners of record,
or the names of adjoining developments; and the names of adjoining streets.



      (2)   The location and dimensions of all boundary lines of the
property to be expressed in feet and decimals of a foot.



      (3)   The location of existing streets, easements, water
bodies, streams, and other pertinent features such as swamps, flood plains,
railroads, buildings, parks cemeteries, drainage ditches, and bridges.



      (4)   The location and width of all existing and proposed
streets, alleys, and other public ways and their rights-of-ways, and of
easements and building setback lines.



      (5)   The locations, dimensions, and areas of all proposed or
existing lots.



      (6)   The location and dimensions of all property proposed to
be set aside for park or playground use, or other public or private
reservation, with designation of the purpose thereof, and conditions, if any,
of the dedication or reservation.



      (7)   The name and address of the owner or owners of land to
be subdivided, the name and address of the subdivider if other than owner,
and the name of the land surveyor.



      (8)   The date of the map, approximate true north point,
scale, and title of the subdivision.



      (9)   Sufficient data acceptable to the town, city or county
engineer or designee to determine readily the location, bearing, and length
of all lines, and to reproduce such lines upon the round, also the location
of all proposed monuments.



      (10)   Names of the subdivision and all new streets to be
approved by the Area Plan Commission.



      (11)   Indication of the use of any lot (single family,
two-family, multifamily, townhouse) and all uses other than residential
proposed by the subdivider.



      (12)   Blocks shall be consecutively numbered or lettered in
alphabetical order. The blocks in numbered additions to subdivisions bearing
the same name shall be lettered or numbered consecutively throughout the
several additions.



      (13)   All lots in each block shall be consecutively numbered.
Outlots shall be lettered in alphabetical order. If blocks are numbered or
lettered, outlots shall be lettered in alphabetical order within each block.



      (14)   The location of existing and proposed rights-of-way and
easements.



      (15)   All information required on the sketch plan should also
be shown on the preliminary plat, and the following notation shall also be
shown:



         (a)   Explanation of drainage easements, if any;



         (b)   Explanation of site easements, if any;



         (c)   Explanation of site reservations, if any; and



         (d)   Endorsement of owner, as follows:



            Owner                   Date         
     



(Ord. 13-8, passed 5-16-13)



§ 152.087  CONSTRUCTION PLANS.



   (A)   General construction plans shall be prepared for all required
improvements, prepared by a licensed professional engineer or land surveyor
in the State of Indiana. Plans shall be drawn at a scale of no more than one
inch equals 50 feet, and map sheets shall be of the same size as the
preliminary plat. The following shall be shown:



      (1)   Profiles showing existing and proposed elevations along
center lines of all streets. Where a proposed street intersects an existing
street or streets, the elevation along the center line of the existing street
or streets within 100 feet of the intersection shall be shown. Approximate
radii of all curves, lengths of tangents, and central angles on all streets.



      (2)   The Area Plan Commission may require, where steep slopes
exist, that cross sections of all proposed streets at 100 foot stations shall
be shown at five points as follows: on a line at right angles to the center
line of the street, and aid elevation points shall be at the center line of
the street, each property line, and points 25 feet inside each property line.



      (3)   Plans and profiles showing the locations and typical
cross section of street pavements including curbs and gutters, sidewalks,
drainage easements, servitude, rights-of-way, manholes, and catch basins; the
location of street trees, street lighting standards, and street signs; the
location, size, and invert elevations of existing and proposed sanitary
sewers, storm water drains, and fire hydrants, showing connection to any
existing or proposed utility systems; and exact location and size of all
water, gas, or other underground utilities or structures.



      (4)   Location, size, elevation, and other appropriate
description of any existing facilities or utilities including but not limited
to, existing streets, sewers drains, water mains, easements, water bodies,
streams, flood plains, and other pertinent features such as swamps,
railroads, buildings, features noted on the Official Map, Thoroughfare Plan
or Comprehensive Plan, at the point of connection to the proposed facilities
and utilities within the subdivision. The water elevations of adjoining lakes
or streams at the date of the survey, and the approximate high and low water
elevations of such lakes or streams. All elevations shall be referred to the
USGS datum plans. If the subdivision borders a lake, river, or stream the
distances and bearings of a meander line established not less than 20 feet
back from the ordinary high water mark of such waterways.



      (5)   Topography at the same scale as the sketch plan with a
contour interval of two feet, referred to sea level datum. All datum provided
shall be latest applicable US Coast and Geodetic Survey datum and should be
so noted on the plat.



      (6)   All specifications and references required by the
town’s, city’s or county’s construction standards and specifications,
including a site grading plan for the entire subdivision.



      (7)   Notation of approval as follows:



         Owner                                   
         Date                         



         Area Plan Commission President                   
                       Date                       



      (8)   Title, name, address, and signature of the professional
engineer and/or surveyor, and date, including revision dates.



(Ord. 13-8, passed 5-16-13)



§ 152.088  FINAL SUBDIVISION PLAT.



   (A)   General. The final subdivision plat shall be presented in ink
on reproducible mylar at an appropriate scale and contain the same
information, except for any changes or additions required by the conditions
of primary approval. See figure 6-3. The preliminary plat may be used as the
final subdivision plat if it meets these requirements and is revised in
accordance with the Area Plan Commission’s approval. All revision dates
must be shown as well as the following:



      (1)   Notation of any self imposed restrictions, and locations
of any building lines proposed to be established in this manner, if required
by the Area Plan Commission in accordance with these regulations.



      (2)   Endorsement of the County Health Department.



      (3)   All monuments erected, corners, and other points are
made shall be noted at the representation thereof or by legend, for metal
monuments shall indicate the kind of metal, the diameter, length, and weight
per lineal foot of the monuments.



   (B)   Preparation. The final subdivision plat shall be prepared by a
land surveyor licensed by the state.



(Ord. 13-8, passed 5-16-13)



§ 152.089  EXEMPT “I” DIVISIONS.



   The information that must be provided in order for the decision to be
made that a division is an Exempt “I” division varies as follows
according to the definition for each type of Exempt “I” Division listed
under Subdivision in § 152.017. With all submission signed by the owner (or
party with limited power of attorney), thus:



   (A)   For type “A” divisions, a metes and bounds legal
description of die exempt division and the land from which it is being
divided must be provided.



   (B)   For type “B” divisions, the old legal and new legal
descriptions must be provided.



   (C)   For type “C” divisions, a copy of the court decree showing
by legal description how the land is to be divided must be provided.



   (D)   For type “D” divisions, a legal description and plot plan
showing the parcel and the location of die street right-of-way or easement
must be provided.



   (E)   For type “E” divisions, a legal description and plot plan
showing the tract to be divided and the tract(s) to be added to must be
provided.



   (F)   For type “F” divisions, a plat of the cemetery showing the
layout of the private drives, parking areas, and size of burial lots must be
provided.



(Ord. 13-8, passed 5-16-13)



§ 152.090  EXEMPT “II” DIVISIONS.



   A metes and bounds legal description and plot plan are required to
verify that the division of property meets the definition of Exempt II
division under § 152.017. Further, the requirements and addition of notes to
the plot plan must be satisfied as set forth in § 152.034(C). All submission
shall be signed by the owner (or party with limited power of attorney).



(Ord. 13-8, passed 5-16-13)







Figure 6-1  Sketch Plan







Figure 6-2  Preliminary Subdivision Plat







Figure 6-3  Final Subdivision Plat Chapter




CERTIFICATIONS




§ 152.105  REQUIRED FORMS AND CERTIFICATES.



   (A)   All applications, requests for plat approval, notices,
affidavits, certificates, endorsements and instruments assuring the
completion and maintenance of improvements required by the provisions of this
chapter shall be submitted to the Administrator or prepared by the
Administrator on the following forms:



      (1)   Application for minor sketch plan review, primary
approval and certificate;



      (2)   Application for major sketch plan review and certificate;



      (3)   Request for primary approval of a major subdivision plat;



      (4)   Notice of public hearing on subdivision plat;



      (5)   Notice to interested parties;



      (6)   Affidavit of notice to interested parties for primary
subdivision approval;



      (7)   Request for secondary approval of subdivision plat;



      (8)   Certificate of approval;



      (9)   Land surveyor’s certificate;



      (10)   Dedication certificate;



      (11)   Subdivision performance bond (or equivalent financial
instrument);



      (12)   Performance bond (or equivalent financial instrument)
secured by deposit;



      (13)   Irrevocable letter of credit;



      (14)   Maintenance bond; and



      (15)   Statement of compliance (exempt divisions).



   (B)   The Area Plan Commission shall determine the need for, and the
form of any additional or amended applications, requests for plat approval,
notices, affidavits, certificates, endorsements and instruments as may be
required in the endorsement of the regulations of this chapter.



(Ord. 13-8, passed 5-16-13)



§ 152.106  FORM ONE: APPLICATION FOR MINOR SKETCH PLAN REVIEW, PRIMARY
APPROVAL AND CERTIFICATE.



   App. No. S                           



   Date Rec’d                            



   Rec’d By                             



Name(s) of Subdivisions                                    
                                                   
                   



Address(es)                                          
                                                   
               



Phone(s)                                            
                                                   
             



Subdivider(s) Representative (if any) and Registered Land Surveyor (if any):



      Name                                      
                                               



      Address                                    
                                                 



      Phone                                      
                                               



I (we) do hereby apply for sketch plan review, primary approval and
certificate of approval of the following described subdivision in accordance
with the provisions of the Subdivision Ordinance. I (we) am (are) the
owner(s) of the real estate included in the subdivision.



Name of subdivision                                      
                    generally described as follows:



      Civil Township             Section            
Quarter Section             Township            



      Range              



      (LEGAL DESCRIPTION OF SUBDIVISION ATTACHED HERETO)



      Area in acres                                  
  Number of lots                                    



Will there be public improvements other than sidewalks?              
    Yes               No



The undersigned, having been duly sworn on oath, states the above information
is true and correct as he is informed and believes.



                           Signature(s) of
Subdividers                                            
   



                                                  



State of Indiana   )



County of Posey   )   SS:



                  Subscribed and sworn before me this    
    day of                 , 20     



                                       �
�                                                 
   



                                       �
�  Notary Public



                                       �
�  Residing in                                 County



                                       �
�  My Commission Expires                    



FOR STAFF USE:   Date of sketch plan review                   
                                                   
 



               Date of Commission/Executive Committee hearing
                                       



               Fee of $               received from
subdivider   Date                                    



(Ord. 13-8, passed 5-16-13)



§ 152.107  FORM TWO: APPLICATION FOR MAJOR SKETCH PLAN REVIEW AND
CERTIFICATE.



   App. No. S                           



   Date Rec’d                            



   Rec’d By                             



Name(s) of Subdivider(s)                                  
                     



Address(es)                                          
                               



Phone Number(s)                                        
                     



Subdivider’s Representative (if any) and Registered Land Surveyor:



Name                                              
                                 



Address                                            
                                   



Phone Number                                          
                     



I do hereby apply for sketch plan review and certificate of approval of the
following, described subdivision in accordance with the provisions of the
subdivision ordinance. I am thr. owner of the real estate included in said
subdivision.



Name of subdivision                                      
                    generally described as follows:



      Civil Township             Section            
Quarter Section             Township            



      Range              



      (LEGAL DESCRIPTION OF SUBDIVISION ATTACHED HERETO)



      Area in acres                                  
  Number of lots                                    



Will there be public improvements other than sidewalks?              
    Yes               No



The undersigned, having been duly sworn on oath states the above information
is true and correct as he is informed and believes.



                           Signature(s) of
Subdividers                                            
   



                                                  



State of Indiana



County of Posey



                  Subscribed and sworn before me this    
    day of                 , 20     



(Ord. 13-8, passed 5-16-13)



§ 152.108  FORM THREE: REQUEST FOR PRIMARY APPROVAL OF A MAJOR SUBDIVISION
PLAT.



                                       �
�        File No.                              



                                       �
�        Date Rec’d                            



                                       �
�        Rec’d By                              



Name(s) of Subdivider(s)                                  
                                                   
                     



Address                                            
                                                   
                                   



Phone Number                                          
                                                   
                           



Subdivider’s Representative and Registered Land Surveyor



Name                                              
                                                   
                                 



Address                                            
                                                   
                                   



Phone Number                                          
                                                   
                         



I do hereby request a primary approval of the following described subdivision
in accordance with the provisions of the subdivision ordinance. I am the
owner of the real estate included in said subdivision.



Name of subdivision                                      
                    generally described as follows:



      Civil Township             Section             1/4
Section             Township            



      Range               Area in acres                
No. of lots                                          



Name of new Streets                                    
                         



                                              
                           



                                              
                           



The undersigned, having been duly sworn on oath states the above information
is hue and correct as he is informed and believed.



   Signature of Subdivider                                
                       



(Ord. 13-8, passed 5-16-13)



§ 152.109  FORM FOUR: NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARING ON SUBDIVISION PLAT.



NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN THAT THE POSEY COUNTY AREA PLAN COMMISSION,



ON THE         DAY OF                               , 20 
      , AT                  



                                       �
�     (Time)



AT THE                                              
              , MT. VERNON, INDIANA, WILL HOLD A PUBLIC HEARING ON A
REQUEST BY                                          
                                       



                                       �
�     (Subdivider)



FOR PRELIMINARY APPROVAL OF                                
                              SUBDIVISION.



                                    (Name
of Subdivision)



SAID SUBDIVISION INVOLVES THE FOLLOWING DESCRIBED REAL ESTATE IN



                                      TOWNSHIP, LOCATED AT
                                                   
        .



(Name of Civil
Township)                        (Common Address or
Road Location)



TO WIT:



   DESCRIPTION



Written suggestions or objections to the provisions of said request may be
filed with the Secretary of the Area Plan Commission at or before such
meeting and will be heard by the Posey County Area Plan Commission at the
time and place specified. Said hearing may be continued from time to time as
may be necessary.



Interested persons desiring to present their views on the said request,
either in writing or verbally, will be given the opportunity to be heard at
the above mentioned time and place.



                        AREA PLAN COMMISSION OF POSEY
COUNTY, INDIANA



                        BY:                
                                                   
                 



                                       �
�     (President)



(Ord. 13-8, passed 5-16-13)



§ 152.110  FORM FIVE: NOTICE TO INTERESTED PARTIES POSEY COUNTY AREA PLAN
COMMISSION.



Notice is hereby given that the Posey County Area Plan Commission, on the 
  day of                     ,



          (Time)



                                                   
Subdivision. The proposed subdivision involves                    



      (Name of Subdivision)



lots on            acres located on                        
                    between                          
           



                           (Street or
Road)                  (Street or Road)



and   in                                       Township,



SECTION                     , TOWNSHIP                   ,
RANGE                        



                                                  
 



                                       �
�              (Petitioner)



(Ord. 13-8, passed 5-16-13)



§ 152.111  FORM SIX: AFFIDAVIT OF NOTICE TO INTERESTED PARTIES FOR PRIMARY
SUBDIVISION APPROVAL.



   Posey County Area Plan Commission



                                                   
                   



(Name of Subdivision)



I,                                                 
, do hereby certify that notice to interested parties of the date, time



  (Name of Subdivider/Surveyor)



and place of the public hearing on the above referenced subdivision:     
                                         



being the application of                                   
              was certified and mailed to the last known address of
each of the following persons owning property adjoining or adjacent to the
property contained in this petition:




1.   




   2.      



   3.



   4.



   5.



   6.



   7.



   8.



   9.



   10.



and that said notices were sent by certified mail on or before the      
day of                     , 20      ,



being at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the public hearing.



                                                  
       



                                       �
�        (Petitioner/Agent)



(Ord. 13-8, passed 5-16-13)



§ 152.112  FORM SEVEN: SECONDARY APPROVAL OF SUBDIVISION.



Request for secondary approval of                            
                                                   
   



FOR STAFF USE:



Plat requires:



                          additional approval - preliminary



                          restrictive covenants received -
date                            



Name of Subdivider                                      
                               



Address                                              
                                       



Phone Number                                          
                                 



I hereby request determination of conformance with the preliminary plat for
the following described subdivision in accordance with the provisions of the
subdivision ordinance. I am the owner of the real estate included in said
subdivision.



Name of Subdivision                                      
                                           



generally described as follows: Civil Township                    
                         



Section                 1/4 Section                    
Township                              



Range                   Area in acres                   ,
Number of Lots                    



                                       �
�                                                  
         



                                       �
�  (Signature of Subdivider/Surveyor)



(Ord. 13-8, passed 5-16-13)



§ 152.113  FORM EIGHT: CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL.



After having given public notice of the time, place and nature of hearing on
the application for primary approval of this subdivision by publication in  
                                        newspaper, more
than ten (10) days before the date set for hearing thereon, under authority
provided by Chapter 138, Acts 1957, enacted by the General Assembly of the
State of Indiana, and all acts supplemental and amendatory thereof, this plat
was given primary approval by a majority of the members of the Posey County
Area Plan Commission or its Executive Committee at a meeting held on      
      day of                         , 20      .



                              Posey County Area
Plan Commission



                              By          
                                     



                                       P
resident



ATTEST:                                             
   



            Executive Director



(Ord. 13-8, passed 5-16-13)



§ 152.114  FORM NINE: LAND SURVEYOR’S CERTIFICATE.



   LAND SURVEYOR’S CERTIFICATE



Each final plat submitted for secondary approval shall carry a certificate
signed by a registered professional land surveyor in substantially the
following form;




I,                                                 ,
hereby certify that I am a registered professional land surveyor of the State
of Indiana; that this plat correctly represents a survey completed by me on
                    , 19      ; that all the monuments shown
thereon actually exist, and that their location, size, type, and material are
accurately shown; and that the computed error of closure of the boundary
survey is not more than one (1) foot in ten thousand (10,000) feet; and that
this plat complies with the provisions of the subdivision ordinance.





                     (SEAL)                   
                                           





                                       �
�  Signature




(Ord. 13-8, passed 5-16-13)



§ 152.115  FORM TEN: DEDICATION CERTIFICATE.



   DEDICATION CERTIFICATE



Each final plat submitted to the Commission for secondary approval shall
carry a deed of dedication, either on said final plat or incorporated therein
by reference, in substantially the following form:



We, the undersigned                                      
    , owners of the real estate shown and described herein, do hereby lay
off, plat and subdivide said real estate in accordance with the herein plat.



This subdivision shall be known and designated as                  
                                , an addition to the (name of
city, town, township), Posey County, State of Indiana. All streets and alleys
and public open spaces shown and not heretofore dedicated are hereby
dedicated to the public.



Front and side yard building setback lines are hereby established as shown on
this plat, between which lines and the property lines of the street there
shall be erected or maintained no building or structure.



EASEMENTS - Easements for installation and maintenance of utilities and
drainage facilities are reserved as shown on the recorded plat. Within these
easements, no structure, planting or other material shall be placed or
permitted to remain which may damage or interfere with the installation and
maintenance of utilities or which may change the direction of flow of
drainage channels in the easements or which may obstruct or retard the flow
of water through drainage channels in the easements. The easement area of
each lot and all improvements in it shall be maintained continuously by the
owner of the lot, except for those improvements for which a public authority
or utility company is responsible.



(Additional dedications and protective covenants, or private restrictions
would be inserted here upon the subdivider’s initiative or the
recommendation of the Commission; important provisions are those specifying
the use to be made of the property and, in the case of residential use, the
minimum habitable floor area.)



The foregoing covenants (or restrictions) are to run with the land and shall
be binding on all parties and all persons claiming under them until January
1, 20    , (twenty-five-year period is suggested), at which time said
covenants (or restrictions) shall be automatically extended for successive
periods of ten (10) years unless by vote of a majority of the then owners of
the building sites covered by these covenants, (or restrictions), it is
agreed to change such covenants (or restrictions) in whole or in part.



Invalidation of any one of the foregoing covenants (or restrictions) by
judgment or court order shall in no way affect any of the other covenants (or
restrictions) which shall remain in full force and effect.



The right to enforce these provisions by injunction, together with the right
to cause the removal by due process of law of any structure or part thereof
erected or maintained in violation hereof, is hereby dedicated to the public,
and reserved to the several owners of the several lots in this subdivision
and to their heirs and assign.



   WITNESS OUR HANDS AND SEALS THIS             DAY OF        
              , 19       



                                       �
�                                              



                                       �
�                                              



                                       �
�                                              



   State of Indiana



   County of Posey



Before me, the undersigned Notary Public, in and for th; County and State,
personally appeared                                     
                                                , and
each separately and severally acknowledged the execution of the foregoing
instrument as his or her voluntary act and deed, for the purpose therein
expressed.




WITNESS MY HAND AND NOTARIAL SEAL THIS       DAY OF              
      , 19   
                                       �
�                                          




                                       �
�              Notary Public



   Residing in                                     County



   My Commission expires                                
             



(Ord. 13-8, passed 5-16-13)



§ 152.116  FORM ELEVEN: SUBDIVISION PERFORMANCE BOND.



   TO BE ISSUED ON BONDING C0MPANY



   STATIONERY



   SUBDIVISION PERFORMANCE BOND



   KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS, That we, (NAME AND ADDRESS OF PRINCIPAL)



                                        , as Principal,
and   (NAME AND ADDRESS OF SURETY)              , as Surety, are held
and firmly bound unto Posey County, Indiana, in the sum of   (AMOUNT SPELLED
OUT)                                , (NUMERICAL AMOUNT), for
payment of which we firmly bind ourselves, our heirs, executors,
administrators, and assigns.



   THE CONDITION OF THIS BOND is such chat if the said Principal shall
complete the construction of     (COMPLETE DESCRIPTION OF IMPROVEMENTS AND
DESCRIPTION OF PROPERTY LOCATION)                             
                                                   
                      ,



according to the approved plans and specifications on file with the Posey
County Area Plan Commission, on or before             (NOT MORE THAN 2
YEARS FROM DATE BOND IS ISSUED)                , then this obligation
is null and void, otherwise to remain in full force and effect.



   IN WITNESS WHEREOF, we have hereunto set our hands and seal this    
(DATE-DAY, MONTH, YEAR)            .



                                       
(NAME OF PRINCIPAL)                         



ATTEST:                                    
BY:             (SIGNATURE OF PRINCIPAL)                 



                                    (TYPED 
NAME OF INDIVIDUAL SIGNING) 



                                       
(NAME OF SURETY)                               



APPROVED BY:                         BY:            
(SIGNATURE OF REPRESENTATIVE)     



POSEY COUNTY AREA                  (TYPED NAME OF
INDIVIDUAL SIGNING) 



PLAN COMMISSION



                                                   
 



Executive Director



(Ord. 13-8, passed 5-16-13)



§ 152.117  FORM TWELVE: DEDICATION CERTIFICATE.



PERFORMANCE BOND - SECURED BY DEPOSIT



KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS:



   That I (we),                                      
                              , of                  
                           



in the County of Posey, Indiana, hereby am (are) held and stand firmly bound,
and bind and obligate myself (ourselves), and my (our) successors, assigns,
executors, administrators, heirs, and devisees to Posey County in the same of
                                dollars ($           
        ) and have secured my (our) compliance with this obligation by
the deposity with the County Auditor of said sum in money, savings band books
duly assigned, or negotiable securities, in an amount satisfactory to the
Area Plan Commission. The CONDITION of the obligation is such that is the
undersigned or his (their) successors, assigns, executors, administrators,
heirs, or devisees shall have within the time specified in the order of the
Area Plan Commission fully and satisfactorily performed in the manner
specified, all of the conditions, covenants, terms, agreements, and
provisions contained in the application signed by



                                                 
and dated                           , 19      , and in the
approval of a definitive plan of a certain subdivision entitled        
                                                   
                and drawn up by   and dated 19      , which was
granted on                               , 19    , or is
hereafter granted, by the Area Plan Commission, then this obligation shall be
null and void; OTHERWISE it shall remain in full force and effect, and the
aforesaid security for the payment of said sum shall be and become the sole
property of Posey County as liquidated damages.



IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the obligor has hereunto set his (its, our) hand(s) and
seal(s) this



        day of                           , 19        .



                                                  
 



                                                  
 



(Ord. 13-8, passed 5-16-13)



§ 152.118  FORM THIRTEEN: IRREVOCABLE LETTER OF CREDIT.



   POSEY COUNTY, INDIANA



   IRREVOCABLE LETTER OF CREDIT



   (Name of Bank)



POSEY COUNTY               Date:                   
                         



INDIANA



Dear Sirs:



   We hereby open our irrevocable credit In your favor available by your
drafts at sight on us for a sum not exceeding $                   
        for the account of                              
              (PURCHASER),  to be accepted by your signed statement
that drawing is due to default or failure to perform by PURCHASER, the
following improvements on or before                            
                              (Insert date twenty-four (24)
months from dace of this letter)



1.   



2.   



3.



4.



in                                                  
      , a subdivision of Posey County, Indiana. Acting through the Board
of County Commissioners, you will notify us when either:



1.   The improvements have been Timely completed and the credit may be
released, or



2.   The purchaser has failed to perform or is in default thereunder.



All drafts drawn hereunder must be marked: “Drawn under            
                            (Name of Bank), Credit No.      
                          , dated                    
              .



   The amount of any draft drawn under this credit must, concurrently with
negotiation, be endorsed on the reverse side hereof, and the presentment of
any such draft shall be a warranty by the negotiating bank that such
endorsement has been made and that documents have been forwarded as herein
required.



   Except so far as otherwise expressly stated herein, this credit is
subject to the uniform customs and practices for commercial documentary
credit, fixed by the 13th Congress of the International Chamber of Commerce.



   We hereby agree with the drawers, endorsers, and bona fide holders of
drafts under and in compliance with the terms of this credit that the same
shall be duly honored on due presentation and delivery of documents as
specified if negotiated on or before                          
                              .



                                       �
�  Very truly yours.



                                       �
�                                                 
       



                                       �
�        (Name of Bank)



                                       B
y:                                                
         
                                       �
�        (Authorized Signature)



(Ord. 13-8, passed 5-16-13)



§ 152.119  FORM FOURTEEN: MAINTENANCE BOND.



TO BE ISSUED ON BONDING COMPANY STATIONERY



MAINTENANCE BOND



   KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS, That we                
(Developer’s Name)                                     
    (Address)                                , as
Principal, and                                          
                                                   
                                                   
                                           



as Surety, are held and firmly bound unto Posey County, Indiana, in the full
and just sum of       (Written amount, and in parentheses, the numerical
amount)              , for the payment of which, well and truly to be
made, we bind ourselves, jointly and severally, and joint and several heirs,
executors, administrators, and assigns, firmly by these presents, this    
  day of                               , 19      .



   THE CONDITIONS OF THE ABOVE OBLIGATION are such that, if the above
described Principal shall well and truly  maintain   (Describe items to
maintain)                                           



and they shall be free from defects of workmanship and materials, general
wear and tear excepted, for a period of three (3) years, then this obligation
shall be null and void, otherwise to remain in full force and effect.



                  SIGNED AND SEALED this       day of  
                    , 19          .



                                       �
�     (Name of Principal)                     



Witness:                                        
               BY:   (Signature of Principle)         
       



                                       �
�     (Name of Surety)                         



                                       B
Y:   (Signature of Surety)                   



                                       �
�     (Type name of Attorney-in-fact)



(Ord. 13-8, passed 5-16-13)



§ 152.120  FORM FIFTEEN: STATEMENT OF COMPLIANCE FOR EXEMPT DIVISIONS OF
LAND.



   STATEMENT OF COMPLIANCE (EXEMPT DIVISIONS)



This division is found to be in compliance with § 152.034 of the subdivision
ordinance and therefore is a parcelization which does not require review by
the Posey County Area Plan Commission.



                                       �
�  ATTEST:



                                       �
�                                                 
       



                                       �
�        Executive Director



(Ord. 13-8, passed 5-16-13)



CHAPTER 153:  ZONING CODE



Section



Title and Purpose



   153.001   Title



   153.002   Purpose, interpretation, and jurisdiction



   153.003   Confirmation of the Area Planning Commission and the Area
Board of Zoning Appeals



Zoning Districts



   153.011   Designation of zoning and overlay districts



   153.012   Zoning map established



   153.013   District boundary description and interpretation



General Provisions



   153.021   General land use limitations



   153.022   General lot limitations



   153.023   Height exceptions



   153.024   Yards



   153.025   Existing building encroachment on front yards



   153.026   Screening wall or fence



Agricultural (A) District Provisions



   153.031   Purpose and intent



   153.032   Use regulation



   153.033   Bulk and area requirements



   153.034   Exception of agricultural uses



   153.035   Sales of agricultural land



Residential (R) District Provisions



   153.041   Purpose and intent



   153.042   Use regulations: R-1 or RS Residential Single-Family
Detached District



   153.043   Bulk and area requirements: R-1 or RS Residential
Single-Family Detached District



   153.044   Use regulations: RT Residential Townhouse District



   153.045   Bulk and area requirements: RT Residential Townhouse
District



   153.046   Use regulations: R-2 Residential Two-Family District



   153.047   Bulk and area requirements: R-2 Two-Family Residential
District



   153.048   Use regulations: RM or R-3 Residential Multiple-Family
District



   153.049   Bulk and area requirements: RM or R-3 Residential Multiple
Family District



   153.050   Site development plan review and approval: multifamily
complexes over eight units



   153.051   Use regulations: RMN Residential Mobile Home District



   153.052   Bulk and area requirements: RMH Residential Mobile Home
District



   153.053   Track development standards: RMH Residential Mobile Home
District



   153.054   Site plan review and approval of mobile home parks



PUD - Planned Unit Development District



   153.061   Purposes



   153.062   General provisions



   153.063   Uses permitted



   153.064   Bulk and area requirements



   153.065   Off-street parking and loading



   153.066   Administration



O or R-O Residential-Office District



   153.071   Purpose



   153.072   Use regulations



   153.073   Bulk and area requirements



   153.074   Site plan review



Business or Commercial District Provisions



   153.081   Purposes



   153.082   Use regulations: B-1 or NC Neighborhood Commercial District



   153.083   Bulk and area requirements: B-1 or NC Neighborhood
Commercial District



   153.084   Use regulations: B-1A or CS Commercial Shopping District



   153.085   Bulk and area requirements: B-1A or CS Commercial Shopping
District



   153.086   Use regulations: B-2 or CG Commercial General District



   153.087   Bulk and area requirements: B-2 or CG Commercial General
District



   153.088   Use regulations: B-3 or CH Commercial High Intensity
District



   153.089   Bulk and area requirements: B-3 or CH Commercial High
Intensity District



   153.090   Use regulations: CBD Central Business District



   153.091   Bulk and area requirements: CBD Central Business District



   153.092   Site development plan review for all business and
commercial districts



Manufacturing District Provisions



   153.101   Purpose



   153.102   Use regulations: M-1 Light Manufacturing District



   153.103   Bulk and area requirements: M-1 Light Manufacturing
District



   153.104   Site development plan review



   153.105   Use regulations: M-2 Medium Manufacturing District



   153.106   Bulk and area requirements: M-2 Medium Manufacturing
District



   153.107   Site development plan review



Flood Hazard (FH) Area or Flood Prone District



   153.111   Statutory authorization, findings of fact, purpose and
objectives



   153.112   Definitions



   153.113   General provisions



   153.114   Administration



   153.115   Provisions for flood hazard reduction



   153.116   Variance procedures



   153.117   Severability



Use Units



   153.141   Introduction of the use units



   153.145   Use unit 0 active agriculture



   153.146   Use unit 1 area-wide uses by right



   153.147   Use unit 2 area-wide special exception uses



   153.148   Use unit 3 public protection and utility facilities



   153.149   Use unit 4 community services and similar uses



   153.150   Use unit 5 single-family detached dwelling



   153.151   Use unit 6 single-family attached dwelling



   153.152   Use unit 7 multiple-family dwelling and similar uses



   153.153   Use unit 8 manufactured or modular home dwelling



   153.154   Use unit 9 mobile home dwelling



   153.155   Use unit 10 off-street parking areas



   153.156   Use unit 11 offices and studios



   153.157   Use unit 12 entertainment establishments and eating
establishments other than drive-ins



   153.158   Use unit 13 convenience goods and services



   153.159   Use unit 14 shopping goods and services



   153.160   Use unit 15 other trades and services



   153.161   Use unit 16 gasoline service stations



   153.162   Use unit 17 automotive and allied activities



   153.163   Use unit 18 drive-in restaurants



   153.164   Use unit 19 hotel, motel and recreation facilities



   153.165   Use unit 20 commercial recreation: intensive



   153.166   Use unit 21 business signs and outdoor advertising



   153.167   Use unit 22 research and development



   153.168   Use unit 23 warehousing and wholesaling



   153.169   Use unit 24 mining and mineral processing



   153.170   Use unit 25 light manufacturing



   153.171   Use unit 26 medium manufacturing and industry



   153.172   Use unit 27 heavy manufacturing and industry



   153.173   Use unit 28 home occupations



   153.174   Use unit 29 mobile office trailer



Off-street parking and Off-street Loading



   153.181   Purpose



   153.182   Applicability of requirements



   153.183   General requirements



   153.184   Design standards for off-street parking areas



   153.185   Design standards for off-street loading areas



Nonconforming Uses and Structures



   153.201   General



   153.202   Nonconforming uses of unimproved land



   153.203   Nonconforming use of building or buildings and land in
combination



   153.204   Nonconforming signs



   153.205   Nonconforming lots



   153.206   Nonconforming structures



   153.207   Nonconforming parking, loading and screening requirement
Nonconforming uses



   153.208   Nonconforming mobile home, park and subdivision



   153.209   Nonconforming variance



Enforcement and Fees



   153.211   Enforcement duty of plan commission 



   153.212   Complaints regarding violation



   153.213   penalties for violation



   153.214   Attorneys fees



   153.215   Cost on appeal



   153.216   Code of ethics



   153.217   Fees



Improvement Location Permit, Site Plan Review and Agreements



   153.221   Improvement location permit



   153.222   Construction and use to be as approved in applications,
plans and permits



   153.223   Site development plan approval for more than eight
attached dwelling units and uses in the business/commercial and manufacturing
zoning districts



   153.224   Land use and development agreements



Board of Zoning Appeals



   153.241   Establishment of the Posey County Area Board of Zoning
Appeals



   153.242   Powers of the Board



   153.243   Proceedings of the Area Board of Zoning Appeals



   153.244   Notice of public hearing of the Area Board of Zoning
Appeals



   153.245   Variances



   153.246   Special exceptions



   153.247   Appeals from the enforcement of the chapter



   153.248   Review by certiorari of decisions



Zoning Text and Map Amendments



   153.251   General



   153.252   Zoning text and map amendments



Definitions



   153.270   Definitions



   Appendix A   Use unit by zoning district



   Appendix B   Zoning bulk and area standards



   Appendix C   Zoning sign standards



   Appendix D   Uses referenced to use unit



TITLE, PURPOSE, INTERPRETATION, AND JURISDICTION



§ 153.001  TITLE.



   This chapter shall be cited as the “Zoning Ordinance of the City of
Mount Vernon, Town of Cynthiana, Town of Poseyville and Unincorporated Posey
County, Indiana” (hereinafter called the “Zoning Ordinance”).



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12)



§ 153.002PURPOSE, INTERPRETATION, AND JURISDICTION.



   (A)   Purpose. This code is enacted for the purposes of promoting
the public health, safety, comfort, morals, convenience, and general welfare;
lessening or avoiding congestion in public ways; and securing adequate light,
and convenience of access and safety from fire, flood and other dangers.



   (B)   Adoption clause Title 36, Article 7, Chapter 4. Indiana Code
36-7-4-100 through I.C. 36-7-4-1616 referred to as Local Planning and Zoning
Statutes as added by Acts 1981, PL 309, Sec. 23 or as it may hereinafter be
amended is hereby adopted by reference and made part hereof.



   (C)   Interpretation.



      (1)   Validity of other laws. Where this code imposes a
greater restriction upon the use of structure or land or upon height or bulk
of structures, or requires larger open space or yards than are imposed by
other ordinances, laws, or regulations, the provisions of this chapter shall
govern. However, nothing in this chapter shall be constructed to prevent the
enforcement of other ordinances, laws, or regulations which prescribe more
restrictive limitations.



      (2)   Relation to public or private easements, covenants and
agreements. It is not intended that this chapter interfere with, abrogate, or
annul any easements, covenants, or agreements between public or private
parties, provided, however, that where the provisions of this chapter are
more restrictive than any deed or agreement, the provisions of this chapter
shall prevail.



      (3)   Severability. In case any portion of this chapter shall
be invalid or unconstitutional, as declared by a court of competent
jurisdiction, the remainder of the code shall not thereby be invalid, but
shall remain in full force and effect.



      (4)   Tense and definition. For the purpose of this chapter
certain terms and words are to be used and interpreted as defined in §§
153.001 through 153.270 of this code: words used in the present tense shall
include future tense; words in the singular number include the plural and
words in the plural number include the singular. Except where the natural
construction of the writing indicates otherwise, the words “shall” and
“will” are mandatory. Additionally, use of the term ordinance refers to
this chapter and future amendments thereto.



   (D)   Jurisdiction.



      (1)   Territorial jurisdiction. This code shall be in full
force and effect and shall apply the all lands the City of Mt. Vernon, the
Town of Cynthiana, the Town of Poseyville and Unincorporated Posey County,
Indiana.



      (2)   Annexed territory.



         (a)   Any territory hereafter annexed to the City of Mt.
Vernon, the Town of Cynthiana or the Town of Poseyville shall, upon such
classification, remain in the same zoning district classification shown for
Unincorporated Posey County on the Official Zoning Map of Posey County. The
district shall be subject to all conditions and regulations applicable to
such zoning district until the zoning district is later redesignated in
accordance with this chapter.



         (b)   Procedures for the rezoning of land (zoning map
amendment) are set forth in § 153.252 of this chapter. In the event the
owner/owners of the land to be annexed desire a different zoning designation
simultaneously with annexation, a petition for rezoning may be filed
concurrent with annexation request.



         (c)   Public property. Property owned, leased or
operated by the City of Mt. Vernon, the Town of Cynthiana, the Town of
Poseyville or the government of Posey County, Indiana or any other public or
governmental body or agency shall be subject to the terms of this chapter,
excluding lands and/or structures wholly owned by the state and federal
governments.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12)



§ 153.003  CONFIRMATION OF THE AREA PLANNING COMMISSION AND THE AREA BOARD
OF ZONING APPEALS.



   (A)   Purpose.



      (1)   An Area Plan Commission for the City of Mt. Vernon, the
Town of Cynthiana, the Town of Poseyville and the Unincorporated Area of
Posey County, Indiana, is hereby confirmed. The Posey County Area Plan
Commission shall exercise the planning and zoning powers for the City of Mt.
Vernon, the Town of Cynthiana, the Town of Poseyville, and the Unincorporated
Area of Posey County, Indiana. (I.C. 36-7-4-102 and I.C. 36-7-4-203(b), as
added by Acts 1981, PL. 309, Sec. 23.)



      (2)   An Area Board of Zoning Appeals for the City of Mt.
Vernon, the Town of Cynthiana, the Town of Poseyville and the Unincorporated
Area of Posey County, Indiana, is hereby confirmed. The Posey County Area
Board of Zoning Appeals shall exercise the powers of appeals from any action
by any entity under the zoning ordinance (except those of the Area Plan
Commission and local legislative bodies), approval and denial of special
exceptions and certain uses (including special exceptions, special uses,
contingent uses and conditional uses) from the zoning ordinance, and approval
or denial of variances from the development standards of the zoning ordinance
for the City of Mt. Vernon, the Town of Cynthiana, the Town of Poseyville,
and the Unincorporated Area of Posey County, Indiana (I.C. 36-7-4-902 and
I.C. 36-7-4-918.1 through 918.5). The Posey County Area Board of Zoning
Appeals shall have the power to make interpretations of the zoning map and
text. The Posey County Area Board of Zoning Appeals is expressly prohibited
from granting a variance from a use district or classification under I.C.
36-7-4-918.3.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12)



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 153.011  DESIGNATION OF ZONING AND OVERLAY DISTRICTS.



   (A)   For the purpose of regulating the use of land, water and
building and height, bulk, population density and open space, County of Posey
and participating cites and towns are hereby divided into the following
districts:



 

Symbol
 
Districts




A
 
Agricultural


RS or R-1
 
Residential Single-Family


RT
 
Residential Townhouse


R-2
 
Residential Two-Family


RM or R-3
 
Residential Multiple Family


RMH
 
Residential Mobile Home Park


PUD
 
Planned Unit Development (residential with limited commercial)


R-O or O
 
Residential-Office District


B-1 orNC
 
Neighborhood Commercial


B-1A or CS
 
Commercial Shopping


B-2 or CG
 
Commercial General District


B-3 or CH
 
Commercial High Intensity (commercial/warehousing/wholesaling)


CBD
 
Central Business District


M-1
 
Manufacturing Light


M-2
 
Manufacturing Medium/Heavy




 



   (B)   While the above zoning districts establish appropriate land
use, the County of Posey and participating cites and towns establish the
following overlay districts that impose additional development standards in
environmentally sensitive areas or in other geographic areas of special
concern:



 

Symbol
 
Districts


FH or FP
 
Flood Hazard/Flood Prone District



 



   (C)   Uses permitted by right or by special exception by zoning
district are summarized in Appendix A: Use Unit by Zoning District, and
Appendix D: Uses Referenced to Use Unit lists the assignment of individual
uses to use unit.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12)



§ 153.012  ZONING MAP ESTABLISHED.



   The locations and boundaries of the various districts as defined herein
shall be established by ordinance and shall be shown and delineated on the
Official Zoning Map of the Unincorporated Posey County, the City of Mt.
Vernon, the Town of Cynthiana and the Town of Poseyville, Indiana. The
Official Zoning Map shall be maintained and located in the Area Planning
Commission office. The Official Map may be divided into parts, and such parts
may be separately employed for identification purposes when adopting or
amending the Official Zoning Map or for any reference to the Official Zoning
Map.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12)



§ 153.013  DISTRICT BOUNDARY DESCRIPTION AND INTERPRETATION.



   District boundary lines shall be described by legal description or by a
map. When a legal description is used, the boundary line shall be deemed to
extend to the centerline of abutting streets and shall be so designated on
the Official Zoning Map. When a map is used, district boundary lines shall be
established by dimensions, property lines, recorded lot lines, or the
centerline of abutting street, alley, or railroad right-of-way, as the same
were of record at the time of adoption. In all cases where there is doubt as
to the exact location of district boundary lines, the same shall be
determined by the Board of Zoning Appeals.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12)



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 153.021  GENERAL LAND USE LIMITATIONS.



   (A)   Limitation on land use. No person, firm or corporation shall
use or permit to be used, any land or buildings, nor shall any person, firm,
or corporation make, erect, construct, move, alter, enlarge or rebuild or
permit the making, erection, construction, moving, altering, enlarging, or
rebuilding of any building, structure, or improvement, which is designed,
arranged or intended to be used or maintained for any purpose or in any
manner except in accordance with the use, height, area, yard, space, and
other requirements established in the district in which such land, building,
structure, or improvements is located. The exception would be as provided by
§§ 153.201 through 153.209, Nonconforming Uses. Nothing in this chapter
shall be deemed to require a change in the plans, construction, or designated
use of any building, where a building permit has been lawfully issued prior
to the effective date of this chapter and pursuant to such permit, said
construction is diligently carried to completion. Upon completion, such
building or use shall be deemed nonconforming and may continue as regulated
by §§ 153.201 through 153.209, Nonconforming Uses.



   (B)   Limitation on domestic animals in non-agricultural zones. In
all zoning districts except the agricultural district, animals permitted on
lots or in structures are limited to domestic animals (such as dogs and
cats). A kennel which is a use of right in Use Unit 15 permitted in the
B-2/CG, B-3/CH, M-1 and M-2 Districts. A variance may be obtained from the
Board of Zoning Appeals for non-domestic animals permitted outside the
agricultural district.



   (C)   Standards for mixed uses.



      (1)   If a structure contains both a residential use and a
nonresidential use and the gross floor area occupied by the residential use
exceeds 25% of the total floor area of the structure, the structure is a
residential use and shall conform to the regulations of the O/O-R District.



      (2)   If the gross floor area occupied by the residential use
is 25% or less of the total floor area of the structure, the structure is a
nonresidential use and shall conform to the regulations of the
business/commercial district in which it is located.



   (D)   Commercial vehicle parking.



      (1)   Commercial vehicles and equipment, other than those used
in the principal use, may not be parked or stored on property in an
agricultural, residential, office or business/commercial district, except the
B-3/CH, CBD (by special exception), M-1 and M-2 Districts. Vehicles designed
and intended for agricultural use are permitted in the agricultural district.



      (2)   A commercial vehicle originally designed or intended as
a private passenger vehicle (pickup trucks up to and including one-ton pickup
trucks, passenger vans, automobiles and station wagons) which has been
materially or structurally altered for use in connection with a commercial
use, may be parked on residential property when used as a commuter vehicle by
the owner or resident of the premises. However, such vehicle while parked on
the property, may not be loaded with trash, scrap materials or debris.



   (E)   Access through residentially zoned property. Residentially
zoned property may not be used for public access to nonresidential property
except for agricultural purposes.



   (F)   House cars, trailers and mobile homes. The following may not
be used as living or sleeping quarters except when in the confines of an
approved mobile home park or approved by special exception in the
agricultural district:



      (1)   Recreational vehicles;



      (2)   Trailers (including travel, storage or construction
trailers);



      (3)   Mobile homes with a minimum livable floor area less than
650 square feet; and



      (4)   Manufactured homes with a minimum livable floor area
less than 950 square feet.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12; Am. Ord. 13-1, passed 1-24-13)



§ 153.022  GENERAL LOT LIMITATIONS.



   (A)   Platting requirement. For the purposes of providing a proper
arrangement of streets and assuring the adequacy of open spaces for traffic,
utilities, and access of emergency vehicles, commensurate with the
intensification of land use customarily incidental to a change of zoning, a
platting requirement is established as follows:



      (1)   For any land which has been rezoned upon application of
a private party, no certificate of occupancy permit shall be issued until
that portion of the tract on which the permit is sought has been included
within a subdivision plat or re-plat, as the case may be. This plat shall be
submitted to the Planning Commission for their review, recommendation, and
approval. Upon final approval, the plat shall be filed in the office of the
Posey County Recorder.



      (2)   The Planning Commission, pursuant to their exclusive
jurisdiction over subdivision plats, may remove the platting requirement upon
a determination that the above stated purposes have been achieved by previous
platting or could not be achieved by a plat or re-plat.



   (B)   Prerecorded lots. Any lot in a recorded subdivision may be
considered a lot suitable for building purposes. A lot of record which
existed in its present configuration and size prior to 1957 may be considered
suitable for building purposes.



   (C)   Division of lots. A lot shall not hereafter be divided into
two or more lots, unless all lots resulting from such division conform to all
the applicable regulations of the zoning district in which the lots are to be
located, and also comply with the Posey County Subdivision Ordinance.



   (D)   Street frontage required. No lot shall contain any building
used in whole or in part for residential purposes unless such lot has a
minimum of 70 feet of frontage on a public street or dedicated right-of-way,
except a substandard lot of record, a lot within an approved planned unit
development (PUD) or a lot within an approved townhouse development in the
Residential Townhouse (RT) District or a lot within an approved mobile home
park in the Residential Mobile Home Park (RMH) District.



   (E)   One single-family dwelling per lot of record. Not more than
one single-family detached dwelling may be located on a lot.



   (F)   Lot area width and exceptions. The lot area and width
requirements of the zoning districts shall not apply to the uses included
within Use Unit 3, Public Protection and Utility Facilities, other than fire
protection and ambulance services.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12)



§ 153.023  HEIGHT EXCEPTIONS.



   The following structures shall not be subject to the height limitation
of the district in which they are located.



   (A)   Belfries, chimneys, cupolas, domes, elevators, penthouses
(structure for housing machinery, not intended as a dwelling), flagpoles,
monitors, smokestacks, spires, cooling towers, and ventilators, provided they
are not intended for human residency.



   (B)   Ground and structure-supported accessory antennas and aerials,
including elevating structures (poles and towers), which do not exceed a
total aggregate height of 60 feet above the natural land grade and which meet
the following requirements:



      (1)   No portion of the antenna, aerial, elevating structure,
or any anchor or guy line may extend beyond the established side yard
requirements of the district in which located; and



      (2)   In a residential district no portion of the antenna,
aerial, elevating structure, or any anchor or guy line, may extend beyond the
front yard building setback line or extend into any established front yard or
into any side yard; provided that:



         (a)   Height and location restrictions shall not be
applicable to radio communication facilities or utility facilities or storage
tanks owned, operated and maintained by any municipal, county, state or
federal governmental entities; and



         (b)   The restrictions established by this section may
be modified by the Board of Zoning Appeals through the approval of a
variance. The Board of Zoning Appeals may require additional safeguards and
conditions as it deems necessary in granting such a variance.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12)



§ 153.024  YARDS.



   (A)   Compliance with yard requirements. Except as otherwise
provided, the required yards shall be open and unobstructed from the ground
to the sky. Yards provided for a building for the purpose of complying with
the provisions of this code shall not be considered the yard for any other
building, nor considered the yard for any other lot.



   (B)   Permitted yard obstructions. Obstructions are permitted in the
required yards as follows:



      (1)   Cornices, canopies, eaves, and similar architectural
features may not project more than two feet into a required yard;



      (2)   Fire escapes may project not more than four and one-half
(4-1/2) feet into a required yard;



      (3)   Fences, hedges, plant materials and walls may be located
in any yard provided that street-intersection corner traffic-visibility is
maintained. Fences and walls in yards shall not exceed a height of six feet
except uses per § 153.026(A)(2). Excluding the agricultural district, any
fence or wall which projects into or encloses a required front yard shall not
exceed a height of three feet and when on a corner lot, shall be constructed
of a material which allows unobstructed vision (i.e. open chain link or
decorative split rail) except uses per § 153.026(A)(2). In all zoning
districts except the agriculture district, all fencing and screening shall
comply with § 153.026(A). The Board of Zoning Appeals may modify these
limitations through a requested variance;



      (4)   No fences, hedges, plant materials, walls or other
obstructions to vision extending in excess of three feet above the
established center-line grade of the street shall be erected or maintained on
that part of the corner lot that is included between the right-of-way lines
of intersecting streets and a line intersecting them at points of 25 feet
distance from the intersection of the right-of-way lines of two streets or
the right-of-way lines of a street and railroad. If there is no dedicated
roadway right-of-way, the right-of-way is assumed to be based on the
applicable roadway functional class as if the roadway right-of-way had been
dedicated (being from the street center line 25 feet for a “local
street”, 40 feet for a “collector” or “secondary arterial”, 60 feet
for a “primary arterial”, and 75 feet for a “divided primary
arterial”);



      (5)   Signs which are permitted as accessory uses in
agriculture, residential and office districts, may be located within any yard
which is bounded by a public street, provided the sign is at least one-foot
from the property line, is not located in the sight triangle of any public
street intersection if the sign exceeds three feet in height above the above
the established center-line grade of the street, and does not obstruct sight
distances on any exit driveway;



      (6)   In accordance with Use Unit 21, business (on-premises)
and outdoor advertising (off-premises) signs which are permitted by right or
special exception, may be located within any yard which is bounded by a
public street, provided the sign is at least one-foot from the property line,
does not obstruct vision in the sight triangle of any public street
intersection (i.e., the sign cannot block vision between three feet and ten
feet of height above the ground level of the approaching travel lanes to the
intersection (nearest to the subject property if more than one approaching
travel lane)), and does not obstruct sight distances on any exit driveway;



      (7)   Swimming pools, hot tubs, spas, tennis courts, patios,
fallout and other protective shelters shall be located in the rear yard,
shall not intrude into any dedicated easements, and shall have a minimum
setback of ten  feet from any side yard or rear lot lines;



      (8)   Private swimming pools (and all accessories thereto);



      (9)   Customary accessory structures, such as clotheslines,
barbecue pits, unenclosed gazebos, and playground equipment are allowed in
side and rear yards, but prohibited in front and street side yards; and



      (10)   If a lot abuts an alley intersection, any fence located
within five feet of the intersection of any public right-of-way (street with
alley or alley with alley) must be of a material which permits an
unobstructed view (i.e. open chain link or decorative split rail). This shall
be measured along the property line if the property line falls along the edge
of the alley roadway. In the event the property lines of a lot fall within
the alley roadway, the five feet of unobstructed vision shall be measured
from the edge of the alley.



   (C)   Use of yards in residential and office districts.



      (1)   No inoperative or unlicensed motor vehicles (including
recreational vehicles or trailers) shall be parked or stored within the front
or exterior side yard in any residential or office district. No inoperative
or unlicensed motor vehicles (including recreational vehicles or trailers)
parked or stored in an exterior rear yard shall be from visible the public
way or adjacent property in any residential or office district.



      (2)   No vehicle shall be parked except on a hard surfaced
area constructed of dust free “all-weather material” (see § 153.270
definition) in any residential or office district.



   (D)   Satellite communications antennas. Satellite antennas are
regulated as follows:



      (1)   Satellite antennas are a permitted use in RS/R-1, RT,
R-2, RM/R-3, RMH, and O/R-O Districts provided they meet the following
standards:



         (a)   Shall be ground mounted or mounted on the building
roof provided the roof mounted antenna does not exceed four feet in height;



         (b)   Shall be setback from the perimeter property
line(s) one foot for every foot in height;



         (c)   Ground mounted antenna shall not exceed 13 feet in
height at the grade where it is mounted; and



         (d)   Shall not be permitted as a principal use on the
lot.



      (2)   Satellite antennas are permitted as a matter of right in
agricultural, business/commercial, and manufacturing districts. If the
antenna is to be located on a lot which abuts an residential or office
district, the antenna shall be setback from the common property boundary two
feet for every one foot of height above grade.



      (3)   Satellite antennas which do not meet the standards as
set forth above shall require approval of a variance by the Board of Zoning
Appeals.



      (4)   Satellite antennas which have been installed prior to
the effective date of this chapter shall be permitted to continue.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12)



§ 153.025  EXISTING BUILDING ENCROACHMENT ON FRONT YARDS.



   Where an existing building or buildings on the same side of the street
and within the same block encroach upon their required front yard (or street
side yard) or building setback, the required front yard or building setback
for new construction shall be established as follows.



   (A)   If the proposed building is to be located more than 200 feet
from an encroaching building, the proposed building shall conform to the
front yard (or street side yard) established for the district in which the
proposed building is to be located.



   (B)   If the proposed building is to be located within 200 feet of
encroaching buildings on both sides and there are no intervening buildings,
the front yard (or street side yard) or building setback shall be that
setback common to the existing buildings which are located within the block
which the proposed building is to be constructed.



   (C)   If the proposed building is to be located within 200 feet of
an encroaching building on one side, but not on both sides, and there are no
intervening buildings, the front yard (or street side yard) or building
setback shall be the average of the front yard (street side yard) or building
setback of the adjacent building and the front yard (or street side yard)
requirement of the district in which the proposed structure is located.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12)



§ 153.026  SCREENING WALL OR FENCE.



   (A)   Specifications.



      (1)   For the purpose of maintaining a compatible relationship
between certain land uses, a screening requirement is established for the
initiation and continuance of particular uses in such instances as may be
hereafter designated.



      (2)   All junkyards, salvage yards, storage yards, outside
storage yards, commercial vehicle and equipment parking lots, scrap yards,
scrap metal reduction operations, garbage reduction operations, or similar
operations to any of the afore listed, shall be completely enclosed with an
opaque fence not less than eight feet in height. This fencing requirement is
mandatory for all storage areas for inoperable vehicles or inoperable
equipment in conjunction with repair shops or similar operations when such
storage areas abut the residential or office districts or are visible from
the public way.



      (3)   When the provisions of this code require the
construction of a screening wall or fence as a condition for the initiation
and subsequent continuance of a use, the screening wall or fence:



         (a)   Shall be constructed with customary fencing
materials which are compatible with the surrounding area, and shall be
designed and arranged to provide visual separation of uses irrespective of
vegetation. Examples of customarily used fencing materials are:



            1.   Chain link fence with privacy slats;



            2.   Stockade type fencing material;



            3.   Decorative brick walls;



            4.   Previously used materials shall not be used
except in the ease of bricks; and



            5.   Walls built with concrete or cinder block are
prohibited;



         (b)   Shall not exceed three  feet in height in any
front yard or street side yard, but otherwise shall be six feet in height;



         (c)   Shall be constructed with all braces and supports
on the interior, except when both sides are of the same design and appearance;



         (d)   Shall be erected prior to the occupancy of the
building or initiation of the use required to be screened; and



         (e)   Shall not be topped by barbed wire, razor wire,
and broken glass, and shall not be electrified.



   (B)   Maintenance. The screening wall or fence shall be maintained
by the owner of the lot containing the use which requires the fence
construction. Failure to maintain the screening wall or fence after notice by
the duly appointed public official shall constitute an offense hereunder.



   (C)   Modification of the screening wall or fence requirement. The
Board of Zoning Appeals, as a variance, may:



      (1)   Modify or remove the screening requirement where
existing physical features provide visual separation of uses;



      (2)   Modify the screening requirement where an alternative
screening will provide visual separation of uses;



      (3)   Grant an extension of time to erect a screen where
properties which are to be benefitted by the screen are undeveloped; and



      (4)   Remove the screening requirement where the purpose of
the screening requirement cannot be achieved.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12)



AGRICULTURAL (A) DISTRICT PROVISIONS



§ 153.031  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   The “A” District has been established and shown on the zoning maps
to minimize conversion of farm land to non-farm uses, to protect agricultural
areas from urban encroachment, and to reduce conflicts over competing land
uses. To regulate urban growth where it can be safely located and
economically serviced by public facilities, such as roads, sanitary sewers,
water lines, schools, police and fire protection, etc., through the rezoning
process. The Area Plan Commission, in its review of a rezoning application
from the “A” District to another use, shall evaluate the following before
any recommendation is given to the applicable local legislative body:



   (A)   Degree of urbanization or present land use;



   (B)   Water: availability of supply relative to needs, quantity and
quality;



   (C)   Liquid waste disposal: availability to expand municipal
service, or suitability for septic systems;



   (D)   Roads, existing; increased design capacity, feasibility of
physical expansion. Additional roads; functional road needs, and feasibility
of construction;



   (E)   Adequate police and fire protection;



   (F)   Soils; substratum support, drainage, slope, stability, erosion
and sedimentation; and



   (G)   Alternative land use. Best use for land relative to existing
resource priorities on uses of land.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12)



§ 153.032  USE REGULATION.



   (A)   Uses by right. No building or structure or part thereof shall
be erected, altered or used, or land used in whole or in part for other than
one or more of the following uses and use conditions in division (C) of this
section.



      (1)   Use Unit 0 - active agricultural uses [including animal
feeding operations (AFOs), but excepting concentrated feeding operations
(CFOs) and confined animal feeding operations (CAFOs) that are permitted only
by special exception and shall meet all state and federal requirements].



      (2)   Use Unit 1 - areawide uses by right.



      (3)   Use Unit 5 - single-family detached dwelling.



      (4)   Use Unit 8 - manufactured or modular home dwelling.



      (5)   Living quarters for persons employed on the premises and
not rented or otherwise used as a separate dwelling.



      (6)   Bona fide farm building.



      (7)   Roadside stands offering for sale agricultural products
are a permitted use, provided said stand is located at least 25 feet from the
front property line (roadway right-of-way line) and that off-street parking
is provided. If there is no dedicated roadway right-of-way, the front yard
setback from the center of the roadway is 25 feet plus one-half the
right-of-way width of the applicable roadway functional class as if the
roadway had been dedicated (adding 25 feet for a “local street”, 40 feet
for a “collector” or “secondary arterial”, 60 feet for a “primary
arterial”, and 75 feet for a “divided primary arterial”).



      (8)   Day care in the home involving less than five unrelated
children.



      (9)   Accessory uses and structures when located on the same
lot.



      (10)   Other than exempt subdivisions as provided in Posey
County Subdivision Ordinance, subdivisions are prohibited within the “A”
District.



      (11)   Landfills are prohibited within the “A” District.



      (12)   Use unit 29 - mobile office trailer, so long as
property does not abut a residential district.



   (B)   Use by special exception. Special exception uses may be
permitted by the Board of Zoning Appeals following a public hearing, as
indicated below, when such are deemed essential or desirable to the public
convenience or welfare and are in harmony with the various elements or
objectives of the Comprehensive Plan and use conditions in division (C) of
this section.



      (1)   Use Unit 0 - active agricultural uses - concentrated
feeding operations (CFOs) and confined animal feeding operations (CAFOs)
meeting all state and federal requirements.



      (2)   Use Unit 2 - areawide special exception uses.



      (3)   Use Unit 3 - public protection and utility facilities.



      (4)   Use Unit 4 - community services (including churches,
nonprofit educational and philanthropic institutional uses, and children’s
nursery/day care center involving more than four children), but excluding
protective shelters, residential treatment centers, transitional living
centers.



      (5)   Use Unit 9 - mobile home dwelling.



      (6)   Part of Use Unit 15 - other trades and services -
limited to veterinary office, animal or kennel (including outside runs) and
greenhouses.



      (7)   Use Unit 20 - commercial recreation: intensive.



      (8)   Part of Use Unit 21 - business signs and outdoor
advertising - excluding outdoor advertising (off-premises) signs.



      (9)   Use Unit 23 - warehousing and wholesaling.



      (10)   Use Unit 24 - mining and mineral extraction and
processing (including oil and gas well drilling and extraction).



      (11)   Part of Use Unit 27 - heavy manufacturing and industry
- limited to livestock sales and commercial breeding.



      (12)   Use Unit 28 - home occupations.



      (13)   Use unit 29 - mobile office trailer when property abuts
a residential district.



   (C)   Uses by right and special exception conditions.



      (1)   Any new residential use, other than that of the
applicant, shall be set back a minimum of 1,500 feet from the livestock
facilities of any existing confined animal feeding operation (CAFO), 1,000
feet from any existing Concentrated Feeding Operation (CFO), or 500 feet from
any existing animal feeding operation (AFO), unless the applicant and the
owner(s) of the affected residence agree to a lesser distance and record a
copy of such agreement in the Office of the Posey County Recorder.



      (2)   Concentrated feeding operations (CFOs) and confined
animal feeding operations (CAFOs) are subject to site plan approval by the
Area Plan Commission under § 153.033(F).



      (3)   Concentrated and confined feeding operations are subject
to the following separation requirements:



         (a)   New AFO’s, shall be set back at least 500 feet
from the boundary of any property zoned residential, office, or
business/commercial, and from any community service in Use Unit 4.



         (b)   All new AFO’s shall be setback at least 500 feet
from any residence (other than that of the applicant) and any community
service in Use Unit 4, unless the applicant and the owner(s) of the affected
residence agree to a lesser distance and record a copy of such agreement in
the Office of the Posey County Recorder.



         (c)   All new CFOs, CFO expansions, and AFO expansions
to the extent the operation becomes a CFO, shall be set back at least 1,000
feet from any residence(other than that of the applicant) and any community
service in Use Unit 4, unless the applicant and the owner(s) of the affected
residence agree to a lesser distance and record a copy of such agreement in
the Office of the Posey County Recorder.



         (d)   The livestock facilities of new CFOs shall be set
back at least one-half mile from any property zoned residential, office, or
business/commercial, and from any community service in Use Unit 4; and shall
be set back at least one-half mile from any shoreline or water line of a lake.



         (e)   New CAFOs shall be set back at least 1,500 feet
from any residence (other than that of the applicant) and community services
of Use Unit 4, unless the applicant and the owner(s) of the affected
residence agree to a lesser distance and record a copy of such agreement in
the Office of the Posey County Recorder.



         (f)   The livestock facilities of new CAFOs shall be set
back at least one-half mile from any property zoned residential, office, or
business/commercial, and from any community service in Use Unit 4; and shall
be set back at least one-half mile from any shoreline or water line of a lake.



         (g)   The property boundary of any confined animal
feeding operations (CAFO) shall not be within two miles of an incorporated
area.



   (D)   Accessory uses permitted. Accessory uses customarily
incidental to a permitted principal use as follows.



      (1)   Any structure in support of Use Unit 0 (Active
Recreation Uses) or Use Unit 1 (Areawide Uses by Right such as passive
agricultural uses and open land uses).



      (2)   Garage.



      (3)   Carport.



      (4)   Signs.



         (a)   Bulletin board.



         (b)   Identification sign.



         (c)   Real estate sign.



         (d)   Construction sign.



      (5)   Shelter (storm).



      (6)   Private swimming pool.



      (7)   Child care in home (four or less).



      (8)   Yard sales.



   (E)   Accessory use conditions.



      (1)   General conditions.



         (a)   An accessory building erected as an integral part
of the principal building shall be made structurally a part thereof, shall
have a common wall therewith, and shall comply with the requirements
applicable to the principal building.



         (b)   A detached accessory building shall not be located
in the front or side yard or encroach upon a minimum building setback line,
but this limitation shall not apply to garages and carports, provided the
minimum required front yard or side yard set back line is observed.



         (c)   Within the rear yard, a detached accessory
building shall be located at least five feet from interior lot line.



      (2)   Signs are permitted as follows in accordance with the
yard requirement of § 153.024(B)(5).



         (a)   One bulletin board may be erected on each street
frontage of any educational, religious, institutional, or similar use in Use
Unit 4 by special exception requiring announcement of its activities. The
bulletin board shall not exceed 12 square feet in surface area, nor 15 feet
in height, and illumination, if any, shall be by constant light.



         (b)   One identification sign may be erected on each
perimeter street frontage of a farm or permitted non- residential use. The
sign shall not be permitted to 48 square feet of display surface area. The
sign shall not exceed 12 feet in height, and illumination, if any, shall be
by constant light.



         (c)   During the period of construction, a temporary
sign advertising the construction of improvements on the street premises, may
be erected on each perimeter street frontage of the development. The sign
shall not exceed 40 square feet in surface area, nor 15 feet in height, and
illumination, if any, shall be by constant light.



         (d)   A temporary real estate sign advertising the sale,
rental, or lease of the premises may be erected on each street frontage of a
lot. The sign shall not exceed four square feet in surface area, nor



six feet in height, and illumination, if any, shall be by constant light.



      (3)   Private swimming pools (and all accessories thereto)
shall meet safety requirements of state and local building codes.



      (4)   Child care - in home.



         (a)   A maximum of four non-related children may be
cared for in the home without state licensing. Five to ten children may be
cared for in the home if the resident obtains a special exception and
maintains continuous state licensing. This number does not include those who
reside in the residence.



         (b)   No person shall be employed other than a member of
the immediate family residing on the premises or a substitute caregiver if
the primary caregiver is unavailable.



         (c)   No signs advertising the child care home shall be
permitted on the lot.



         (d)   No exterior alteration of the dwelling or any
customary accessory structure shall be made which would detract from the
residential character of the structures.



         (e)   State-licensed child-care homes in existence on
the effective date of this chapter, but which would be prohibited by these
requirements, may continue as otherwise regulated herein.



      (5)   Yard sales shall occur only once a month for not more
than three consecutive days.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12; Am. Ord. 13-9, passed 5-16-13)



§ 153.033  BULK AND AREA REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Minimum lot area.



      (1)   Every lot upon which a structure is hereinafter erected,
shall:



         (a)   Have a frontage not less than 150 feet on a street
or public right-of-way or dedicated road, or shall have access to a public
road or street by a dedicated right-of-way or access easement running with
the land;



         (b)   Have a minimum area of one acre with or without
public sewers: however, the Posey County Health Department may require a
larger lot where public sewers area lacking; and



         (c)   Be a minimum of ten acres for an animal feeding
operation (AFO), 30 acres for a new concentrated feeding operation (CFO), and
120 acres for a new confined animal feeding operation (CAFO).



      (2)   Where a lot has less width or area than herein required
and was a lot of record (or contract sales, dated) prior to the effective
date of this chapter, such lot may be occupied by any use permitted in the
“A” District.



   (B)   Yards.



      (1)   Front yard and street side yard.



         (a)   Every lot used for a single-family detached
dwelling shall have a front yard (or street side yard) not less than 25 feet
in depth. The front yard or street side yard may be more or less than the
25-foot minimum depending on the predominant front yard (or street side yard)
setback of existing structures along the blockface. If only one lot on the
blockface is developed, the front yard (or street side yard) should be an
average of the 25-foot setback and the existing structure setback. When the
proposed structure falls between two developed lots, the front yard setback
should be the average of the two abutting lot structure setbacks.



         (b)   Every lot used for a non-residential use shall
have a front yard (or corner lot side yard) not less than 25 feet in depth.



         (c)   If there is no dedicated roadway right-of-way, the
front yard (or corner lot side yard) setback from the center of the roadway
is 25 feet plus one-half the right-of-way width of the applicable roadway
functional class as if the roadway had been dedicated (adding 25 feet for a
“local street”, 40 feet for a “collector” or “secondary
arterial”, 60 feet for a “primary arterial”, and 75 feet for a
“divided primary arterial”).



         (d)   Concentrated and confined feeding operations shall
have greater front yard and street side yard setbacks of 100 feet for animal
feeding operation (AFO), 200 feet for a new concentrated feeding operation
(CFO), and 500 feet for a new confined animal feeding operation (CAFO).



      (2)   Side yards.



         (a)   Every lot used for a single-family detached
dwelling shall have a side yard not less than 15 feet in depth.



         (b)   Every lot used for a non-residential use shall
have a side yard not less than ten feet in depth. However, when a
non-residential use by right or special exception abuts a residential or
office district, the minimum side yard requirement in the A District of ten
feet shall be increased by one foot for each foot of building height
exceeding 18 feet, but the required side yard shall not exceed 25 feet.



         (c)   Concentrated and confined feeding operations shall
have greater side yard setbacks of 100 feet for animal feeding operation
(AFO), two hundred (200) feet for a new concentrated feeding operation (CFO),
and 500 feet for a new confined animal feeding operation (CAFO).



      (3) Rear yard.



         (a)   Every lot used for a one-family dwelling shall
have a rear yard not less than 25 feet in depth.



         (b)   Every lot used for a non-residential use shall
have a rear yard not less than ten feet in depth. However, when a
non-residential use by right or special exception abuts a residential or
office district, the minimum rear yard requirement in the A District of ten
feet shall be increased by one foot for each foot of building height
exceeding 18 feet, but the required rear yard shall not exceed 25 feet.



         (c)   Concentrated and confined feeding operations shall
have greater rear yard setbacks of 100 feet for animal feeding operation
(AFO), 200 feet for a new concentrated feeding operation (CFO), and 500 feet
for a new confined animal feeding operation (CAFO).



   (C)   Height.



      (1)   No residential building or structure or part thereof
shall be erected or altered to a height exceeding two and one-half stories or
35 feet.



      (2)   No non-residential structure, accessory building or
structure or part thereof shall be erected or altered to a height exceeding
45 feet.



   (D)   Lot coverage. The combined area occupied by all principal and
accessory buildings shall not exceed 30% of the area of the lot.



   (E)   Minimum floor area. The minimum livable floor area of a
single-family detached dwelling or mobile home shall be 950 square feet. The
minimum width of a single-family detached dwelling is 23 feet wide; however,
there is no minimum width for a mobile home.



   (F)   Site plan approval for concentrated and confined feeding
operations. As a use by right, all new and expanding animal feeding
operations (AFOs) shall submit a site plan for approval by the Area Plan
Commission Executive Director to obtain a “location improvement permit”
per § 153.221. All new and expanding concentrated feeding operations (CFOs)
and confined animal feeding operations (CAFOs) shall submit a site plan for
approval by the Area Plan Commission in conjunction with the request for
approval as a special exception by the Area Board of Zoning Appeals. Animal
feeding operations and concentrated feeding operations shall comply with all
state and county health and environmental regulations, as well as all federal
laws governing such uses. New AFOs, CFOs, CAFOs and/or AFOs or CFOs expanding
to a CAFO shall comply with all applicable state and federal laws and county
regulations governing such uses, and shall also submit a site development
plan to the Area Plan Commission for review, as well as approval as a special
exception by the Area Board of Zoning Appeals.



      (1)   Site development plan submission for CFOs and CAFOs. The
following submissions shall be received from the applicant and shall be
considered by the Posey County Area Plan Commission for site development plan
approval:



         (a)   A scaled drawing representing the dimensions and
the shape of the lot to be built upon, the size and location of existing
buildings, and the location and dimensions of the proposed building or
alteration;



         (b)   The boundaries of the property;



         (c)   The general topography of the region;



         (d)   The location of all residential dwellings,
businesses, public buildings, and recreational areas within a one-half mile
radius of the livestock facilities;



         (e)   The existence, if any, and type of test/monitoring
wells;



         (f)   An odor control plan that addresses confinement
buildings, manure storage, dust and particulate matter;



         (g)   A mortality plan for disposal of dead animals; and



         (h)   Any and all other information deemed necessary by
the Posey County Area Plan Commission for the administration and enforcement
of this chapter, including but not limited to, existing or proposed uses of
the buildings and land; compliance with county health department and drainage
board regulations; and status of county highway department approval.



      (2)   Animal feeding operations. Animal feeding operations
(AFOs) shall comply with all state and county health and environmental
regulations. An AFO shall not be expanded to a CFO until it has been in
operation for at least three years and meets all CFO requirements.



      (3)   Concentrated feeding operations (CFOs) and confined
animal feeding operations (CAFOs). Concentrated feeding operations and
confined animal feeding operations shall comply with all applicable Indiana
and federal laws governing such uses.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12)



§ 153.034  EXCEPTION OF AGRICULTURAL USES.



   Excluding animal feeding operations (AFOs), concentrated feeding
operations (CFOs) and confined animal feeding operations (CAFOs), nothing
contained in these regulations shall impose restrictions with respect to land
used or to be used for agricultural purposes, or with the erection,
maintenance, repair, alteration, remodeling, or extension of buildings or
structures which are to be used for agricultural purposes, except that such
buildings and structures for agricultural purposes shall conform to building
set back lines.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12)



§ 153.035  SALES OF AGRICULTURAL LAND.



   Divisions of land for agricultural purposes only are except from the
bulk and area requirements of § 153.033.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12)



RESIDENTIAL (R) DISTRICT PROVISIONS



§ 153.041  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   (A)   General purpose. The residential districts are designed to:



      (1)   Achieve the residential objectives of the Comprehensive
Plan;



      (2)   Protect the character of residential areas by excluding
inharmonious commercial and industrial activities;



      (3)   Achieve a suitable environment for the family by
permitting in residential areas appropriate neighborhood facilities, such as
churches, schools, and certain cultural and recreational facilities;



      (4)   Preserve openness of the living areas and avoid
overcrowding by requiring minimum yards, open spaces, lot areas, and by
limiting the bulk of structures;



      (5)   Permit a variety of dwelling types and densities to meet
the varying needs of families; and



      (6)   Control the density of residential development to
facilitate the planning for and economical provision of streets, utilities,
and other public facilities.



   (B)   Purpose of RS or R-1, Residential Single-Family Detached
District. This district is designed to permit the development and
conservation of detached dwellings on individual lots.



   (C)   Purpose of RT, Residential Townhouse District. The RT district
is designed to permit the development of fee simple townhouse dwellings. The
district is intended to provide suitable areas for attached single-family
dwellings on individual lots at medium densities.



   (D)   Purpose of R-2, Residential Two Family District. The district
is intended to provide suitable areas for single-family attached dwellings at
medium densities. While this district allows traditional two single-family
attached dwellings on the same lot, it also allows a variety of innovative
single-family attached dwelling unit types on individual fee simple lots
including zero lot-lines, duplexes with one common wall on one lot or two
separate lots, and quadruplexes with two common walls on four separate lots.



   (E)   Purpose of RM or R-3, Residential Multiple-family District.
The district is designed to provide suitable areas for single-family,
two-family, and multiple-family dwelling types in suitable environments in a
variety of densities to meet the varying requirements of families. The types
of uses permitted are:



      (1)   Single-family attached (patio homes, townhouses,
condominiums);



      (2)   Two-family dwellings (duplexes);



      (3)   Multifamily (apartments); and



      (4)   Group quarters (apartment hotel, rooming/boarding house,
group home, elderly/retirement housing, fraternity/sorority home,
convent/monastery, nursing homes, college resident halls).



   (F)   Purpose of RMH, Residential Mobile Home District. The RMH
district is intended to provide an alternative to conventional single-family
detached housing. To achieve this, the RMH district allows two different
types of mobile home settings.



      (1)   Mobile home park. This designation is intended for
commercial rental development. This designation provides for the location of
mobile home parks and the leasing, regulation and control of mobile homes
within a park site. It is further intended that mobile home parks be designed
and adhere to high standards of development to insure compatibility with
surrounding areas and safety for occupants of the mobile homes.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12)



§ 153.042  USE REGULATIONS: R-1 OR RS RESIDENTIAL SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED
DISTRICT.



   (A)   Use by right. No building or structure, or part thereof, shall
be erected, altered or used, or land used in whole or in part, for other than
one or more of the following permitted principal uses:



      (1)   Use Unit 1 - areawide uses by right;



      (2)   Use Unit 5 - single-family detached dwelling; and



      (3)   Use Unit 8 - manufactured or modular home dwelling.



   (B)   Use by special exception. Special exception uses may be
permitted by the Board of Zoning Appeals following a public hearing, as
indicated below, when such are deemed essential or desirable to the public
convenience or welfare and are in harmony with the various elements or
objectives of the Comprehensive Plan.



      (1)   Use Unit 2 - areawide special exception uses.



      (2)   Use Unit 3 - public protection and utility facilities.



      (3)   Use Unit 4 - community services excluding protective
shelters, residential treatment centers, transitional living centers, and
including children’s nursery/day care center for more than four unrelated
children (excluding those who live in the home).



      (4)   Use Unit 28 - home occupations.



      (5)   Unit 29 - mobile office trailer.



   (C)   Accessory uses permitted. Accessory uses customarily
incidental to a permitted principal use not involving the conduct of any
business, trade, occupation or profession, are permitted as follows.



      (1)   Garage.



      (2)   Carport.



      (3)   Signs:



         (a)   Bulletin board;



         (b)   Identification sign;



         (c)   Real estate sign; and



         (d)   Construction sign.



      (4)   Shelter (storm).



      (5)   Private swimming pool.



      (6)   Child care in home (four or less).



      (7)   Yard sales.



   (D)   Accessory use conditions.



      (1)   General conditions.



         (a)   An accessory building erected as an integral part
of the principal building shall be made structurally a part thereof, shall
have a common wall therewith, and shall comply with the requirements
applicable to the principal building.



         (b)   A detached accessory building shall not be located
in the front or side yard or encroach upon a minimum building setback line,
but this limitation shall not apply to garages and carports, provided the
minimum required front yard or side yard set back line is observed.



         (c)   Within the rear yard, a detached accessory
building shall be located at least five feet from interior lot line.



      (2)   Signs are permitted as follows in accordance with the
yard requirement of § 153.024(B)(5).



         (a)   One bulletin board may be erected on each street
frontage of any educational, religious, institutional, or similar use
requiring announcement of its activities. The bulletin board shall not exceed
12 square feet in surface area, nor 15 feet in height, and illumination, if
any, shall be by constant light.



         (b)   One Identification sign may be erected on each
perimeter street frontage of a single-family detached subdivision, or
permitted non- residential use. The sign shall not be permitted to exceed 48
square feet of display surface area. The sign shall not exceed 12 feet in
height, and illumination, if any, shall be by constant light.



         (c)   During the period of construction, a temporary
sign advertising the construction of improvements on the street premises, may
be erected on each perimeter street frontage of the development. The sign
shall not exceed 40 square feet in surface area, nor 15 feet in height, and
illumination, if any, shall be by constant light.



         (d)   A temporary real estate sign advertising the sale,
rental, or lease of the premises may be erected on each street frontage of a
lot. The sign shall not exceed four square feet in surface area or more than
six feet in height, and shall not be illuminated in any way.



      (3)   Private swimming pools (and all accessories thereto)
shall meet safety requirements of state and local building codes.



      (4)   Child care - in home.



         (a)   A maximum of four non-related children may be
cared for in the home without state licensing. Five to ten children may be
cared for in the home if the resident obtains a special exception and
maintains continuous state licensing. This number does not include those who
reside in the residence.



         (b)   No person shall be employed other than a member of
the immediate family residing on the premises or a substitute caregiver if
the primary caregiver is unavailable.



         (c)   No signs advertising the child care home shall be
permitted on the lot.



         (d)   No exterior alteration of the dwelling or any
customary accessory structure shall be made which would detract from the
residential character of the structures.



         (e)   State-licensed child-care homes in existence on
the effective date of this chapter, but which would be prohibited by these
requirements, may continue as otherwise regulated herein.



      (5)   Yard sales shall occur only once a month for not more
than three consecutive days.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12; Am. Ord. 13-9, passed 5-16-13)



§ 153.043  BULK AND AREA REQUIREMENTS: R-1 OR RS RESIDENTIAL SINGLE-FAMILY
DETACHED DISTRICT.



   (A)   Area. Every lot upon which a structure is hereafter erected
shall front onto a dedicated street or public right-of-way, and shall conform
to the following minimum lot area and width requirements.



      (1)   Residential use.



         (a)   The lot area shall be a minimum of 7,000 square
feet with a minimum width of 70 feet (where sanitary sewers are available).



         (b)   Where no public sewers are available and disposal
is by soil absorption, the minimum lot area shall be one acre. The Posey
County Health Department may require a larger lot.



      (2)   Non-residential use.



         (a)   The lot area shall be a minimum of 10,000 square
feet with a minimum width of 100 feet (where sanitary sewers are available).



         (b)   Where no public sanitary sewers are available and
disposal is by soil absorption, minimum lot area shall be one acre. The Posey
County Health Department may require a larger lot.



   (B)   Yards.



      (1)   Front yard and street side yard.



         (a)   Every lot used for a single-family detached
dwelling shall have a front yard (or street side yard) not less than 25 feet
in depth. The front yard (or street side yard) may be more or less than the
25-foot minimum depending on the predominant front yard (or street side yard)
setback of existing structures along the blockface. If only one lot on the
blockface is developed, the front yard (or street side yard) should be an
average of the 25-foot setback and the existing structure setback. When the
proposed structure falls between two developed lots, the front yard setback
should be the average of the two abutting lot structure setbacks.



         (b)   Every lot used for a non-residential use shall
have a front yard (or corner lot side yard) not less than 25 feet in depth.



         (c)   If there is no dedicated roadway right-of-way, the
front yard (or comer lot side yard) setback from the center of the roadway is
25 feet plus one-half the right-of-way width of the applicable roadway
functional class as if the roadway had been dedicated (adding 25 feet for a
“local street”, 40 feet for a “collector” or “secondary
arterial”, 60 feet for a “primary arterial”, and 75 feet for a
“divided primary arterial”).



      (2)   Side yards.



         (a)   Every lot used for a single-family detached
dwelling shall have a side yard not less than five feet in depth.



         (b)   Every lot used for a non-residential use shall
have a side yard not less than ten feet in depth. However, when a
non-residential use by right or special exception abuts a residential or
office district, the minimum side yard requirement in the RS or R-1 District
of ten feet shall be increased by one foot for each foot of building height
exceeding 18 feet, but the required side yard shall not exceed 25 feet.



      (3)   Rear yard.



         (c)   Every lot used for a one-family dwelling shall
have a rear yard not less than 25 feet in depth.



         (d)   Every lot used for a non-residential use shall
have a rear yard not less than ten feet in depth. However, when a
non-residential use by right or special exception abuts a residential or
office district, the minimum rear yard requirement in the A District of ten
feet shall be increased by one foot for each foot of building height
exceeding 18 feet, but the required rear yard shall not exceed 25 feet.



   (C)   Height. No building or structure or part thereof shall be
erected or altered to a height exceeding two and one-half stories, or 35 feet.



   (D)   Lot coverage. The combined area occupied by all principal and
accessory buildings shall not exceed 30% of the area of the lot.



   (E)   Minimum floor area. A one-family dwelling shall have a minimum
livable floor area of 950 square feet and shall be a minimum of 23 feet wide.



   (F)   Floor area ratio. The floor area ratio shall not exceed 0.40.



   (G)   Dwelling unit density. The maximum number of dwelling units
per acre is 6.223.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12)



§ 153.044  USE REGULATIONS: RT RESIDENTIAL TOWNHOUSE DISTRICT.



   (A)   Use by right. No building or structure, or part thereof, shall
be erected, altered or used, or land used in whole or in part, for other than
one or more of the following permitted principal uses.



      (1)   Use Unit 1 - areawide uses by right.



      (2)   Use Unit 5 - single-family detached dwelling.



      (3)   Part Use Unit 6 - single-family attached dwelling -
townhouses (only).



      (4)   Use Unit 8 - manufactured or modular home dwelling.



   (B)   Use by special exception. Special exception uses may be
permitted by the Board of Zoning Appeals following a public hearing, as
indicated below, when such are deemed essential or desirable to the public
convenience or welfare and are in harmony with the various elements or
objectives of the Comprehensive Plan.



      (1)   Use Unit 2 - areawide special exception uses.



      (2)   Use Unit 3 - public protection and utility facilities.



      (3)   Use Unit 4 - community services [including protective
shelters, residential treatment centers and transitional living centers, and
including children’s nursery/day care center for more than four unrelated
children (excluding those who live in the home)].



      (4)   Use Unit 28 - home occupations.



      (5)   Unit 29 - mobile office trailer.



   (C)   Accessory uses permitted. Accessory uses customarily
incidental to a permitted principal use not involving the conduct of any
business, trade, occupation or profession, are permitted as follows.



      (1)   Garage.



      (2)   Carport.



      (3)   Signs:



         (a)   Bulletin board;



         (b)   Identification sign;



         (c)   Real estate sign; and



         (d)   Construction sign.



      (4)   Shelter (storm).



      (5)   Private swimming pool.



      (6)   Child care in home (four or less).



      (7)   Yard sales.



   (D)   Accessory use conditions.



      (1)   General conditions.



         (a)   An accessory building erected as an integral part
of the principal building shall be made structurally a part thereof, shall
have a common wall therewith, and shall comply with the requirements
applicable to the principal building.



         (b)   A detached accessory building shall not be located
in the front or side yard or encroach upon a minimum building setback line,
but this limitation shall not apply to garages and carports, provided the
minimum required front yard or side yard set back line is observed.



         (c)   Within the rear yard, a detached accessory
building shall be located at least five feet from interior lot line.



      (2)   Signs are permitted as follows in accordance with the
yard requirement of § 153.024(B)(5).



         (a)   One bulletin board may be erected on each street
frontage of any educational, religious, institutional, or similar use in Use
Unit 4 by special exception requiring announcement of its activities. The
bulletin board shall not exceed 12 square feet in surface area, nor 15 feet
in height, and illumination, if any, shall be by constant light.



         (b)   One identification sign may be erected on each
perimeter street frontage of townhouse development, single-family detached
subdivision, or permitted non- residential use. The sign shall not be
permitted to exceed 48 square feet of display surface area. The sign shall
not exceed 12 feet in height, and illumination, if any, shall be by constant
light.



         (c)   During the period of construction, a temporary
sign advertising the construction of improvements on the street premises, may
be erected on each perimeter street frontage of the development. The sign
shall not exceed 40 square feet in surface area, nor 15 feet in height, and
illumination, if any, shall be by constant light.



         (d)   A temporary real estate sign advertising the sale,
rental, or lease of the premises may be erected on each street frontage of a
lot. The sign shall not exceed four square feet in surface area, or more than
six feet in height, and shall not be illuminated in any way.



      (3)   Private swimming pools (and all accessories thereto)
shall meet safety requirements of state and local building codes.



      (4)   Child care - in home.



         (a)   A maximum of four non-related children may be
cared for in the home without state licensing. Five to ten children may be
cared for in the home if the resident obtains a special exception and
maintains continuous state licensing. This number does not include those who
reside in the residence.



         (b)   No person shall be employed other than a member of
the immediate family residing on the premises or a substitute caregiver if
the primary caregiver is unavailable.



         (c)   No signs advertising the child care home shall be
permitted on the lot.



         (d)   No exterior alteration of the dwelling or any
customary accessory structure shall be made which would detract from the
residential character of the structures.



         (e)   State-licensed child-care homes in existence on
the effective date of this chapter, but which would be prohibited by these
requirements, may continue as otherwise regulated herein.



      (5)   Yard sales shall occur only once a month for not more
than three consecutive days.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12; Am. Ord. 13-9, passed 5-16-13)



§ 153.045  BULK AND AREA REQUIREMENTS: RT RESIDENTIAL TOWNHOUSE DISTRICT.



   (A)   Area. Every lot upon which a structure is hereafter erected
shall front onto a dedicated street or public right-of-way, and shall conform
to the following minimum lot area and width requirements.



      (1)   Residential use.



         (a)   The tract area shall be a minimum of 7,000 square
feet with a minimum tract width of 70 feet (where sanitary sewers are
available) for single-family detached and single-family attached uses.



         (b)   It is assumed that there is a minimum of three
townhouses per structure with a 70-foot tract width; thus, the minimum lot
width is 20 feet (with public sewers) for townhouses.



         (c)   Where no public sewers are available and disposal
is by soil absorption, the minimum lot area shall be one acre. The Posey
County Health Department may require a larger lot.



      (2)   Non-residential use.



         (a)   The lot area shall be a minimum of 10,000 square
feet with a minimum width of 100 feet (where sanitary sewers are available).



         (b)   Where no sanitary sewers are available and
disposal is by soil absorption, minimum lot area shall be one acre. The Posey
County Health Department may require a larger lot.



   (B)   Yards.



      (1)   Front yard and street side yard.



         (a) Every lot or tract used for a single-family detached
dwelling or single-family attached dwelling shall have a front yard (or
street side yard) not less than 25 feet in depth. The front yard or street
side yard may be more or less than the 25-foot minimum depending on the
predominant front yard (or street side yard) setback of existing structures
along the blockface. If only one lot on the blockface is developed, the front
yard (or street side yard) should be an average of the 25-foot setback and
the existing structure setback. When the proposed structure falls between two
developed lots, the front yard setback should be the average of the two
abutting lot structure setbacks.



         (b)   Every lot used for a non-residential use shall
have a front yard (or corner lot side yard) not less than 25 feet in depth.



         (c)   If the there is no dedicated roadway right-of-way,
the front yard (or corner lot side yard) setback from the center of the
roadway is 25 feet plus one-half the right-of-way width of the applicable
roadway functional class as if the roadway had been dedicated (adding 25 feet
for a “local street”, 40 feet for a “collector” or “secondary
arterial”, 60 feet for a “primary arterial”, and 75 feet for a
“divided primary arterial”).



      (2)   Side yards.



         (a)   Every lot used for a single-family detached
dwelling shall have a side yard not less than five feet in depth.



         (b)   Every lot used for a non-residential use shall
have a side yard not less than ten feet in depth. However, when a
non-residential use by right or special exception abuts a residential or
office district, the minimum side yard requirement in the RT District of ten
feet shall be increased by one foot for each foot of building height
exceeding 18 feet, but the required side yard shall not exceed 25 feet.



      (3)   Rear yard.



         (a)   Every lot used for a one-family dwelling (attached
or detached) shall have a rear yard not less than 20 feet in depth.



         (b)   Every lot used for a non-residential use shall
have a rear yard not less than ten feet in depth. However, when a
non-residential use by right or special exception abuts a residential or
office District, the minimum rear yard requirement in the RT District of ten
feet shall be increased by one foot for each foot of building height
exceeding 18 feet, but the required rear yard shall not exceed 25 feet.



   (C)   Height. No building or structure or part thereof shall be
erected or altered to a height exceeding two and one-half stories, or 35 feet.



   (D)   Lot coverage. The combined area occupied by all principal and
accessory buildings shall not exceed 30% of the area of the lot.



   (E)   Minimum floor area.



      (1)   A single-family detached dwelling shall have a minimum
livable floor area of 950 square feet and shall be a minimum of 23 feet wide.



      (2)   A single-family attached dwelling shall have a minimum
livable floor area of 650 square feet and shall be a minimum dwelling unit
width of 20 feet wide.



   (F)   Floor area ratio. The floor area ratio shall not exceed 0.50.



   (G)   Dwelling unit density. The maximum number of dwelling units
per acre is 12.446.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12)



§ 153.046  USE REGULATIONS: R-2 RESIDENTIAL TWO-FAMILY DISTRICT.



   (A)   Use by right. No building or structure, or part thereof, shall
be erected, altered or used, or land used, in the whole or in part, for other
than one or more of the following permitted principal uses:



      (1)   Use Unit 1 - areawide uses by right;



      (2)   Use Unit 5 - single-family detached dwelling;



      (3)   Use Unit 6 - single-family attached dwelling
(townhouses, duplexes, zero lot-line, quadruplexes); or



      (4)   Use Unit 8 - manufactured or modular home dwelling.



   (B)   Use by special exception. Special exception uses may be
permitted by the Board of Zoning Appeals following a public hearing, as
indicated below, when such are deemed essential or desirable to the public
convenience or welfare and are in harmony with the various elements or
objectives of the Comprehensive Plan.



      (1)   Use Unit 2 - areawide special exception uses.



      (2)   Use Unit 3 - public protection and utility facilities.



      (3)   Use Unit 4 - community services [including protective
shelters, residential treatment centers and transitional living centers, and
including children’s nursery/day care center for more than four unrelated
children (excluding those who live in the home)].



      (4)   Use Unit 28 - home occupations.



      (5)   Unit 29 - mobile office trailer.



   (C)   Accessory uses permitted. Accessory uses customarily
incidental to a permitted principal use not involving the conduct of any
business, trade, occupation or profession, are permitted as follows:



      (1)   Garage;



      (2)   Carport;



      (3)   Signs:



         (a)   Bulletin board;



         (b)   Identification sign;



         (c)   Real estate sign; and



         (d)   Construction sign;



      (4)   Shelter (storm);



      (5)   Private swimming pool;



      (6)   Child care in home (four or less); and



      (7)   Yard sales.



   (D)   Accessory use conditions.



      (1)   General conditions.



         (a)   An accessory building erected as an integral part
of the principal building shall be made structurally a part thereof, shall
have a common wall therewith, and shall comply with the requirements
applicable to the principal building.



         (b)   A detached accessory building shall not be located
in the front or side yard or encroach upon a minimum building setback line,
but this limitation shall not apply to garages and carports, provided the
minimum required front yard or side yard set back line is observed.



         (c)   Within the rear yard, a detached accessory
building shall be located at least five feet from interior lot line.



      (2)   Signs are permitted as follows in accordance with the
yard requirement of § 153.024(B)(5).



         (a)   One bulletin board may be erected on each street
frontage of any educational, religious, institutional, or similar use in Use
Unit 4 by special exception requiring announcement of its activities. The
bulletin board shall not exceed 12 square feet in surface area, nor 15 feet
in height, and illumination, if any, shall be by constant light.



         (b)   One identification sign may be erected on each
perimeter street frontage of a single-family detached subdivision, townhouse
development, duplex structure or quadruplex structure or permitted
non-residential use. The sign shall not be permitted to exceed 48 square feet
of display surface area. The sign shall not exceed 12 feet in height, and
illumination, if any, shall be by constant light.



         (c)   During the period of construction, a temporary
sign advertising the construction of improvements on the street premises, may
be erected on each perimeter sheet frontage of the development. The sign
shall not exceed 40 square feet in surface area, nor 15 feet in height, and
illumination, if any, shall be by constant light.



         (d)   A temporary real estate sign advertising the sale,
rental, or lease of the premises may be erected on each street frontage of a
lot. The sign shall not exceed four square feet in surface area, or more than
six feet in height and shall not be illuminated in any way.



      (3)   Private swimming pools (and all accessories thereto)
shall meet safety requirements of state and local building codes.



      (4)   Child care - in home.



         (a)   A maximum of four non-related children may be
cared for in the home without state licensing. Five to ten children may be
cared for in the home if the resident obtains a special exception and
maintains continuous state licensing. This number does not include those who
reside in the residence.



         (b)   No person shall be employed other than a member of
the immediate family residing on the premises or a substitute caregiver if
the primary caregiver is unavailable.



         (c)   No signs advertising the child care home shall be
permitted on the lot.



         (d)   No exterior alteration of the dwelling or any
customary accessory structure shall be made which would detract from the
residential character of the structures.



         (e)   State-licensed child-care homes in existence on
the effective date of this chapter, but which would be prohibited by these
requirements, may continue as otherwise regulated herein.



      (5)   Yard sales shall occur only once a month for not more
than three consecutive days.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12; Am. Ord. 13-9, passed 5-16-13)



§ 153.047  BULK AND AREA REQUIREMENTS: R-2 TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   Area. Every lot upon which a structure is hereafter erected
shall front onto a dedicated street or public right-of-way and shall conform
to the following minimum lot area width requirements.



      (1)   Residential use.



         (a)   The tract area shall be a minimum of 7,000 square
feet with a minimum width of 70 feet (where sanitary sewers are available)
for single-family detached and single-family attached uses. For a quadruplex,
(four units with two common walls), the minimum tract area is 14,000 square
feet (where sanitary sewers are available).



         (b)   It is assumed that there is a minimum of are three
townhouses per structure with a 70-foot tract width; thus, the minimum lot
width is 20 feet (with public sewers) for townhouses. Therefore, the interior
of the three townhouses has a minimum lot area of 2,000 square feet and the
exterior townhouse lots are a minimum of 2,500 square feet (where sanitary
sewers are available).



         (c)   It is assumed that there are two units per
structure in a duplex with a 70-foot tract width; thus, the minimum lot width
is 35 feet (with public sewers) with one common wall for duplexes. Therefore,
the minimum lot area is 3,500 square feet per dwelling unit (where sanitary
sewers are available).



         (d)   It is assumed that there are four units per
structure in a quadruplex with a 70-foot tract width; thus, the minimum lot
width is 35 feet (with public sewers) for a quadruplex with two common walls.
Therefore, the minimum lot area is 3,500 square feet per dwelling unit (where
sanitary sewers are available).



         (e)   Where no sanitary sewers are available and
disposal is by soil absorption, the minimum lot area shall be one acre per
single-family detached dwelling, and one acre per duplex structure. The lot
size for townhouse or quadruplex, structures shall not be less than one acre,
and the Posey County Health Department may require a larger lot size. For all
residential uses, the Posey County Health Department may require a larger lot
for any type of residential use.



      (2)   Non-residential use.



         (a)   The lot area shall be a minimum of 10,000 square
feet with aminimum width of 100 feet (where sanitary sewers are available).



         (b)   Where no sanitary sewers are available and
disposal is by soil absorption, the minimum lot area shall be one acre. The
Posey County Health Department may require a larger lot.



   (B)   Yards.



      (1)   Front yard and street side yard.



         (a)   Every lot or tract used for a single-family
detached dwelling or single-family attached dwelling shall have a front yard
(or street side yard) not less than 25 feet in depth. The front yard (or
street side yard) may be more or less than the 25-foot minimum depending on
the predominant front yard (or street side yard) setback of existing
structures along the blockface. If only one lot on the blockface is
developed, the front yard (or street side yard) should be an average of the
25-foot setback and the existing structure setback. When the proposed
structure falls between two developed lots, the front yard setback should be
the average of the two abutting lot structure setbacks.



         (b)   Every lot used for a non-residential use shall
have a front yard (or corner lot side yard) not less than 25 feet in depth.



         (c)   If the there is no dedicated roadway right-of-way,
the front yard (or corner lot side yard) setback from the center of the
roadway is 25 feet plus one-half the right-of-way width of the applicable
roadway functional class as if the roadway had been dedicated (adding 25 feet
for a “local street”, 40 feet for a “collector” or “secondary
arterial”, 60 feet for a “primary arterial”, and 75 feet for a
“divided primary arterial”).



      (2)   Side yard.



         (a)   Every lot used for a single-family detached
dwelling or every tract used for a single-family attached structure shall
have a side yard not less than five feet in depth. The interior lot (or unit)
of a townhouse structure with two common walls has no side yard requirement.
The adjoining lots of a duplex with one common wall or adjoining lots of a
zero lot-line development have no side yard requirement. The adjoining
portion of lots of quadruplex structure with two common walls has no side
year requirements.



         (b)   Every lot used for non-residential use shall have
a side yard of not less than ten feet in depth. However, when a
non-residential use by right or special exception abuts a residential or
office district, the minimum side yard requirement in the R-2 District of ten
feet shall be increased by one foot for each foot of building height
exceeding 18 feet, but the required side yard shall not exceed 25 feet.



      (3)   Rear yard.



         (a)   Every lot used for a residential use used for a
one-family dwelling (attached or detached) shall have a rear yard of not less
than 25 feet in depth. For a quadruplex, the rear yard must be observed for
the tract holding the quadruplex structure, but is not observed for the
adjoining portion of lots where a common wall exists between abutting units.



         (b)   Every lot used for non-residential use shall have
a rear yard of not less than ten feet in depth. However, when a
non-residential use by right or special exception abuts a residential or
office district, the minimum rear yard requirement in the R-2 District of ten
feet shall be increased by one foot for each foot of building height
exceeding 18 feet, but the required rear yard shall not exceed 25 feet.



   (C)   Height. No building or structure, or part thereof, shall be
erected or altered to a height exceeding two and one-half stories or 35 feet.



   (D)   Lot coverage. The combined area occupied by all principal and
accessory buildings shall not exceed 30% of the area of the lot.



   (E)   Minimum floor area.



      (1)   The minimum livable floor area for a single-family
detached dwelling unit shall be 950 square feet and a minimum of 23 feet wide.



      (2)   The minimum livable floor area for a single-family
attached dwelling (townhouse, duplex, zero lot line or quadruplex) shall be
650 square feet per dwelling unit, total of 1,950 square feet for a townhouse
structure (assuming three units), total 1,300 square feet per duplex
structure (two units), total of 650 square feet per zero lot-line unit, and
total of 2,600 square feet per quadruplex structure (four units).



   (F)   Floor area ratio. The floor area ratio shall not exceed 0.50.



   (G)   Dwelling unit density. The maximum number of dwelling units
per acre is 12.446.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12)



§ 153.048  USE REGULATIONS: RM OR R-3 RESIDENTIAL MULTIPLE-FAMILY DISTRICT.



   (A)   Use of right. No building or structure, or part thereof, shall
be erected, altered or used, or land used, in whole or in part, for other
than one or more of the following permitted principle uses:



      (1)   Use Unit 1 - areawide uses by right;



      (2)   Use Unit 5 - single-family detached dwelling;



      (3)   Use Unit 6 -  Single-family attached dwelling
(including townhouses, duplex, zero lot-line, quadruplexes);



      (4)   Use Unit 7 - multiple family dwelling (including
“group quarters” but excluding funeral homes, hotels and motels); or



      (5)   Use Unit 8 - manufactured or modular home dwelling.



   (B)   Use by special exception. Special exception uses may be
permitted by the Board of Zoning Appeals following a public hearing, as
indicated below, when such are deemed essential or desirable to the public
convenience or welfare and are in harmony with the various elements or
objectives of the Comprehensive Plan:



      (1)   Use Unit 2 - areawide special exception uses;



      (2)   Use Unit 3 - public protection and utility facilities;



      (3)   Use Unit 4 - community services [including protective
shelters, residential treatment centers and transitional living centers; and
including children’s nursery/day care center for more than four unrelated
children (excluding those who live in the home)];



      (4)   Use Unit 10 - off-street parking areas;



      (5)   Use Unit 11 - offices and studios; and



      (6)   Use Unit 28 - home occupations.



      (7)   Unit 29 - mobile office trailer.



   (C)   Accessory uses permitted. Accessory uses customarily
incidental to a permitted principal use not involving the conduct of any
business, trade, occupation or profession, are permitted as follows:



      (1)   Management office, private recreation, laundry, and
storage facilities;



      (2)   Garage;



      (3)   Carport;



      (4)   Signs:



         (a)   Bulletin board;



         (b)   Identification sign;



         (c)   Real estate sign; and



         (d)   Construction sign;



      (5)   Shelter (storm);



      (6)   Private swimming pool;



      (7)   Child care in home (four or less); and



      (8)   Yard sales.



   (D)   Accessory use conditions.



      (1)   General conditions.



         (a)   An accessory building erected as an integral part
of the principal building shall be made structurally a part thereof, shall
have a common wall therewith, and shall comply with the requirements
applicable to the principal building.



         (b)   A detached accessory building shall not be located
in the front or side yard or encroach upon a minimum building setback line,
but this limitation shall not apply to garages and carports, provided the
minimum required front yard or side yard set back line is observed.



         (c)   Within the rear yard, a detached accessory
building shall be located at least five feet from interior lot line.



      (2)   Signs are permitted as follows in accordance with the
yard requirement of § 153.024(B)(5).



         (a)   One bulletin board may be erected on each street
frontage of any educational, religious, institutional, or similar use in Use
Unit 4 by special exception or other uses by special exception requiring
announcement of its activities. The bulletin board shall not exceed 12 square
feet in surface area, nor 15 feet in height, and illumination, if any, shall
be by constant light.



         (b)   One identification sign may be erected on each
perimeter street frontage of a single-family detached subdivision, townhouse
development, duplex structure, quadruplex development, multifamily-family
development or permitted non- residential use. The sign shall not be
permitted to exceed 48 square feet of display surface area. The sign shall
not exceed 12 feet in height, and illumination, if any, shall be by constant
light.



         (c)   During the period of construction, a temporary
sign advertising the construction of improvements on the street premises, may
be erected on each perimeter street frontage of the development. The sign
shall not exceed 40 square feet in surface area, nor 15 feet in height, and
illumination, if any, shall be by constant light.



         (d)   A temporary real estate sign advertising the sale,
rental, or lease of the premises may be erected on each street frontage of a
lot. The sign shall not exceed eight square feet in surface area, nor 15 feet
in height, and illumination, if any, shall be by constant light.



      (3)   Private swimming pools (and all accessories thereto)
shall meet safety requirements of state and local building codes.



      (4)   Child care - in home.



         (a)   A maximum of four non-related children may be
cared for in the home without state licensing. Five to ten children may be
cared for in the home if the resident obtains a special exception and
maintains continuous state licensing. This number does not include those who
reside in the residence.



         (b)   No person shall be employed other than a member of
the immediate family residing on the premises or a substitute caregiver if
the primary caregiver is unavailable.



         (c)   No signs advertising the child care home shall be
permitted on the lot.



         (d)   No exterior alteration of the dwelling or any
customary accessory structure shall be made which would detract from the
residential character of the structures.



         (e)   State-licensed child-care homes in existence on
the effective date of this chapter, but which would be prohibited by these
requirements, may continue as otherwise regulated herein.



      (5)   Yard sales shall occur only once a month for not more
than three consecutive days.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12; Am. Ord. 13-9, passed 5-16-13)



§ 153.049  BULK AND AREA REQUIREMENTS: RM OR R-3 RESIDENTIAL MULTIPLE
FAMILY-DISTRICT.



   (A)   Area. Every lot upon which a structure is hereafter erected
shall front onto a dedicated street or public right-of-way and shall conform
to the following minimum lot area and width requirements.



      (1)   Residential use.



         (a)   The tract area shall be a minimum of 7,000 square
feet with a minimum tract width of 70 feet (where sanitary sewers are
available) for single-family detached and single-family attached uses. For a
quadruplex, (four units with two common walls), the minimum tract area is
14,000 square feet (where sanitary sewers are available). For multiple family
uses and “group quarters” uses (Use Unit 7), the minimum tract area is
10,000 square feet with a minimum tract with of 100 feet (where sanitary
sewers are available).



         (b)   It is assumed that there is a minimum of three
townhouses per structure with a 70-foot tract width; thus, the minimum lot
width is 20 feet (with public sewers) for townhouses. Therefore, the interior
of the three townhouses has a minimum lot area of 2,000 square feet and the
exterior townhouse lots are a minimum of 2,500 square feet (where sanitary
sewers are available).



         (c)   It is assumed that there are two units per
structure in a duplex with a 70-foot tract width; thus, the minimum lot width
is 35 feet (with public sewers) with one common wall for duplexes. Therefore,
the minimum lot area is three 3,500 square feet per dwelling unit (where
sanitary sewers are available).



         (d)   It is assumed that there are four units per
structure in a quadruplex with a 70-foot tract width; thus, the minimum lot
width is 20 feet (with public sewers) for a quadruplex with two common walls.
Therefore, the minimum lot area is three 3,500 square feet per dwelling unit
(where sanitary sewers are available).



         (e)   Where no sanitary sewers are available and
disposal is by soil absorption, the minimum lot area shall be one acre per
single-family detached dwelling and one acre per duplex structure. The lot
size for townhouse, quadruplex, multi-family structures and “group
quarters” (Use Unit 7) structures shall not be less than one acre, and the
Posey County Health Department may require a larger lot size. For all
residential uses, the Posey County Health Department may require a larger lot
for any type of residential use.



      (2)   Non-residential use.



         (a)   The lot area shall be at least 10,000 square feet
with a minimum width of 100 feet (where sanitary sewers are available).



         (b)   Where no sanitary sewers are available and
disposal is by soil absorption, minimum lot of the area shall be one acre.
The Posey County Health Department may require a larger lot.



   (B)   Yards.



      (1)   Front yard and street side yard.



         (a)   Every lot or tract for single-family detached
dwelling, townhouse structure, single-family attached structure, multiple
family structure and “group quarters” structure (Use Group 7), shall have
a front yard (or street side yard) not less than 25 feet in depth. The front
yard (or street side yard) may be more or less than the 25-foot minimum
depending on the predominant front yard (or street side yard) setback of
existing structures along the blockface. If only one lot on the blockface is
developed, the front yard (or street side yard) should be an average of the
25-foot setback and the existing structure setback. When the proposed
structure falls between two developed lots, the front yard setback should be
the average of the two abutting lot structure setbacks.



         (b)   Every lot used for a non-residential use shall
have a front yard (or corner lot side yard) hot less than 25 feet in depth.



         (c)   If the there is no dedicated roadway right-of-way,
the front yard (or corner lot side yard) setback from the center of the
roadway is 25 feet plus one-half the right-of-way width of the applicable
roadway functional class as if the roadway had been dedicated (adding 25 feet
for a “local street”, 40 feet for a “collector” or “secondary
arterial”, 60 feet for a “primary arterial”, and 75 feet for a
“divided primary arterial”).



      (2)   Side yard.



         (a)   Every lot used for a single-family detached
dwelling or every tract used for a single-family attached structure shall
have a side yard not less than five feet in depth. The interior lot (or unit)
of a townhouse structure with two common walls has no side yard requirement.
The adjoining lots of a duplex with one common wall or adjoining lots of a
zero lot-line development have no side yard requirement. The adjoining
portion of lots of quadruplex structure with two common walls has no side
year requirements.



         (b)   Every lot used for non-residential use shall have
a side yard of not less than ten feet in depth. However, when a
non-residential use by right or special exception abuts a residential or
office district, the minimum side yard requirement in the R-2, RM or R-3
District of ten feet shall be increased by one foot for each foot of building
height exceeding 18 feet, but the required side yard shall not exceed 25 feet.



      (3)   Rear yard.



         (a)   Every lot or tract for a residential use shall
have a rear yard of not less than 20 feet in depth. For a quadruplex, the
rear yard must be observed for the tract holding the quadruplex structure,
but is not observed for the adjoining portion of lots where a common wall
exists between abutting units.



         (b)   Every lot used for a non-residential use shall
have a rear yard of not less than ten feet in depth. However, when a
non-residential use by right or special exception abuts a residential or
Office district, the minimum rear yard requirement in the RM or R-3 District
of ten feet shall be increased by one foot for each foot of building height
exceeding 18 feet, but the required rear yard shall not exceed 25 feet.



   (C)   Height. No building or structure, or part thereof, shall be
erected or altered to a height exceeding four stories, the four stories not
to exceed 50 feet.



   (D)   Lot coverage. The combined area occupied by all principal and
accessory buildings shall not exceed 50% of the area of the lot.



   (E)   Minimum floor area.



      (1)   Minimum livable floor area for a single-family detached
dwelling unit shall be 950 square feet and a minimum of 23 feet wide.



      (2)   Minimum livable floor area for a single-family attached
(townhouse, duplex, zero lot-line or quadruplex) shall be 650 square feet per
dwelling unit, total of 1,950 square feet for a townhouse structure (assuming
three units), total 1,300 square feet per duplex structure (two units),total
of 650 square feet per zero lot-line unit, and total of 2,600 square feet per
quadruplex structure (four units).



      (3)   Minimum livable floor area for a multiple-family
dwelling shall be 400 square feet for an efficiency apartment, 500 square
feet for a one-bedroom apartment, 600 square feet for a two-bedroom
apartment, and 700 for a three-bedroom apartment.



   (F)   Minimum lot area per dwelling. The minimum lot area per
dwelling unit shall be 1,500 square feet for multiple family uses and other
residential uses in the Use Group 7 containing multiple dwelling units.



   (G)   Floor area ratio. The floor area ratio shall not exceed 0.50.



   (H)   Dwelling unit density. The maximum number of dwelling units
per acre is 29.04.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12)



§ 153.050  SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN REVIEW AND APPROVAL: MULTIFAMILY COMPLEXES
OVER EIGHT UNITS.



   Purpose. By reason of potential adverse effects on public services or
to neighboring land uses, site plan review and approval is required for all
proposed multifamily complexes over eight units. This for the purposes of
assuring proper accessibility, circulation, functional relationships of uses,
and compatibility with adjoining and nearby development. No building permit
shall be issued nor use commenced on a site approved for these uses except in
accordance with a site development plan submitted to and approved by the Area
Plan Commission in accordance with § 153.223.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12)



§ 153.051  USE REGULATIONS: RMH RESIDENTIAL MOBILE HOME DISTRICT.



   (A)   Use of right. No building or structure, or part thereof, shall
be erected, altered or used, or land or water used, in whole or part, for
other than one or more of the following principle permitted uses:



      (1)   Use Unit 1 - areawide uses by right;



      (2)   Use Unit 8 - manufactured or modular dwelling; and/or



      (3)   Use Unit 9 - mobile home dwelling.



   (B)   Use by special exception. Special exception uses may be
permitted by the Board of Zoning Appeals following a public hearing, as
indicated below, when such are deemed essential or desirable to the public
convenience or welfare and are in harmony with the various elements or
objectives of the Comprehensive Plan:



      (1)   Use Unit 2 - areawide special exception uses;



      (2)   Use Unit 3 - public protection and utility facilities;



      (3)   Use Unit 4 - community services [excluding protective
shelters, residential treatment centers and transitional living centers, and
including children’s nursery/day care center for more than four unrelated
children (excluding those who live in the home)];



      (4)   Use Unit 28 - home occupations; and



      (5)   Unit 29 - mobile office trailer.



   (C)   Accessory uses permitted. Accessory uses customarily
incidental to a permitted principal use not involving the conduct of any
business, trade, occupation or profession, are permitted as follows:



      (1)   Management office, laundry and storage facilities;



      (2)   Indoor or outdoor recreation areas;



      (3)   Commercial uses supplying essential goods or services
for the use of park occupants;



      (4)   Garage;



      (5)   Carport;



      (6)   Signs:



         (a)   Bulletin board;



         (b)   Identification sign;



         (c)   Real estate sign; and



         (d)   Construction sign;



      (7)   Shelter (storm);



      (8)   Private swimming pool



      (9)   Child care in home (four or less); and



      (10)   Yard sales.



   (D)   Accessory use conditions.



      (1)   Indoor or outdoor recreation areas not be less than 8%
of the gross site area.



      (2)   Commercial uses supplying essential goods or services
for the use of park occupants, shall be subject to the following restrictions:



         (a)   Such establishments and the parking areas
primarily related to their operations shall not occupy more than 10% of the
total area of the park;



         (b)   Shall be subordinate to the residential use and
character of the park;



         (c)   Shall be located and designed and intended to
serve convenient trade or service needs of persons residing in the park; and



         (d)   Shall present no visible evidence of their
commercial nature to areas outside the park.



      (3)   General conditions.



         (a)   An accessory building erected as an integral part
of the principal building shall be made structurally a part thereof, shall
have a common wall therewith, and shall comply with the requirements
applicable to the principal building.



         (b)   A detached accessory building shall not be located
in the front or side yard or encroach upon a minimum building setback line,
but this limitation shall not apply to garages and carports, provided the
minimum required front yard or side yard set back line is observed.



         (c) Within the rear yard, a detached accessory building
shall be located at least five feet from interior lot line.



      (4)   Signs are permitted as follows in accordance with the
yard requirement of § 153.024(B)(5).



         (a)   One bulletin board may be erected on each street
frontage of any educational, religious, institutional, or similar use in Use
Unit 4 by special exception requiring announcement of its activities. The
bulletin board shall not exceed 12 square feet in surface area, nor 15 feet
in height, and illumination, if any, shall be by constant light.



         (b)   One identification sign may be erected on each
perimeter street frontage of a mobile home park or subdivision. The sign
shall not be permitted to exceed 48 square feet of display surface area. The
sign shall not exceed 12 feet in height, and illumination, if any, shall be
by constant light.



         (c)   During the period of construction, a temporary
sign advertising the construction of improvements on the street premises, may
be erected on each perimeter street frontage of the development. The sign
shall not exceed 40 square feet in surface area, nor 15 feet in height, and
illumination, if any, shall be by constant light.



         (d)   A temporary real estate sign advertising the sale,
rental, or lease of the premises may be erected on each street frontage of a
lot. The sign shall not exceed 12 square feet in surface area (total of all
sides), nor six feet in height, and illumination, if any, shall be by
constant light.



      (5)   Private swimming pools (and all accessories thereto)
shall meet safety requirements of state and local building codes.



      (6)   Child care - in home.



         (a)   A maximum of four non-related children may be
cared for in the home without state licensing. Five to ten children may be
cared for in the home if the resident obtains a special exception and
maintains continuous state licensing. This number does not include those who
reside in the residence.



         (b)   No person shall be employed other than a member of
the immediate family residing on the premises or a substitute caregiver if
the primary caregiver is unavailable.



         (c)   No signs advertising the child care home shall be
permitted on the lot.



         (d)   No exterior alteration of the dwelling or any
customary accessory structure shall be made which would detract from the
residential character of the structures.



         (e)   State-licensed child-care homes in existence on
the effective date of this chapter, but which would be prohibited by these
requirements, may continue as otherwise regulated herein.



      (7)   Yard sales shall occur only once a month for not more
than three consecutive days.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12; Am. Ord. 13-9, passed 5-16-13; Am. Ord. 2016-2A,
passed 1-21-16)



§ 153.052  BULK AND AREA REQUIREMENTS: RMH RESIDENTIAL MOBILE HOME DISTRICT.



   (A)   Area. Every lot upon which a structure is hereafter erected
shall front onto a dedicated street or public right-of-way and shall conform
to the following minimum lot area and width requirements.



      (1)   Residential use.



         (a)   The tract area planned for a mobile home park
shall be a minimum of five gross acres with a minimum tract width of 100
feet, and shall be served by sanitary sewers. Additionally, a subdivision
plat incorporating these requirements and any additional requirements which
result from the subdivision process, must be submitted to and approved by the
Plan Commission and filed of record in the Office of the Posey County
Recorder.



         (b)   The lot area for a mobile home shall be a minimum
of 6,440 square feet with a minimum with a minimum lot width of 56 feet.



         (c)   No mobile home site shall be leased in any mobile
home park for less than 30 days.



      (2)   Non-residential use.



         (a)   The lot area shall be at least 10,000 square feet
with a minimum width of 100 feet (where sanitary sewers are available).



   (B)   Yards.



      (1)   Front yard and street side yard.



         (a)   Every tract of the mobile home park or
manufactured/modular subdivision shall have a front yard (or street side
yard) of 25 feet.



         (b)   Every lot for single-family detached dwellings
shall have a front yard not less than 20 feet in depth and street side yard
not less than ten feet.



         (c)   Every lot used for a non-residential use shall
have a front yard (or street side yard) not less than 25 feet in depth.



         (d)   If there is no dedicated roadway right-of-way, the
front yard (or corner lot side yard) setback of the tract from the center of
the roadway is 25 feet plus one-half the right-of-way width of the applicable
roadway functional class as if the roadway had been dedicated (adding 25 feet
for a “local street”, 40 feet for a “collector” or “secondary
arterial”, 60 feet for a “primary arterial”, and 75 feet for a
“divided primary arterial”).



      (2)   Side yard.



         (a)   Every tract of the mobile home park or
manufactured/modular subdivision shall have a side yard not less than 25 feet.



         (b)   Every lot used for a single-family detached
dwelling shall have a side yard not less than five feet in depth.



         (c)   Every lot used for non-residential use shall have
a side yard of not less than 25 feet.



      (3)   Rear yard.



         (a)   Every tract of the mobile home park or
manufactured/modular subdivision shall have a rear yard of 25 feet.



         (b)   Every lot for single-family detached dwelling
shall have a rear yard not less than ten feet in depth.



         (c)   Unattached buildings of accessory uses may be
located in the rear yard but shall be setback at least five feet from the
rear property line or outside any utility easement, whichever is greater.



         (d)   Every lot used for a non-residential use shall
have a rear yard not less than 25 feet in depth.



   (C)   Height. No building or structure, or part thereof, shall be
erected or altered to a height exceeding one story, not to exceed 35 feet.



   (D)   Lot coverage. The combined area occupied by all principal and
accessory buildings shall not exceed 30% of the area of the lot.



   (E)   Minimum floor area. Minimum livable floor area for a
single-family detached dwelling unit shall be 650 square feet.



   (F)   Minimum livability area per dwelling. The minimum livability
area for recreation areas shall be 300 square feet per dwelling unit. This
shall be provided in common areas of not less than 7,500 square feet, located
so as to be conveniently accessible to the mobile, manufactured or modular
homes served. The area shall be of appropriate shape and terrain for active
recreational uses, but shall not include any portion of an individual mobile,
manufactured or modular home site or lot.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12)



§ 153.053 TRACK DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS: RMH RESIDENTIAL MOBILE HOME DISTRICT.



   (A)   Stages. The tract may be developed in two or more stages,
provided that said stages conform in all respects with the approved mobile
home park design and are developed within the prescribed period of time.



   (B)   Fronting. Each mobile home lot shall front onto a paved
internal street of a minimum for 20 feet with a minimum right-of-way width of
40 feet.



   (C)   Pad and skirting. Each mobile home lot shall be provided with
a pad consisting of either a solid concrete slab or other adequate concrete
supports of a thickness and size adequate to support the maximum anticipated
loads during all seasons. When concrete ribbons are used, the area between he
ribbons shall be filled with a layer of crushed rock or asphalt. Each
concrete pad shall be provided with a minimum of six anchor rings for each
mobile home. Each mobile home unit shall have the undercarriage completely
enclosed by skirting.



   (D)   Paved outdoor living area. Each mobile home lot shall be
provided with a suitable paved outdoor living area of a minimum of 100 square
feet with a minimum width of ten feet. This area shall be covered with a
roof, subject to limitations imposed by the lot coverage maximum of 30%.
Parking areas and driveways shall not be included as part of this outdoor
living space.



   (E)   Landscaping.



      (1)   Lawn and ground cover shall be provided where needed to
prevent erosion of swales, slopes and other areas to obtain useable yards.



      (2)   Lawn and ground cover shall be appropriate for the use
and location.



   (F)   Lot markers. The boundaries of each mobile home lot shall be
permanently and visibly marked on the ground by flush stakes, markers, or
other suitable means approved by the Area Plan Commission. Each mobile home
site shall be numbered.



   (G)   Storage. Each mobile home park shall have a central storage
structure available for use by all residents of the park or individual
storage structures on each mobile home site. The storage structures, whether
individual or central shall be waterproof. Each individual storage structure
shall contain a minimum of 90 cubic feet. Central waterproof structures shall
provide 90 cubic feet of space for each mobile home lot that they serve.



   (H)   Water and sewage. Each mobile home site shall be connected
with a municipal water and sewer system if such systems are adjacent to the
park site or within one hundred fifty 150 feet.



   (I)   Utilities. All interior utility lines, including, but not
limited to, gas, electric, communications, street lighting, and cable
television, shall be placed underground. Individual antennas for televisions
may be installed on each mobile home site but centralized antennas shall be
encouraged.



   (J)   Common walks. Common walks at least three feet in width shall
be provided in locations where pedestrian traffic is concentrated; for
example to the entrance and to the office and other important facilities. No
required walk shall be used as a drainage way.



   (K)   Street.



      (1)   Access to the mobile home park shall be free from a
public street.



      (2)   The number and location of access streets shall be
controlled for traffic safety and protection of surrounding properties.



      (3)   No mobile home site, recreation area, or service
facility shall be designed for direct access to a street outside the
boundaries of the mobile home park.



      (4)   All streets within the mobile home park shall have a
minimum right-of-way width of 40 feet, and shall be surfaced according to the
standards adopted by location jurisdictions.



      (5)   In the event sheets are not dedicated, the mobile home
park owner shall, prior to final approval, provide written certification that
lease or rental agreements contain regulations to prohibit street parking in
such a manner that impedes the movement of emergency vehicles.



   (L)   Grading and drainage. Prior to construction, the drainage plan
shall be submitted to the City (or Town) Engineer and the Street and Sewer
Commissioner for approval or the County Highway Engineer (or County
Commissioners) and the County Surveyor (or County Commissioners) for approval.



      (1)   The mobile home park shall be graded and drained giving
due consideration to the protection of the proposed development from
inundation of flood hazard from an adjacent water course and to provide for
the safe conveyance of storm waters, both those originating outside and
inside the proposed park.



      (2)   This to be carried out through the development of
facilities of sufficient capacity to permit ultimate development of the
upstream tributary areas, and to allow discharge of storm waters originating
within the park and/or conveyed through the park, on to downstream adjacent
lands, to return to predevelopment flow conditions as closely as possible.



      (3)   This does not imply that the developer make extensive or
reasonable improvement of existing inadequate drainage facilities on
adjoining properties other than those necessary for satisfactory operation of
the drainage facilities in the proposed development.



   (M)   Signs. See § 153.051(D)(4).



   (N)   Illumination of parks. All mobile home parks shall be
furnished with lighting units spaced and equipped with luminaries placed at
such heights and at such locations within the park to provide safe movement
of pedestrians and vehicles. Lights shall be located at all entrances and
exits. The illumination shall be by constant light and be so arranged as to
direct the light within the boundaries of the park.



   (O)   Fire protection. The mobile home park shall meet the standards
for adequate fire protection established by the National Fire Protection
Association NFPA No. 501A and all amendments thereto. No open fires shall be
permitted at any time or place within the mobile home park.



   (P)   Trash and refuse storage and collection.



      (1)   All refuse shall be stored in fly-tight, watertight,
rodent proof containers, which shall be located no more than 150 feet from
any mobile home site. Containers shall be provided in sufficient number and
capacity to properly store all refuse. Refuse collection stands shall be so
designed to prevent containers from being tipped, this is to minimize
spillage, container deterioration, and to facilitate cleaning around them.



      (2)   Refuse, when not collected by a municipally sponsored
service, shall be collected at least once a week. Where suitable collection
service is not available from municipal or private agencies, the mobile home
park operator shall dispose of the refuse by incineration or transporting
refuse to a disposal site outside of the park area. Incinerators shall be
authorized and operation if there is no conflict resulting with other
statutes, ordinance or regulation. Authorized refuse incinerators shall be
constructed in accordance with specifications of the Indiana State Health
Department. Incinerators shall be operated only when attended by a person
specifically authorized by the mobile home park owner or operator.



   (Q)   Location of buildings and structures within mobile home parks.
The location of buildings and structures within a mobile home park shall be
subject to the following regulations.



      (1)   Permitted buildings or structures which are not located
upon a mobile home site shall be located at least ten feet from any mobile
home site line.



      (2)   Swimming pools (their related facilities) and all other
recreational areas shall be located at least 100 feet within the boundary of
the mobile home park.



      (3)   One dwelling unit, other than a mobile home, may upon
approval of the Area Plan Commission, be constructed for the owner or
operator to reside.



   (R)   Abandonment and expiration. In the event a mobile home park is
abandoned for a period of one year, or if upon expiration of three years from
the adoption of this chapter the mobile home park has not been substantially
completed, as determined by the Area Plan Commission, the land shall be
rezoned by the Area Plan Commission. Rezoning would return the land in
question to its previous zoning classification and may occur only after
proper zoning application has been filed by the Commission. The Commission
may, upon good cause, grant one extension for a period of one year upon
application and public notice as required by law. Such application for
extension shall be filed with the Commission six months prior to the
expiration of the aforesaid three year period.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12)



§ 153.054  SITE PLAN REVIEW AND APPROVAL OF MOBILE HOME PARKS.



   (A)   Overview. No mobile home shall be located or altered, or land
used, nor shall any use permit be issued thereof, unless and until the RMH
District and necessary mobile home park plans are officially approved by the
Area Plan Commissioner. All mobile homes shall be located and maintained in
full conformity with the mobile home park site plans as approved for each RMH
District. In addition to compliance with the requirements set forth here in
and in conformity with all applicable ordinances and laws of the State of
Indiana, each mobile home park shall also meet the requirements provided by
the Indiana Mobile Home Parks Act of 1955 and all amendments thereto; and the
Indiana State Board of Health Regulations and all amendments thereto.



   (B)   Preliminary site plan. A person desiring the approval of a
mobile home park shall submit to the Area Plan Commission a preliminary site
plan. The preliminary site plan shall be drawn at a scale of not less than
100 feet to one inch on a sheet 24 by 36 inches, except that, when the
drawing at that scale requires more than two sheets, the site plan may then
be drawn at a scale of 200 feet to one inch; and shall contain the following
information.



      (1)   Description:



         (a)   Proposed name of the mobile home park.



         (b)   A legal description showing the park location.



         (c)   Name and address of property owners.



         (d)   Graphic scale, north point and date.



      (2)   Existing conditions:



         (a)   Boundary line of proposed park indicated by solid
heavy line.



         (b)   Location, width and names of all existing streets
or other public ways, railroads and utility rights-of-way, permanent
buildings or structures, sections and municipal corporation lines within or
adjacent to the tract.



         (c)   Location of existing sewers, water mains, culverts
or other underground facilities, indicating pipe sizes and grades, within and
adjoining to the proposed park.



         (d)   Boundary lines of adjacent land, showing adjoining
streets, easements and owner’s name.



         (e)   Existing and proposed topography, contour interval
not to exceed five feet, except where such interval is impractical.



         (f)   In the case of a revised site plan, all
descriptive lines of the original site plan being vacated shall be shown by
dotted lines in their proper position in relation to the new arrangement of
the plan, the new site plan being clearly shown in solid lines so as to avoid
ambiguity and confusion.



      (3)   Proposed conditions.



         (a)   Layout of streets, their names and width and also
the width of alleys, walkways and easements.



            1.   The names of streets shall conform as far as
practicable to names of corresponding streets existing in the vicinity of the
mobile home park.



            2.   The name of a new street, not an extension or
correspondence to an existing street, shall not duplicate or be similar to
that of any existing street in the city, town, or county.



         (b)   The location of all ingress and egress points with
their corresponding dimensions.



         (c)   Layout, dimensions and number of mobile home sites.



         (d)   Parcels of land to be dedicated or reserved for
public use.



         (e)   Building setback lines showing dimensions for the
tract and all lots.



         (f)   Location site of recreational areas, commercial,
and service facilities, parking areas, other structures, driveways,
landscaping, street lights, fire hydrants, signs and sewer, water and storm
drain facilities within the park.



   (C)   Approval of the preliminary site plan.



      (1)   A public hearing shall be held in accordance with the
administrative rules of the Area Plan Commission.



      (2)   Plan Commission action. After the public hearing, the
Area Plan Commission may give its approval to the preliminary site plan. Such
approval shall be governed by the following qualifications:



         (a)   The approval of a preliminary site plan by the
Area Plan Commission indicates the general acceptability of the layout as
submitted;



         (b)   The Area Plan Commission may introduce such
changes or revisions as deemed necessary in the interests and heeds of the
community;



         (c)   Preliminary approval shall be effective for a
maximum period of three months. The Area Plan Commission may, provided good
cause is shown and upon application, grant one extension for a period of 30
days; such application for extension shall be filed with the Plan Commission
ten days prior to the expiration of the aforesaid three month period. If the
final site plan has not been approved within this time, the preliminary site
plan must again be submitted to the Plan Commission for approval;



         (d)   Any person feeling himself aggrieved by any action
of the Area Plan Commission upon any proposed site plan, may apply in writing
to the Area Plan Commission prior to its next meeting for modification of
such action; and



         (e)   If the Area Plan Commission disapproves the site
plan, it shall set forth its reasons in its own records and provide the
applicant with a copy.



   (D)   Approval of final site plan. After the approval of the
preliminary site plan by the Area Plan Commission and the fulfillment of the
requirements of these regulations:



      (1)   The final site plan must be submitted in the form of an
original tracing with waterproof ink on standard tracing cloth or approved
equivalent and three prints thereof, shall be submitted to the Commission.
The final site plan so submitted may include the entire area of the
preliminary site plan as approved or such portions of it which shall provide
consecutive development units. The final site plan shall be prepared at the
same scale as the preliminary site plan as approved or such portions of it
which will provide consecutive development units, and shall contain that
information provided in the preliminary site plan. All final site plans shall
be prepared by a registered engineer or land surveyor duly registered to
practice in the State of Indiana with his seal affixed thereto and must have
certification endorsed thereon, by the City (or Town) Engineer and the City
(or Town) Street and Sewer Commissioner or County Highway Engineer (or County
Commissioners) and the County Surveyor (or County Commissioners) that all
streets, sidewalks, curbs, gutters, sanitary and storm drainage facilities
meet current City, Town or County standards as to such facilities.



      (2)   The final site plan shall be acted upon at the first
meeting of the Area Plan Commission following its submission, provided such
plan has previously received preliminary approval, and provided the final
site plan is submitted to the Director of the Area Plan Commission not less
than 72 hours prior to such meeting. If the Area Plan Commission approves the
final site plan, it shall affix the Commission’s seal upon the site plan
together with the certifying signature of its President and Secretary.



      (3)   If the Area Plan Commission disapproves the final site
plan, it shall set forth its reasons in its own records and provide the
applicant with a copy.



      (4)   Upon approval of the final site plan by the Area Plan
Commission, the applicant shall pay the designated fee by check or money
order payable to the Area Plan Commission.



      (5)   All final site plans shall be recorded in the Office of
the Recorder of Posey County, Indiana. Final site plan approval shall not
become effective for the purposes of recording the site plan or action by the
applicable local legislative body on the acceptance of streets until the
Executive Director executes the site plan release.



   (E)   Site plan release. The Executive Director shall execute the
site plan release upon certification by the appropriate local legislative
body that is has received and has approved one of the following:



      (1)   A certificate submitted by the property owner and
approved by the City (or Town) Engineer and the City/Town Street and Sewer
Commissioner or by the County Highway Engineer (or County Commissioners) and
the County Surveyor (or County Commissioners) stating that all improvements
and installations in the mobile home park required for its approval have been
made or installed in accordance with the requirements of this chapter; or



      (2)   A bond which shall:



         (a)   Run to the local legislative body;



         (b)   Be in the amount to complete the improvements and
installations in compliance with the ordinance;



         (c)   Be with surety satisfactory to the local
legislative body; and



         (d)   Specify the time for completion of the
improvements and installations;



      (3)   Or, in the event the property owner has not received the
certificate from local legislative body that the improvements and
installations to the mobile home park have been made, and in the event the
property owner elects not to furnish the bond required in (b) immediately
preceding this subsection, then the Executive Director of the Commission may
execute the plat release if he finds that all other matters comply with the
general requirements of this chapter, and shall cause to be stamped or
printed on the plat the following:



      “Street, road and other minimum improvements have not been made
and the public is notified that the City, Town or County will not accept the
same for maintenance until owners of the various lots herein improve the same
up to said minimum standards.”



   (F)   Final site plan forms. The following forms shall be used in
the final site plan:



      (1)   Certificate.



 

UNDER AUTHORITY PROVIDED BY ORDINANCE ADOPTED BY THE APPLICABLE LOCAL
LEGISLATIVE BODY IN POSEY COUNTY, INDIANA. THIS SITE PLAN WAS GIVEN FINAL
APPROVAL BY THE AREA PLAN COMMISSION OF POSEY COUNTY AS FOLLOWS:

Approved by the Area Plan Commission of Posey County at a meeting held    
        .

President

Secretary                                             
                                                   
       

Date Plat Release



 



      (2)   Engineer’s certificate.



 

I,                       , hereby certify that I am a professional
engineer/land surveyor licensed in compliance with the laws of the State of
Indiana; that the site plan correctly represents a survey completed by me on
insert date; that all monuments shown thereon actually exist; and that their
location, size, type and material are accurately shown.

SEAL AND

NUMBER                     Signature



 



      (3)   Owner’s certificate (dedication).



 

The undersigned (names), owner(s) of the real estate shown and described
herein, do hereby certify that I (we) have laid off and platted, and do
hereby lay off and plat said real estate in accordance with the site plan.
The mobile home park shall be known and designated as (name). All streets and
alleys shown and not heretofore dedicated, are hereby dedicated to the
public. Front and side yard building setback lines are hereby established as
shown on the plat; between which lines and the property lines of the streets,
there shall be erected or maintained no buildings or structure or mobile
homes. There are strips of land (number) feet in width shown on this plat and
marked easements reserved for the use of public utilities for the
installation of water, sewer mains, poles, ducts, lines and wires, subject at
all times to the proper authorities and to the easement herein reserved. No
structures, buildings or mobile homes are to be erected or maintained upon
said strips of land. (Additional dedications and protective covenants, or
private restrictions, would be inserted here upon the property owner’s
initiative.)

Signature



 



      (4)   Owner’s certificate (no dedication).



 

If said mobile home park site plan contains no dedication to the public,
streets or utilities; or should it be contemplated that the facilities of the
applicable local jurisdiction shall not be used for maintenance of streets
and sidewalks, then such owner shall be required to record with such mobile
home site plan, a covenant that he will maintain said streets and sidewalks
in compliance with the minimum standards as established by the applicable
local jurisdiction, and that should he fail to maintain such standards in any
of these respects, the applicable local jurisdiction may, after ten (10) days
notice to such owners, effect all the necessary repairs or improvements as
required to maintain said minimum standards, and the cost of all these and
said necessary repairs or improvements shall become a lien against said real
estate; and enforced and recorded as mechanic’s liens are enforced and
recorded, against such real estate; and said covenant shall contain the
following provision:

That (name), being the owner(s) of the real estate contained in the above
attached mobile home park site plan do hereby consent that if they or their
assignees, heirs or those holding or owning said land through said owner(s)
fail to maintain the streets and sidewalks according to and in compliance
with the minimum standards for the maintenance of streets and sidewalks
established by the applicable local jurisdiction, that after ten (10) days
notice in writing to the owner of said real estate as shown upon the tax
records in the Treasurer’s Office of Posey County and at the address shown
thereon, then said owner, assignees, heirs and those holding or owning
through said owner(s) hereby authorize the applicable local jurisdiction to
make all necessary repairs and perform all necessary maintenance and further
authorize said applicable local jurisdiction to file a mechanic’s lien
against said real estate and enforce said lien pursuant to applicable laws.



 



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12)



PUD - PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT



Planned Unit Development is an alternative to conventional development where
the particular tract is under common ownership or control, and a detailed
plan (Outline Development Plan) for the development of the tract, as a unit,
is proposed and submitted for public review. A prerequisite for PUD
development is the approval of a supplemental zoning district classification
by the Area Plan Commission and the appropriate local legislative body.



§ 153.061  PURPOSES.



   (A)   Purposes of PUD. The purposes of the Planned Unit Development
are to:



      (1)   Permit innovative land development while maintaining
appropriate limitation of the character and intensity of use and assuring
compatibility with adjoining and nearby properties;



      (2)   Permit flexibility within the development to best
utilize the unique physical features of the particular site;



      (3)   Provide and preserve meaningful open space; and



      (4)   Achieve a continuity of function and design within the
development.



   (B)   Purposes of PUD provisions. The purpose of this subchapter is
to permit such flexibility and provide performance criteria which can result
in planned developments which produce:



      (1)   A maximum choice in the types of environment and living
units available to the public;



      (2)   Open space and recreation areas;



      (3)   A pattern of development which preserves trees,
outstanding topography and geological features and prevents soil erosion;



      (4)   A creative approach to the use of land and related
physical developments;



      (5)   An effective use of land resulting in smaller networks
of utilities and streets, and thereby lower housing costs;



      (6)   An environment of stable character in harmony with
surrounding development; and



      (7)   A more desirable environment than would be possible,
through the strict application of other sections of this chapter.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12)



§ 153.062  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   Planned unit development is permitted on tracts having the district
designation PUD. In every instance, the PUD is to be reviewed as to the
proposed location and character of the uses and the unified treatment of the
development of the tract. The regulations of the general zoning district or
districts remain applicable except as specifically modified pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter. No modification of use or bulk and area
requirement of the applicable general use district or districts shall be
permitted unless a subdivision plat incorporating the provisions and
requirements of this chapter is submitted to and approved by the Area Plan
Commission and filed of record in the office of the Posey County Recorder.
Further, all PUDs shall be served by adequate publically dedicated roadways,
public sanitary sewers and public potable water system, and shall provide
adequate stormwater retention and site stormwater drainage.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12)



§ 153.063  USES PERMITTED.



   (A)   Use of right. No building or structure, or part thereof, shall
be erected, altered or used, or land used, in whole or in part, for other
than one or more of the following permitted principle uses.



      (1)   Use Unit 1 - areawide uses by right.



      (2)   Use Unit 5 - single-family detached dwelling.



      (3)   Use Unit 6 - single-family attached dwelling (including
townhouses, duplex, zero lot-line, quadruplexes).



      (4)   Use Unit 7 - multiple family dwelling (including
“group quarters” but excluding funeral homes, hotels and motels).



      (5)   Use Unit 8 - manufactured or modular home dwelling.



      (6)   Use Unit 11 - offices and studios.



      (7)   Use Unit 12 - entertainment and eating establishments
(excluding drive-in restaurants).



      (8)   Use Unit 13 - convenient goods and services.



      (9)   Use Unit 14 - shopping goods and services.



   (B)   Use by special exception. Special exception uses may be
permitted by the Board of Zoning Appeals following a public hearing, as
indicated below, when such are deemed essential or desirable to the public
convenience or welfare and are in harmony with the various elements or
objectives of the Comprehensive Plan.



      (1)   Use Unit 2 - areawide special exception uses.



      (2)   Use Unit 3 - Public protection and utility facilities.



      (3)   Use Unit 4 - Community services [excluding protective
shelters, residential treatment centers and transitional living centers, but
including children’s nursery/day care center for more than four unrelated
children (excluding those who live in the home)].



      (4)   Use Unit 28 - home occupations.



      (5)   Unit 29 - mobile office trailer.



   (C)   Accessory uses.



      (1)   Accessory uses customarily incidental to the principal
uses within the PUD are permitted as found in the R-3 or RM Residential
Multiple Family District and in the B-2 or CG Commercial General District.



      (2)   Signs. Business signs accessory to principal office or
commercial uses shall not exceed the following limitations, providing the
approving authority may impose such additional restrictions as are necessary
to maximize compatibility with other neighboring uses.



         (a)   General sign use conditions.



            1.   No outdoor advertising (off-premises) signs
shall be permitted.



            2.   No roof, projecting, flashing (does not
include time and temperature signs), animated (unless approved by the Board
of Zoning Appeals through a Special Exception) or revolving signs are
permitted.



            3.   The leading edge of any ground sign shall be
at least one foot from the front or street property line.



            4.   No ground sign shall be located within 150
feet of any residential area, either within or abutting the PUD, unless
separated by an arterial street.



            5.   Any ground sign shall maintain a minimum
separation of 100 feet from any other ground sign.



            6.   Ground signs shall not exceed 25 feet in
height, measured from the mean curb level or the lot upon which it is
erected, except a sign when located behind the building setback line may
exceed 25, but shall not exceed 35 feet in height.



            7.   Only one side of a double-face sign shall be
included in computation of display surface area.



         (b)   The following signs are not included in the
computation of display surface area and are permitted.



            1.   Nameplates, attached to the face of the wall
and not exceeding two square feet in surface area.



            2.   Temporary real estate and construction signs.



            3.   Signs which are not visible from a public
street.



            4.   Signs painted on glass surface of windows or
doors, and pertaining to the business conducted there in.



            5.   Tablets built into the wall of a building or
the structure and used for inscriptions or as memorial tablets or for similar
purposes.



            6.   Signs of warning, directive, or instructional
nature erected by a public utility, franchised transportation company or
governmental agency.



            7.   Legal notices and street numbers.



            8.   Election campaign signs, if erected not more
than 45 prior to an election and removed within seven days following an
election.



            9.   Signs located within a building.



            10.   Signs, not exceeding three square feet of
display surface area, or warning, directive or instructional nature,
including entrance, exit and rest room signs.



            11.   Signs which are attached as labels of a
commodity offered for sale.



         (c)   Commercial PUD signs. Signs located in a
commercial portion of the PUD shall comply with provisions set forth in Use
Unit 21.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12; Am. Ord. 13-9, passed 5-16-13)



§ 153.064  BULK AND AREA REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Intensity of use. It is the intent of this code that the
aggregate intensity of use within the Planned Unit Development remains
substantially the same as that which would be permitted if the area were
developed conventionally. However, within the development, the intensity may
be reallocated.



      (1)   Residential intensity.



         (a)   The residential intensity shall not exceed a
maximum number of dwelling units computed as follows: maximum number of
permitted dwelling units = gross area of property located with a residential
district divided by the minimum land area per dwelling unit permitted in the
applicable use district. Thus, the maximum dwelling unit density is 6.223
dwelling units per acre for any portion of the PUD designated for
single-family detached use, 12.446 dwelling units per acre for any portion of
the PUD designated for single-family attached uses (townhouse, duplex, zero
lot-line or quadruplex), and 29.04 dwelling units per acre for any portion of
the PUD designated for multiple family uses.



         (b)   The minimum land area per dwelling unit, for the
purpose of the above described computation, shall be the least restrictive
minimum land area per dwelling unit permitted in the applicable district for
the particular house type.



      (2)   Nonresidential intensity.



         (a)   The nonresidential intensity shall not exceed a
maximum permitted floor area computed as follows: maximum permitted floor
area = gross area of property located within a nonresidential district
multiplied by the floor area ratio permitted either by right or exception
within the bulk and area requirements or the applicable use district, except
where a floor area ratio is not specified, a floor area of 0.75 shall apply.



         (b)   The intensity of use of a PUD located within two
or more zoning districts of the following differing general classifications -
residential, office, and commercial - shall be separately calculated and
allocated within the PUD development by said general classification.



   (B)   Lot width and lot area minimums. Within a PUD, a minimum lot
size requirement of 800 square feet shall apply to lots utilized for dwelling
purposes. Additionally a minimum lot width requirement of 20 feet shall apply
to lot utilized for dwelling purposes.



   (C)   Livability space.



      (1)   Within a PUD, livability space shall be provided in an
aggregate amount of not less than the amount of livability space required by
the applicable use district for conventional development of a comparable
number of dwelling units. Required livability space may be provided on the
lot containing the dwelling unit or units on which computed, or in common
areas.



      (2)   Common livability space shall be designed and located so
as to be accessible to the dwelling units served. Provisions for the
ownership and maintenance of common livability space that will insure its
continuity and conservation shall be incorporated in the subdivision plat, in
compliance with the provisions of § 153.066(E).



   (D)   Building height and yards. Within a PUD, the Area Plan
Commission shall prescribe building height limitation and minimum yards,
which shall be incorporated within the subdivision plat in compliance with
the provisions of § 153.066(B).



   (E)   Setbacks for abutting public streets.



      (1)   Within a PUD, building setbacks from abutting public
streets for residential use, shall not be less than as prescribed for an RS
or R-1 District.



      (2)   Within a PUD, building setbacks from abutting public
streets for nonresidential uses shall not be less than as prescribed for an O
or O-R District.



   (F)   Perimeter requirements for PUDs. The Area Plan Commission
shall prescribe perimeter requirements for screening, landscaping, and
setbacks, as are necessary to assure compatibility with adjoining and
proximate properties. These requirements shall be incorporated within the
subdivision plat in compliance with the provisions of § 153.066(B) and (E).



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12)



§ 153.065  OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING.



   Off-street parking and loading spaces shall be provided as specified in
the applicable use unit and in conformance with the requirements of §§
153.181 through 153.185, Off-Street Parking and Loading. Required spaces may
be provided on the lot containing the uses for which it is intended to serve
or in common areas. Common parking area shall be designed and located so as
to be accessible to the uses it is intended to serve. Provisions for the
ownership and maintenance of common parking space as will insure its
continuity and conservation shall be incorporated in the subdivision plat in
compliance with the provisions of § 153.167(E).



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12)



§ 153.066  ADMINISTRATION.



   (A)   General.



      (1)   Any person, corporation, partnership, association, or
combination thereof, owning or possessing a property right or interest in or
to a tract of land may make application for the district designation PUD.
Such application shall be accompanied by an outline development plan
processed in the manner set forth in divisions (B), (C), and (D) of this
section.



      (2)   An application for the district designation PUD may be
processed simultaneously with an application for an amendment to the general
zoning district and made contingent upon approval of the application.



   (B)   Application and outline development plan. An application for a
planned unit development shall be filed with the Area Plan Commission. The
application shall be accompanied by payment of fee, to be paid in accordance
with the established fee schedule. Such fee shall not include advertising and
sign costs which shall be billed to the applicant. The application shall be
in such format and content as the Area Plan Commission may be resolution
establish. Three copies of an outline development plan shall accompany the
filing of the application. The outline development plan shall consist of maps
and text which contain:



      (1)   A site plan reflecting:



         (a)   Proposed location of uses, including off-street
parking, open spaces and public uses;



         (b)   Development standards for location, height,
setback and size of buildings and other structures;



         (c)   Public and private vehicular and pedestrian
circulation;



         (d)   The approximate intensity of residential uses
expressed in number of dwelling units and the approximate intensity of
nonresidential uses expressed in floor area, allocated to each identifiable
segment of the PUD;



         (e)   Proposed screening and landscaping;



         (f)   Proposed location, height, and size of any ground
signs; and



         (g)   Sufficient surrounding area to demonstrate the
relationship of the PUD to adjoining uses, both existing and proposed;



      (2)   Existing topographic character of the land including
identification of floodplain areas, tree areas, slope analysis and soil
analysis;



      (3)   An explanation of the character of the PUD;



      (4)   The expected schedule of development; and



      (5)   The Area Plan Commission may require elevations and
perspective drawings of the proposed buildings as part of required detailed
site plan review.



   (C)   Public hearing and Area Plan Commission action.



      (1)   The Area Plan Commission, upon the filing of an
application for the PUD district designation shall set the matter for public
hearing and give proper notice. Within two months after the filing of an
application, the Area Plan Commission shall conduct the public hearing and
shall determine:



         (a)   Whether the PUD is consistent with the
Comprehensive Plan;



         (b)   Whether the PUD is in harmony with the existing
and expected development of surrounding areas;



         (c)   Whether the PUD is a unified treatment of the
development possibilities of the project site; and



         (d)   Whether the PUD is consistent with the stated
purposes and standards of this chapter.



      (2)   The Area Plan Commission shall forward its
recommendation, the application, and the outline development plan to the
applicable local legislative body for further hearing as provided in division
(D) of this section.



   (D)   Local legislative body action. Upon receipt of the
application, outline development plan, and Area Plan Commission
recommendation, the local legislative shall hold a hearing, review the
outline development plan and approve, disapprove, modify or return the
outline development plan to the Area Plan Commission for further
consideration. Upon approval, the zoning map shall be amended to reflect the
PUD designation, and the applicant shall be authorized to process a
subdivision plat incorporating the provisions of the outline development plan.



   (E)   Planned unit development subdivision plat. A planned unit
development subdivision plat shall be filed with the Area Plan Commission and
shall be processed in accordance with the subdivision regulations. In
addition to the requirements of the subdivision regulations the plat shall
include:



      (1)   Details as to the location of uses and street
arrangement;



      (2)   Provisions for the ownership and maintenance of the
common open space that will reasonably insure its continuity and
conservation. Open space may be dedicated to a private association or to the
public, provided that a dedication to the public shall not be accepted
without the approval of the applicable local legislative body; and



      (3)   Such covenants as will reasonably insure the continued
compliance with the approved outline development plan. The Area Plan
Commission may require covenants which provide for detailed site plan review
and approval of individual lots by the Commission prior to the issuance of
any building permits within the PUD. In order that the public interest may be
protected, the local legislative body shall be made beneficiary of covenants
pertaining to such matters as location of uses, height of structures,
setbacks, screening, and access. Such covenants shall provide that the local
legislative body may enforce compliance therewith, and shall further provide
that amendment to such covenants shall require the approval of the Area Plan
Commission and the filing of record of a written amendment to the covenants,
endorsed by the Area Plan Commission.



   (F)   Issuance of building permits. After the filing of an approved
PUD subdivision plat and notice thereof to the Building Inspector, no
building permits shall be issued on lands within the PUD except in accordance
with the approved plat and outline development plan. A building permit for a
free-standing or separate commercial structure within a PUD containing no
commercial zoning shall not be issued until building permits have been issued
for a least one-half of the number of dwelling units on which the
authorization of the commercial use is based.



   (G)   Amendments. Minor changes in the PUD may be authorized upon
approval by the Area Plan Commission which may direct the processing of an
amended subdivision plat incorporating such changes. This provided that
substantial compliance is maintained with the outline development plan and
the purposes and standard of the PUD provisions as approved. Changes which
would represent a significant departure from the outline development plan
shall require compliance with the notice and procedural requirements of an
original planned unit development.



   (H)   Abandonment. Abandonment of planned unit development shall
require approval of the affected local legislative body, upon a
recommendation by the Area Plan Commission. This shall be based on an
application for amendment to the zoning map repealing the PUD designation.
Upon final action authorizing the abandonment of the planned unit
development, no building permit shall be issued except in accordance with the
restriction and limitation of the previous zoning district or districts
applicable to the affected property.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12)



O OR R-O RESIDENTIAL-OFFICE DISTRICT



§ 153.071  PURPOSE.



   The Residential-Office District is intended as a transition zoning
district between the residential districts and the business/commercial
districts. The district is often located where pre-existing residential uses
are transitioning to business uses. Thus, the Residential-Office District
accommodates the full range of residential uses while permitting designs to
preserve and promote the development of efficient office facilities and to
maximize compatibility with other land uses by:



   (A)   Establishing bulk and area controls;



   (B)   Requiring off-street parking;



   (C)   Controlling the number, area, location, and types of signs; and



   (D)   Designed to provide area for offices, together with certain
community facilities normally compatible with primary office uses.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12)



§ 153.072  USE REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Uses by right. The principal uses permitted in the office
district are designated by use unit. The use units are groupings of
individual uses and are fully described, including their respective
off-street parking, loading, and screening requirements and other use
conditions in §§ 153.141 to 153.174. Except for parking lots, all
activities including sales, displays, preparation and storage shall be
conducted entirely within a completely enclosed building. No building or
structure, or part thereof, shall be erected, altered or used, or land used,
in whole or in part, for other than one or more of the following permitted
principal uses.



      (1)   Use Unit 1 - areawide uses by right.



      (2)   Use Unit 5 - single-family detached dwelling.



      (3)   Use Unit 6 - single-family attached dwelling (including
townhouses, duplex, zero lot-line, quadruplexes).



      (4)   Use Unit 7 - multiple family dwelling excluding “group
quarters” uses (permitted by special exception) [excluding funeral homes,
hotels and motels].



      (5)   Use Unit 8 - manufactured or modular home dwelling.



      (6)   Use Unit 10 - off-street parking areas.



      (7)   Use Unit 11 - offices and studios.



      (8)   Part Use Unit 12 - entertainment and eating
establishments excluding entertainment and drinking establishments (excluding
drive-in restaurants).



      (9)   Part Use Unit 13 - convenience goods and services -
limited to barber and beauty shops.



      (10)   Use Unit 28 - home occupations.



      (11)   Other uses. other uses or enterprises similar to the
above, which in the judgment of the Area Plan Commission Board or Board of
Zoning Appeals are similar to and not more objectionable to the general
welfare, than the uses listed. Other uses so determined shall be regarded as
listed uses. In no instance, however, shall the Area Plan Commission Board or
Board of Zoning Appeals determine nor the regulations be so interpreted, that
a use shall be permitted in a district where such use is specifically listed
as first permissible in a less restricted district.



   (B)   Use by special exception. Special exception uses, as indicated
below, may be permitted by the Board of Zoning Appeals following a public
hearing when such are deemed essential or desirable to the public convenience
or welfare and are in harmony with the various elements or objectives of the
Comprehensive Plan.



      (1)   Use Unit 2 - areawide special exception uses.



      (2)   Use Unit 3 - public protection and utility facilities.



      (3)   Use Unit 4 - community services [including protective
shelters, residential treatment centers and transitional living centers; and
including children’s nursery/day care center for more than four unrelated
children (excluding those who live in the home)].



      (4)   Use Unit 13 - convenient goods and services.



      (5)   Use Unit 14 - shopping goods and services.



      (6)   Unit 29 - mobile office trailer.



   (C)   Special exception use requirements. The special exception
uses, permitted in the Office or Residential-Office District, as designated
above, are subject to the minimum requirements set out below and such
additional safeguards and conditions as may be imposed by the Board of Zoning
Appeals.



      (1)   Except for parking lots, all activities including sales,
displays, preparation and storage shall be conducted entirely with a
completely enclosed building unless expressly permitted by the Board of
Zoning Appeals in granting the special exception.



      (2)   The accessory use provisions of the Office District
pertaining to signs apply to signs which are accessory to uses permitted by
special exception; provided that each sign permitted shall primarily identify
the principal office building, permitted accessory convenience goods and
services shall be secondary.



      (3)   Multifamily use in the Office District shall comply with
the bulk and area requirements of the RM/R-3District.



      (4)   Convenience goods and services in the Office District
shall comply with the following requirements:



         (a)   No accessory convenience goods and services shall
be permitted unless the principal building contains a minimum of 5,000 square
feet of floor space;



         (b)   The permitted accessory convenience goods and
services listed below shall be located entirely within the principal building
and shall have its pedestrian entrance and exit through the principal
building;



         (c)   Permitted accessory convenience goods and services
are limited to the following uses and use groupings:



            1.   Bookstore;



            2.   Gift, novelty, and florist shops;



            3.   Newsstand;



            4.   Medical, dental, optical, and orthopedic
supplies; and



            5.   Tobacco, candy, and nut store; and



         (d)   The permitted accessory convenient goods and
services listed above shall not occupy more than 15% of the gross floor area
of the building in which located.



      (5)   Within the Office District, the principal office
structure may include an eating place (5% maximum), and accessory goods and
services (15% maximum), or a total of 20% maximum of the total gross floor
area devoted to the uses. Provided the eating places and accessory convenient
goods and services do not exceed the maximum allowable for each individual
use.



      (6)   Except as provided in § 153.022(F) for public
protection and utility facilities, a minimum frontage of 100 feet are the
requirements of the special exception uses unless the use unit requirements
are more restrictive, in which case the more restrictive shall apply.



      (7)   Barber and beauty shops may be permitted as either
accessory or principal uses in an office district by special exception.



      (8)   Special housing facilities in Use Unit 4 (community
services), Use Unit 5 (single-family detached) and Use Unit 7 (multifamily)
shall meet applicable use conditions and off-street parking and loading
requirements as provided in §§ 153.181 through 153.185, in addition, to
those required within the use unit itself.



   (D)   Accessory uses permitted. Those accessory uses which are
customarily incidental to a principal permitted as follows.



      (1)   Management office, private recreation, laundry, and
storage facilities for Use Unit 7 (multiple family dwelling).



      (2)   Garage.



      (3)   Carport.



      (4)   Signs:



         (a) Business signs in Use Unit 21 (see Use Unit 21 for
permitted business signs);



         (b)   Bulletin board;



         (c)   Identification sign;



         (d)   Real estate sign; and



         (e)   Construction sign.



      (5)   Shelter (storm).



      (6)   Private swimming pool.



      (7)   Child care in home (four or less).



      (8)   Yard sales.



   (E)   Accessory use conditions.



      (1)   General conditions.



         (a)   An accessory building erected as an integral part
of the principal building shall be made structurally a part thereof shall
have a common wall therewith, and shall comply with the requirements
applicable to the principal building.



         (b)   A detached accessory building shall not be located
in the front or side yard or encroach upon a minimum building setback line,
but this limitation shall not apply to garages and carports, provided the
minimum required front yard or side yard set back line is observed.



         (c)   Within the rear yard, a detached accessory
building shall be located at least five feet from interior lot line.



      (2)   Signs are permitted as follows in accordance with the
yard requirement of § 153.024(B)(5).



         (a)   One bulletin board may be erected on each street
frontage of any educational, religious, institutional, or similar use in Use
Unit 4 by special exception or other uses by special exception requiring
announcement of its activities. The bulletin board shall not exceed 12 square
feet in surface area, nor 15 feet in height, and illumination, if any, shall
be by constant light.



         (b)   One identification sign may be erected on each
perimeter street frontage of a single-family detached subdivision, townhouse
development, duplex structure, quadruplex development, multifamily-family
development or permitted non- residential use. The sign shall not be
permitted to exceed 48 square feet of display surface area. The sign shall
not exceed 12 feet in height, and illumination, if any, shall be by constant
light.



         (c)   During the period of construction, a temporary
sign advertising the construction of improvements on the street premises, may
be erected on each perimeter street frontage of the development. The sign
shall not exceed 40 square feet in surface area, nor 15 feet in height, and
illumination, if any, shall be by constant light.



         (d)   A temporary real estate sign advertising the sale,
rental, or lease of the premises may be erected on each street frontage of a
lot. The sign shall not exceed eight square feet in surface area, nor 15 feet
in height, and illumination, if any, shall be by constant light.



      (3)   Private swimming pools (and all accessories thereto)
shall meet safety requirements of state and local building codes.



      (4)   Child care - in home.



         (a)   A maximum of four non-related children may be
cared for in the home without state licensing. Five to ten children may be
cared for in the home if the resident obtains a special exception and
maintains continuous state licensing. This number does not include those who
reside in the residence.



         (b)   No person shall be employed other than a member of
the immediate family residing on the premises or a substitute caregiver if
the primary caregiver is unavailable.



         (c)   No signs advertising the child care home shall be
permitted on the lot.



         (d)   No exterior alteration of the dwelling or any
customary accessory structure shall be made which would detract from the
residential character of the structures.



         (e)   State-licensed child-care homes in existence on
the effective date of this chapter, but which would be prohibited by these
requirements, may continue as otherwise regulated herein.



      (5)   Yard sales shall occur only once a month for not more
than three consecutive days.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12; Am. Ord. 13-9, passed 5-16-13)



§ 153.073  BULK AND AREA REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Area. Every lot upon which a structure is hereafter erected
shall front onto a dedicated street or public right-of-way and shall conform
to the following minimum lot area and width requirements.



      (1)   Residential use.



         (a)   The tract area shall be a minimum of 7,000 square
feet with a minimum tract width of 70 feet (where sanitary sewers are
available) for single-family detached and single-family attached uses. For a
quadruplex, (four units with two common walls), the minimum tract area is
14,000 square feet. For multiple family uses and “group quarters” uses
(Use Unit 7), the minimum tract area is 10,000 square feet with a minimum
tract width of 100 feet.



         (b)   It is assumed that there is a minimum of three
townhouses per structure with a 70-foot tract width; thus, the minimum lot
width is 20 feet (with public sewers) for townhouses. Therefore, the interior
lot of the three townhouses has a minimum lot area of 2,000 square feet and
the exterior townhouse lots are a minimum of 2,500 square feet.



         (c)   It is assumed that there are two units per
structure in a duplex with a 70-foot tract width; thus, the minimum lot width
is 35 feet (with public sewers) with one common wall for duplexes. Therefore,
the minimum lot area is 3,500 square feet per dwelling unit (where sanitary
sewers are available).



         (d)   It is assumed that there are four units per
structure in a quadruplex with a 70-foot tract width; thus, the minimum lot
width is 20 feet (with public sewers) for a quadruplex with two common walls.
Therefore, the minimum lot area is 3,500 square feet per dwelling unit (where
sanitary sewers are available).



         (e)   Where no sanitary sewers are available and
disposal is by soil absorption, the minimum lot area shall be one acre per
single-family detached dwelling and one acre per duplex structure. The lot
size for townhouse, quadruplex, multi-family structures and “group
quarters” (Use Unit 7) structures shall not be less than one acre, and the
Posey County Health Department may require a larger lot size. For all
residential uses, the Posey County Health Department may require a larger lot
for any type of residential use.



      (2)   Non-residential use.



         (a)   The lot area shall be at least 10,000 square feet
with a minimum width of 100 feet.



         (b)   Where no sanitary sewers are available and
disposal is by soil absorption, minimum lot of the area shall be one acre.
The Posey County Health Department may require a larger lot.



   (B)   Yards.



      (1)   Front yard and street side yard.



         (a)   Every lot or tract for single-family detached
dwelling, townhouse structure, single-family attached structure, multiple
family structure and “group quarters” structure (Use Unit 7), shall have
a front yard (or street side yard) not less than 25 feet in depth. The front
yard (or street side yard) may be more or less than the 25-foot minimum
depending on the predominant front yard (or street side yard) setback of
existing structures along the blockface. If only one lot on the blockface is
developed, the front yard (or street side yard) should be an average of the
25-foot setback and the existing structure setback. When the proposed
structure falls between two developed lots, the front yard setback should be
the average of the two abutting lot structure setbacks.



         (b)   Every lot used for a non-residential use shall
have a front yard (or corner lot side yard) not less than 25 feet in depth.



         (c)   If the there is no dedicated roadway right-of-way,
the front yard (or corner lot side yard) setback from the center of the
roadway is 25 feet plus one-half the right-of-way width of the applicable
roadway functional class as if the roadway had been dedicated (adding 25 feet
for a “local street”, 40 feet for a “collector” or “secondary
arterial”, 60 feet for a “primary arterial”, and 75 feet for a
“divided primary arterial”).



      (2)   Side yard.



         (a)   Every lot used for a single-family detached
dwelling or every tract used for a single-family attached structure shall
have a side yard not less than five feet in depth. The interior lot (or unit)
of a townhouse structure with two common walls has no side yard requirement.
The adjoining lots of a duplex with one common wall or adjoining lots of a
zero lot-line development have no side yard requirement. The adjoining
portion of lots of quadruplex structure with two common walls has no side
year requirements.



         (b)   Every lot used for non-residential use shall have
a side yard of not less than ten feet in depth. However, when a
non-residential use by right or special exception abuts a residential or
office district, the minimum side yard requirement in the office district of
ten feet shall be increased by one foot for each foot of building height
exceeding 18 feet, but the required side yard shall not exceed 25 feet.



      (3)   Rear yard.



         (a)   Every lot or tract for a residential use shall
have a rear yard of not less than 20 feet in depth. For a quadruplex, the
rear yard must be observed for the tract holding the quadruplex structure,
but is not observed for the adjoining portion of lots where a common wall
exists between abutting units.



         (b)   Every lot used for a non-residential use shall
have a rear yard of not less than ten feet in depth. However, when a
non-residential use by right or special exception abuts a residential or
office district, the minimum rear yard requirement in the office district of
ten feet shall be increased by one foot for each foot of building height
exceeding 18 feet, but the required rear yard shall not exceed 25 feet.



   (C)   Height. No building or structure, or part thereof, shall be
erected or altered to a height exceeding 2.5 stories, not to exceed 35 feet.



   (D)   Lot coverage. The combined area occupied by all principal and
accessory buildings shall not exceed 50% of the area of the lot.



   (E)   Minimum floor area.



      (1)   Minimum livable floor area for a single-family detached
dwelling unit shall be 950 square feet and a minimum of 23 feet wide.



      (2)   Minimum livable floor area for a single-family attached
(townhouse, duplex, zero lot-line or quadruplex) shall be 650 square feet per
dwelling unit, total of 1,950 square feet for a townhouse structure (assuming
three units) total 1,300 square feet per duplex structure (two units) total
of 650 square feet per zero lot-line unit, and total of 2,600 square feet per
quadruplex structure (four units).



      (3)   Minimum livable floor area for a multiple-family
dwelling shall be 400 square feet for an efficiency apartment, 500 square
feet for a one-bedroom apartment, 600 square feet for a two-bedroom
apartment, and 700 for a three-bedroom apartment.



   (F)   Minimum lot area per dwelling unit. The minimum lot area per
dwelling unit shall be 1,500 square feet for multiple family uses and other
residential uses in the Use Group 7 containing multiple dwelling units.



   (G)   Floor area ratio. The floor area ratio shall not exceed 0.50.



   (H)   Dwelling unit density. The maximum number of dwelling units
per acre is 29.04.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12)



§ 153.074  SITE PLAN REVIEW.



   By reason of potential adverse effects on public services or to
neighboring land uses, site plan review and approval is required for all
office developments for the purpose of assuring proper accessibility,
circulation, functional relationships of uses and compatibility with
adjoining and nearby development. No building permit shall be issued nor use
commenced within this development except in accordance with an approved site
plan by the Area Plan Commission Executive Director. See § 153.223 which
also applies to the office site plan review process.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12)



BUSINESS OR COMMERCIAL DISTRICT PROVISIONS



§ 153.081  PURPOSES.



   (A)   General purposes. The commercial districts are designed to:



      (1)   Achieve the commercial objectives of the Comprehensive
Plan;



      (2)   Meet the needs for commercial goods and services for
neighborhoods, communities and the region;



      (3)   Preserve and promote the development of efficient
commercial facilities and encourage a compatible relationship between
commercial facilities and other land uses and thoroughfares by:



         (a)   Differentiating the types and purposes of
commercial activities;



         (b)   Establishing bulk and area controls;



         (c)   Requiring off-street loading and parking
facilities;



         (d)   Controlling the number, area, location, and types
of signs; and



         (e)   Protecting the character of commercial districts
and their peculiar suitability for commercial uses;



      (4)   Permit the compatible mixture of residential, office and
commercial uses facilitating community livability by reducing the distances
between uses to reduce dependence on the automobile; and



      (5)   Require site development plan approval for all multiple
family uses of eight or more uses, all office uses and all commercial uses.
(See § 153.223.)



   (B)   Purposes of the B-1 Neighborhood Commercial District. The B-l
or NC District is designed to accommodate convenience goods arid services in
proximity to residential areas.



   (C)   Purposes of the B-1A or CS Shopping District. The CS District
is designed to accommodate convenience, neighborhood, shopping areas
providing a wide range of retail and personal service uses.



   (D)   Purposes of the B-2 or CG General Commercial District. The CG
District is designed to:



      (1)   Accommodate existing development of mixed commercial
uses which are well established, while providing a degree of protection to
adjacent residential areas; and



      (2)   Accommodate auto-oriented uses.



   (E)   Purposes of the CH Commercial High Intensity District. The CH
District is designed to:



      (1)   Accommodate high intensity commercial and related uses;
and



      (2)   Accommodate the grouping of certain commercial uses,
wholesaling and warehousing uses, and restricted light industrial uses (by
special exception) which are compatible with one another.



   (F)   Purposes of the CBD Central Business District.



      (1)   The CBD District is designed to:



         (a)   Accommodate and encourage the most desirable, most
productive, most intense use of land, without regard to the regulation of
building height floor area, land coverage or parking space requirements
within the central core area of the city; and



         (b)   Preserve and promote the public and private
investment in the existing central core area.



      (2)   CBD District contained within this defined area:



         (a)   The Ohio River to the South;



         (b)   Fifth Street to the North;



         (c)   College Avenue to the West; and



         (d)   Walnut Street to the East.



      (3)   Before additional area, contiguous to that area
presently designated CBD, is considered for inclusion within the CBD District
consideration should be given to the appropriateness of the B-2 or CG,
Commercial General classification. This alternate designation is intended to
create a less congested district than that of the CBD.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12)



§ 153.082  USE REGULATIONS: B-1 OR NC NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   Use by right. The principal uses permitted in the neighborhood
commercial districts are designed by use units. These units are groupings of
individual uses and are fully described, including their respective
off-street parking, loading, and screening requirements and other use
conditions in §§ 153.141 to 153.174. No building or structure, or part
thereof, shall be erected, altered, or used, or land used in whole or in part
for other than one or more of the following specified permitted principal
uses in accordance with the limitations herein-after specified.



      (1)   Use Unit 1 - areawide uses by right.



      (2)   Use Unit 5 - single-family detached dwelling.



      (3)   Use Unit 6 - single-family attached dwelling (including
townhouses, duplex, zero lot-line, quadruplexes).



      (4)   Use Unit 7 - multiple family dwelling (including
“group quarters” uses, but excluding funeral homes, hotels and motels).



      (5)   Use Unit 8 - manufactured or modular home dwelling.



      (6)   Use Unit 10 - off-street parking areas.



      (7)   Use Unit 11 - offices and studios including
photographer’s studio.



      (8)   Part Use Unit 12 - entertainment and eating
establishments: limited to delicatessen.



      (9)   Part Use Unit 13 - convenience goods and services:
limited to confectionery or ice cream; drugs; bakery; personal service shops.



      (10)   Part Use Unit 14 - shopping goods and services: limited
to book and stationery; newsstand or sundry; florists; fruit or vegetables;
gifts; home appliances; jewelry; package liquor; meat market; music;
photographic supplies; shoe; clothing; variety; paint; art supplies; custom
dressing, tailor or millinery shops; radio, television and phonograph sales
and service; bicycle sales and service.



      (11)   Part Use Unit 15 - other trades and services: limited
to furniture; funeral home; small engine repair sales and service up to 18
HP; chain saw sales and service; power tools sales and service (other uses in
Unit 15 and sexually oriented uses are prohibited).



      (12)   Part Use Unit 21 - business signs and outdoor
advertising - excluding outdoor advertising (off-premises) signs and retail
uses.



      (13)   Use Unit 28 - home occupations.



      (14)   Other uses. Other uses or enterprises similar to the
above, which in the judgment of the Area Plan Commission Board or Board of
Zoning Appeals are similar to and not more objectionable to the general
welfare, than the uses listed. Other uses so determined shall be regarded as
listed uses. In no instance, however, shall the Area Plan Commission Board or
Board of Zoning Appeals determine nor the regulations be so interpreted, that
a use shall be permitted in a district where such use is specifically listed
as first permissible in a less restricted district or where such use is
permitted by special exception in this district.



      (15)   Use unit 29 - mobile office trailer, so long as
property does not abut a residential district.



   (B)   Use by special exception. Special exception uses may be
permitted by the Board of Zoning Appeals following a public hearing, as
indicated below, when such are deemed essential or desirable to the public
convenience or welfare and are in harmony with the various elements or
objectives of the Comprehensive Plan.



      (1)   Use Unit 2 - areawide special exception uses.



      (2)   Use Unit 3 - public protection and utility facilities.



      (3)   Use Unit 4 - Community services [including protective
shelters, residential treatment centers and transitional living centers; and
including children’s nursery/day care center for more than four unrelated
children (excluding those who live in the home)].



      (4)   Use Unit 10 - off-street parking areas.



      (5)   Part Use Unit 14 - shopping goods and services: limited
to self-service launderettes, self-service dry cleaning establishments.



      (6)   Use Unit 16 - gasoline service stations.



      (7)   Use unit 29 - mobile office trailer when property abuts
a residential district.



   (C)   Limitations on uses by right and special exception.



      (1)   Except for accessory parking lots and service stations,
all activities including sales, display, preparations and storage shall be
conducted entirely within a completely enclosed building. (Except those that
may be permitted by the Board of Zoning Appeals in granting a special
exception.).



      (2)   All products shall be sold as retail on the premises.



      (3)   All on-site lighting shall be directed toward the
structures on-site and away from any neighboring residential districts.
Areawide loudspeakers or paging systems will not be allowed.



   (D)   Accessory uses permitted. Those accessory uses which are
customarily incidental to a principal permitted use are as follows.



      (1)   Management office, private recreation, laundry, and
storage facilities for Use Unit 7 (multiple family dwelling).



      (2)   Garage.



      (3)   Carport.



      (4)   Signs:



         (a)   Business signs in Use Unit 21 (see Use Unit 21 for
permitted business signs);



         (b)   Bulletin board;



         (c)   Identification sign;



         (d)   Real estate sign; and



         (e)   Construction sign.



      (5)   Shelter (storm).



      (6)   Private swimming pool.



      (7)   Child care in home (four or less).



      (8)   Yard sales on residential lots.



   (E)   Accessory use conditions.



      (1)   General conditions.



         (a)   An accessory building erected as an integral part
of the principal building shall be made structurally a part thereof, shall
have a common wall therewith, and shall comply with the requirements
applicable to the principal building.



         (b)   A detached accessory building shall not be located
in the front or side yard or encroach upon a minimum building setback line,
but this limitation shall not apply to garages and carports, provided the
minimum required front yard or side yard set back line is observed.



         (c)   Within the rear yard, a detached accessory
building shall be located at least five feet from interior lot line.



      (2)   Signs. Signs for residential uses and community services
of Use Unit 4 are permitted as follows in accordance with the yard
requirement of § 153.024(B)(5). Office and business signs are permitted in
accordance with Use Unit 21 (excluding outdoor advertising or off-premises
signs).



         (a)   One bulletin board may be erected on each street
frontage of any educational, religious, institutional, or similar use in Use
Unit 4 by special exception or other uses by special exception requiring
announcement of its activities. The bulletin board shall not exceed 12 square
feet in surface area, nor 15 feet in height, and illumination, if any, shall
be by constant light.



         (b)   One identification sign may be erected on each
perimeter street frontage of a single-family detached subdivision, townhouse
development, duplex structure, quadruplex development, multifamily-family
development or permitted non- residential use. The sign shall not be
permitted to exceed 48 square feet of display surface area. The sign shall
not exceed 12 feet in height, and illumination, if any, shall be by constant
light.



         (c)   During the period of construction, a temporary
sign advertising the construction of improvements on the street premises, may
be erected on each perimeter street frontage of the development. The sign
shall not exceed 40 square feet in surface area, nor 15 feet in height, and
illumination, if any, shall be by constant light.



         (d)   A temporary real estate sign advertising the sale,
rental, or lease of the premises may be erected on each street frontage of a
lot. The sign shall not exceed eight square feet in surface area, nor 15 feet
in height, and illumination, if any, shall be by constant light.



      (3)   Private swimming pools (and all accessories thereto)
shall meet safety requirements of state and local building codes.



      (4)   Child care - in home.



         (a)   A maximum of four non-related children may be
cared for in the home without state licensing. Five to ten children may be
cared for in the home if the resident obtains a special exception and
maintains continuous state licensing. This number does not include those who
reside in the residence.



         (b)   No person shall be employed other than a member of
the immediate family residing on the premises or a substitute caregiver if
the primary caregiver is unavailable.



         (c)   No signs advertising the child care home shall be
permitted on the lot.



         (d)   No exterior alteration of the dwelling or any
customary accessory structure shall be made which would detract from the
residential character of the structures.



         (e)   State-licensed child-care homes in existence on
the effective date of this chapter, but which would be prohibited by these
requirements, may continue as otherwise regulated herein.



      (5)   Yard sales on residential lots shall occur only once a
month for not more than three consecutive days.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12; Am. Ord. 13-9, passed 5-16-13)



§ 153.083  BULK AND AREA REQUIREMENTS: B-1 OR NC NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL
DISTRICT.



   (A)   Area. Every lot upon which a structure is hereafter erected
shall front onto a dedicated street or public right-of-way and shall conform
to the following minimum lot area and width requirements.



      (1)   Residential use.



         (a)   The tract area shall be a minimum of 7,000 square
feet with a minimum tract width of 70 feet (where sanitary sewers are
available) for single-family detached and single-family attached uses. For a
quadruplex, (four units with two common walls), the minimum tract area is
14,000 square feet. For multiple family uses and “group quarters” uses
(Use Unit 7), the minimum tract area 10,000 square feet with a minimum tract
width of 100 feet.



         (b)   It is assumed that there is a minimum of three
townhouses per structure with a 70-foot tract width; thus, the minimum lot
width is 20 feet (with public sewers) for townhouses. Therefore, the interior
of the three townhouses has a minimum lot area of 2,000 square feet and the
exterior townhouse lots are a minimum of 2,500 square feet.



         (c)   It is assumed that there are two units per
structure in a duplex with a 70-foot tract width; thus, the minimum lot width
is 35 feet (with public sewers) with one common wall for duplexes. Therefore,
the minimum lot area is 3,500 square feet per dwelling unit (where sanitary
sewers are available).



         (d)   It is assumed that there are four units per
structure in a quadruplex with a 70-foot tract width; thus, the minimum lot
width is 20 feet (with public sewers) for a quadruplex with two common walls.
Therefore, the minimum lot area is 3,500 square feet per dwelling unit (where
sanitary sewers are available).



         (e)   Where no sanitary sewers are available and
disposal is by soil absorption, the minimum lot area shall be one acre per
single-family detached dwelling and one acre per duplex structure. The lot
size for townhouse, quadruplex, multi-family structures and “group
quarters” (Use Unit 7) structures shall not be less than one acre, and the
Posey County Health Department may require a larger lot size. For all
residential uses, the Posey County Health Department may require a larger lot
for any type of residential use.



      (2)   Non-residential use.



         (a)   The lot area shall be at least 10,000 square feet
with a minimum width of 100 feet.



         (b)   Where no sanitary sewers are available and
disposal is by soil absorption, minimum lot of the area shall be one acre.
The Posey County Health Department may require a larger lot.



   (B)   Yards.



      (1)   Front yard and street side yard.



         (a)   Every lot or tract shall have a front yard (or
street side yard) not less than ten feet in depth. If the proposed structure
falls between two developed lots, the front yard setback should be the
average of the two abutting lot structure setbacks.



         (b)   When a B or C District abuts an O or R District,
the front yard requirements of the O or R District should be observed for 200
feet into the B or C District (except the CBD). When a B or C District abuts
an O or R District, off-street parking is prohibited in the front and street
side yards; however, off-street parking would be permitted in front and
street side yards greater than ten feet provided the side yards are
landscaped to hide the parking area and the parking area does not extend into
the first ten feet of the front or street side yard. The front yard and
street side yard requirements of the B and C District may be reduced to none
if adjacent lots or the majority of the lots on the blockface have no front
yard or street side yard setback.



         (c)   If there is no dedicated roadway right-of-way, the
front yard (or corner lot side yard) setback from the center of the roadway
is 25 feet plus one-half the right-of-way width of the applicable roadway
functional class as if the roadway had been dedicated (adding 25 feet for a
“local street”, 40 feet for a “collector” or “secondary
arterial”, 60 feet for a “primary arterial”, and 75 feet for a
“divided primary arterial”).



      (2)   Side yard.



         (a)   Every lot shall have a side yard not less than ten
feet in depth.



         (b)   The interior lot (or unit) of a townhouse
structure with two common walls has no side yard requirement. The adjoining
lots of a duplex with one common wall or adjoining lots of a zero lot-line
development have no side yard requirement. The adjoining portion of lots of
quadruplex structure with two common walls has no side year requirements.



         (c)   When a B or C District (except CBD) abuts an R-3,
RM, O or R-O District, the side yard requirement is 20 feet, but may be
reduced to ten feet if landscaped. When a B or C District (except the CBD)
abuts an R-1, RS, RT or R-2 District, the minimum side yard requirement is 20
feet, and is to be increased one additional foot for each foot of building
height exceeding 28 feet and cannot be reduced by landscaping.



      (3)   Rear yard.



         (a)   Every lot or tract shall have a rear yard of not
less than 20 feet in depth. For a quadruplex, the rear yard must be observed
for the tract holding the quadruplex structure, but is not observed for the
adjoining portion of lots where a common wall exists between abutting units.



         (b)   When a B or C District (except the CBD) abuts an
R-1, RS, RT or R-2 District, the minimum rear yard requirement of 20 feet is
to be increased one additional foot for each foot of building height
exceeding 28 feet and cannot be reduced by landscaping.



   (C)   Height. No building or structure, or part thereof, shall be
erected or altered to a height exceeding two and one-half stories, not to
exceed 35 feet.



   (D)   Lot coverage. For residential uses on individual lots or
tracts not mixed with office or commercial uses, the combined area occupied
by all principal and accessory buildings shall not exceed 50% of the area of
the lot.



   (E)   Minimum floor area.



      (1) Minimum livable floor area for a single-family detached
dwelling unit shall be 950 square feet and a minimum of 23 feet wide.



      (2)   Minimum livable floor area for a single-family attached
(townhouse, duplex, zero lot-line or quadruplex) shall be 650 square feet per
dwelling unit, total of 1,950 square feet for a townhouse structure (assuming
three units) total 1,300 square feet per duplex structure (two units) total
of 650 square feet per zero lot-line unit, and total of 2,600 square feet per
quadruplex structure (four units).



      (3)   Minimum livable floor area for a multiple-family
dwelling shall be 400 square feet for an efficiency apartment, 500 square
feet for a one-bedroom apartment, 600 square feet for a two-bedroom
apartment, and 700 for a three-bedroom apartment.



   (F)   Minimum lot area per dwelling unit. For residential uses on
individual lots or tracts not mixed with office or commercial uses, the
minimum lot area per dwelling unit shall be 1,500 square feet for multiple
family uses and other residential uses in the Use Group 7 containing multiple
dwelling units.



   (G)   Floor area ratio. The floor area ratio shall not exceed 0.50.



   (H)   Dwelling unit density. The maximum number of dwelling units
per acre is 29.04.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12)



§ 153.084  USE REGULATIONS: B-1A OR CS COMMERCIAL SHOPPING DISTRICT.



   (A)   Use by right. The principal uses permitted in the commercial
shopping districts are designed by use units. These units are groupings of
individual uses and are fully described, including their respective
off-street parking, loading, and screening requirements and other use
conditions in §§ 153.141 to 153.174. No building or structure, or part
thereof, shall be erected, altered, or used, or land used in whole or in part
for other than one or more of the following specified permitted principal
uses in accordance with the limitations herein-after specified.



      (1)   Use Unit 1 - areawide uses by right.



      (2)   Use Unit 3 - public protection and utility facilities.



      (3)   Use Unit 4 - community services [including protective
shelters, residential treatment centers and transitional living centers; and
including children’s nursery/day care center for more than four unrelated
children (excluding those who live in the home)].



      (4)   Use Unit 5 - single-family detached dwelling.



      (5)   Use Unit 6 - single-family attached dwelling (including
townhouses, duplex, zero lot-line, quadruplexes).



      (6)   Use Unit 7 - multiple family dwelling (including
“group quarters” uses, but excluding funeral homes, hotels and motels).



      (7)   Use Unit 8 - manufactured or modular home dwelling.



      (8)   Use Unit 10 - off-street parking areas.



      (9)   Use Unit 11 - offices and studios.



      (10)   Part Use Unit 12 - entertainment and eating
establishments excluding entertainment and drinking establishments.



      (11)   Use Unit 13 - convenience goods and services.



      (12)   Use Unit 14 - shopping goods and services.



      (13)   Use Unit 16 - gasoline service stations.



      (14)   Part Use Unit 21 -business signs and outdoor
advertising-excluding outdoor advertising (off-premises) signs.



      (15)   Use Unit 28 - home occupations.



      (16)   Other uses. Other uses or enterprises similar to the
above, which in the judgment of the Area Plan Commission Board or Board of
Zoning Appeals are similar to and not more objectionable to the general
welfare, than the uses listed. Other uses so determined shall be regarded as
listed uses. In no instance, however, shall the Area Plan Commission Board or
Board of Zoning Appeals determine nor the regulations be so interpreted, that
a use shall be permitted in a district where such use is specifically listed
as first permissible in a less restricted district or where such use is
permitted by Special Exception in this district.



      (17)   Use unit 29 - mobile office trailer, so long as
property does not abut a residential district.



   (B)   Use by special exception. Special exception uses may be
permitted by the Board of Zoning Appeals following a public hearing, as
indicated below, when such are deemed essential or desirable to the public
convenience or welfare and are in harmony with the various elements or
objectives of the Comprehensive Plan.



      (1)   Use Unit 2 - areawide special exception uses.



      (2)   Use unit 29 - mobile office trailer when property abuts
a residential district.



   (C)   Limitations on uses by right and special exception.



      (1)   Except for accessory parking lots and service stations,
all activities including sales, display, preparations and storage shall be
conducted entirely within a completely enclosed building. (Except those that
may be permitted by the Board of Zoning Appeals in granting a special
exception).



      (2)   All products shall be sold as retail on the premises.



      (3)   All on-site lighting shall be directed toward the
structures on-site and away from any neighboring residential districts.
Areawide loudspeakers or paging systems will not be allowed.



   (D)   Accessory uses permitted. Those accessory uses which are
customarily incidental to a principal permitted use are as follows.



      (1)   Management office, private recreation, laundry, and
storage facilities for Use Unit 7 (multiple family dwelling).



      (2)   Garage.



      (3)   Carport.



      (4)   Signs.



         (a)   Business signs in Use Unit 21 (see Use Unit 21 for
permitted business signs).



         (b)   Bulletin board.



         (c)   Identification sign.



         (d)   Real estate sign.



         (e)   Construction sign.



      (5)   Shelter (storm).



      (6)   Private swimming pool.



      (7)   Child care in home (four or less).



      (8)   Yard sales on residential lots.



   (E)   Accessory use conditions.



      (1)   General conditions.



         (a)   An accessory building erected as an integral part
of the principal building shall be made structurally a part thereof, shall
have a common wall therewith, and shall comply with the requirements
applicable to the principal building.



         (b)   A detached accessory building shall not be located
in the front or side yard or encroach upon a minimum building setback line,
but this limitation shall not apply to garages and carports, provided the
minimum required front yard or side yard set back line is observed.



         (c)   Within the rear yard, a detached accessory
building shall be located at least five feet from interior lot line.



      (2)   Signs for residential uses and community services of Use
Unit 4 are permitted as follows in accordance with the yard requirement of §
153.024(B)(5). Office and business signs are permitted in accordance with Use
Unit 21 (excluding outdoor advertising or off-premises signs).



         (a)   One bulletin board may be erected on each street
frontage of any educational, religious, institutional, or similar use in Use
Unit 4 by special exception or other uses by special exception requiring
announcement of its activities. The bulletin board shall not exceed 12 square
feet in surface area, nor 15 feet in height, and illumination, if any, shall
be by constant light.



         (b)   One identification sign may be erected on each
perimeter street frontage of a single-family detached subdivision, townhouse
development, duplex structure, quadruplex development, multifamily-family
development or permitted non- residential use. The sign shall not be
permitted to exceed 48 square feet of display surface area. The sign shall
not exceed 12 feet in height, and illumination, if any, shall be by constant
light.



         (c)   During the period of construction, a temporary
sign advertising the construction of improvements on the street premises, may
be erected on each perimeter street frontage of the development. The sign
shall not exceed 40 square feet in surface area, nor 15 feet in height, and
illumination, if any, shall be by constant light.



         (d)   A temporary real estate sign advertising the sale,
rental, or lease of the premises may be erected on each street frontage of a
lot. The sign shall not exceed eight square feet in surface area, nor 15 feet
in height, and illumination, if any, shall be by constant light.



      (3)   Private swimming pools (and all accessories thereto)
shall meet safety requirements of state and local building codes.



      (4)   Child care - in home.



         (a)   A maximum of four non-related children may be
cared for in the home without state licensing. Five to ten children may be
cared for in the home if the resident obtains a special exception and
maintains continuous state licensing. This number does not include those who
reside in the residence.



         (b)   No person shall be employed other than a member of
the immediate family residing on the premises or a substitute caregiver if
the primary caregiver is unavailable.



         (c)   No signs advertising the child care home shall be
permitted on the lot.



         (d)   No exterior alteration of the dwelling or any
customary accessory structure shall be made which would detract from the
residential character of the structures.



         (e)   State-licensed child-care homes in existence on
the effective date of this chapter, but which would be prohibited by these
requirements, may continue as otherwise regulated herein.



      (5)   Yard sales on residential lots shall occur only once a
month for not more than three  consecutive days.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12; Am. Ord. 13-9, passed 5-16-13)



§ 153.085  BULK AND AREA REQUIREMENTS: B-1A OR CS COMMERCIAL SHOPPING
DISTRICT.



   (A)   Area. Every lot upon which a structure is hereafter erected
shall front onto a dedicated street or public right-of-way and shall conform
to the following minimum lot area and width requirements.



      (1)   Residential use.



         (a)   The tract area shall be a minimum of 10,000 square
feet with a minimum tract width of 100 feet (where sanitary sewers are
available) for single-family detached and single-family attached uses. For a
quadruplex, (four units with two common walls), the minimum tract area is
14,000 square feet. For multiple family uses and “group quarters” uses
(Use Unit 7), the minimum tract area is 10,000 square feet with a minimum
tract width of 100 feet.



         (b)   It is assumed that there is a minimum of four
townhouses per structure with a 100-foot tract width; thus, the minimum lot
width 20 feet (with public sewers) for townhouses. Therefore, the interior
lots of the four townhouses have a minimum lot area of 2,000 square feet and
the exterior townhouse lots are a minimum of 3,000 square feet.



         (c)   It is assumed that there are two units per
structure in a duplex with a 100-foot tract width; thus, the minimum lot
width is 50 feet (with public sewers) with one common wall for duplexes.
Therefore, the minimum lot area is 5,000 square feet per dwelling unit (where
sanitary sewers are available).



         (d)   It is assumed that there are four units per
structure in a quadruplex with a 100-foot tract width; thus, the minimum lot
width is 50 feet (with public sewers) for a quadruplex with two common walls.
Therefore, the minimum lot area is 5,000 square feet per dwelling unit (where
sanitary sewers are available).



         (e)   Where no sanitary sewers are available and
disposal is by soil absorption, the minimum lot area shall be one acre per
single-family detached dwelling and one acre per duplex structure. The lot
size for townhouse, quadruplex, multi-family structures and “group
quarters” (Use Unit 7) structures shall not be less than one acre, and the
Posey County Health Department may require a larger lot size. For all
residential uses, the Posey County Health Department may require a larger lot
for any type of residential use.



      (2)   Non-residential use.



         (a)   The lot area shall be at least 10,000  square
feet with a minimum width of 100 feet.



         (b)   Where no sanitary sewers are available and
disposal is by soil absorption, minimum lot of the area shall be one acre.
The Posey County Health Department may require a larger lot.



   (B)   Yards.



      (1)   Front yard and street side yard.



         (a)   Every lot or tract shall have a front yard (or
street side yard) not less than ten feet in depth. If the proposed structure
falls between two developed lots, the front yard setback should be the
average of the two abutting lot structure setbacks.



         (b)   When a B or C District abuts an O or R District,
the front yard requirements of the O or R District should be observed for 200
feet into the B or C District (except the CBD). When a B or C District abuts
an O or R District, off-street parking is prohibited in the front and street
side yards; however, off-street parking would be permitted in front and
street side yards greater than ten feet provided the side yards are
landscaped to hide the parking area and the parking area does not extend into
the first ten feet of the front or street side yard. The front yard and
street side yard requirements of the B and C District may be reduced to none
if adjacent lots or the majority of the lots on the blockface have no front
yard or street side yard setback.



         (c)   If there is no dedicated roadway right-of-way, the
front yard (or corner lot side yard) setback from the center of the roadway
is 25 feet plus one-half the right-of-way width of the applicable roadway
functional class as if the roadway had been dedicated (adding 25 feet for a
“local street”, 40 feet for a “collector” or “secondary
arterial”, 60 feet for a “primary arterial”, and 75 feet for a
“divided primary arterial”).



      (2)   Side yard.



         (a)   Every lot shall have a side yard not less than ten
feet in depth.



         (b)   The interior lot (or unit) of a townhouse
structure with two common walls has no side yard requirement. The adjoining
lots of a duplex with one common wall or adjoining lots of a zero lot-line
development have no side yard requirement. The adjoining portion of lots of
quadruplex structure with two common walls has no side year requirements.



         (c)   When a B or C District (except CBD) abuts an R-3,
RM, O or R-O District, the side yard requirement is 20 feet, but may be
reduced to ten feet if landscaped. When a B or C District (except the CBD)
abuts an R-l, RS, RT or R-2 District, the minimum side yard requirement is 20
feet, and is to be increased one additional foot for each foot of building
height exceeding 28 feet and cannot be reduced by landscaping.



      (3)   Rear yard.



         (a)   Every lot or tract shall have a rear yard of not
less than 20 feet in depth. For a quadruplex, the rear yard must be observed
for the tract holding the quadruplex structure, but is not observed for the
adjoining portion of lots where a common wall exists between abutting units.



         (b)   When a B or C District (except the CBD) abuts an
R-1, RS, RT or R-2 District, the minimum rear yard requirement of 20 feet is
to be increased one additional foot for each foot of building height
exceeding 28 feet and cannot be reduced by landscaping.



   (C)   Height. No building or structure, or part thereof, shall be
erected or altered to a height exceeding four stories, not to exceed 50 feet.



   (D)   Lot coverage. For residential uses on individual lots or
tracts not mixed with office or commercial uses, the combined area occupied
by all principal and accessory buildings shall not exceed 50% of the area of
the lot.



   (E)   Minimum floor area.



      (1)   Minimum livable floor area for a single-family detached
dwelling unit shall be 950 square feet and a minimum of 23 feet wide.



      (2)   Minimum livable floor area for a single-family attached
(townhouse, duplex, zero lot-line or quadruplex) shall be 650 square feet per
dwelling unit, total of 1,950 square feet for a townhouse structure (assuming
three units) total 1,300 square feet per duplex structure (two units) total
of 650 square feet per zero lot-line unit, and total of 2,600 square feet per
quadruplex structure (four units).



      (3)   Minimum livable floor area for a multiple-family
dwelling shall be 400 square feet for an efficiency apartment, 500 square
feet for a one-bedroom apartment, 600 square feet for a two-bedroom
apartment, and 700 for a three-bedroom apartment.



   (F)   Minimum lot area per dwelling unit. For residential uses on
individual lots or tracts not mixed with office or commercial uses, the
minimum lot area per dwelling unit shall be 1,500 square feet for multiple
family uses and other residential uses in the Use Group 7 containing multiple
dwelling units.



   (G)   Floor area ratio. The floor area ratio shall not exceed 0.50.



   (H)   Dwelling unit density. The maximum number of dwelling units
per acre is 29.04.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12)



§ 153.086  USE REGULATIONS: B-2 OR CG COMMERCIAL GENERAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   Use by right. The principal uses permitted in the Commercial
General Districts are designed by Use Units. These units are groupings of
individual uses and are fully described, including their respective
off-street parking, loading, and screening requirements and other use
conditions in §§ 153.141 to 153.174. No building or structure, or part
thereof, shall be erected, altered, or used, or land used in whole or in part
for other than one or more of the following specified permitted principal
uses in accordance with the limitations herein-after specified.



      (1)   Use Unit 1 - areawide uses by right.



      (2)   Use Unit 3 - public protection and utility facilities.



      (3)   Use Unit 4 - community services [including protective
shelters, residential treatment centers and transitional living centers; and
including children’s nursery/day care center for more than four unrelated
children (excluding those who live in the home)].



      (4)   Use Unit 5 - single-family detached dwelling.



      (5)   Use Unit 6 - single-family attached dwelling (including
townhouses, duplex, zero lot-line, quadruplexes).



      (6)   Use Unit 7 - multiple family dwelling (including
“group quarters” uses, but excluding funeral homes, hotels and motels).



      (7)   Use Unit 8 - manufactured or modular home dwelling.



      (8)   Use Unit 10 - off-street parking areas.



      (9)   Use Unit 11 - offices and studios.



      (10)   Use Unit 12 - entertainment and eating establishments.



      (11)   Use Unit 13 - convenience goods and services.



      (12)   Use Unit 14 - shopping goods and services.



      (13)   Use Unit 15 - other trades and services (excluding
sexually oriented businesses).



      (14)   Use Unit 16 - gasoline service stations.



      (15)   Use Unit 17 - automotive and allied activities.



      (16)   Use Unit 18 - drive-in restaurants.



      (17)   Use Unit 19 - hotel, motel and recreation facilities.



      (18)   Use Unit 21 - business signs and outdoor advertising.



      (19)   Use Unit 28 - home occupations.



      (20)   Other uses. Other uses or enterprises similar to the
above, which in the judgment of the Area Plan Commission Board or Board of
Zoning Appeals are similar to and not more objectionable to the general
welfare, than the uses listed. Other uses so determined shall be regarded as
listed uses. In no instance, however, shall the Area Plan Commission Board or
Board of Zoning Appeals determine nor the regulations be so interpreted, that
a use shall be permitted in a district where such use is specifically listed
as first permissible in a less restricted district or where such use is
permitted by Special Exception in this district.



      (21)   Use unit 29 - mobile office trailer, so long as
property does not abut a residential district.



   (B)   Use by special exception. Special exception uses may be
permitted by the Board of Zoning Appeals following a public hearing, as
indicated below, when such are deemed essential or desirable to the public
convenience or welfare and are in harmony with the various elements or
objectives of the Comprehensive Plan.



      (1)   Use Unit 2 - areawide special exception uses.



      (2)   Use unit 29 - mobile office trailer when property abuts
a residential district.



   (C)   Limitations on uses by right and special exception.



      (1)   All activities including sales, display, preparations
and storage shall be conducted entirely within a completely enclosed building
except:



         (a)   Accessory parking lots and service stations;



         (b)   Retail stores in Use Units 14 and 15 involving the
sale or rental of building materials, lawn and garden equipment, lumber,
shrubs, trees and flowers;



         (c)   Uses in Use Unit 17 (automobile and allied
products); and



         (d)   Uses that may be permitted by the Board of Zoning
Appeals in granting a special exception.



      (2)   All products shall be sold as retail on the premises.



      (3)   All on-site lighting shall be directed toward the
structures on-site and away from any neighboring residential districts.
Areawide loudspeakers or paging systems will not be allowed.



   (D)   Accessory uses permitted. Those accessory uses which are
customarily incidental to a principal permitted use are as follows0



      (1)   Management office, private recreation, laundry, and
storage facilities for Use Unit 7 (multiple family dwelling).



      (2)   Garage.



      (3)   Carport.



      (4)   Signs.



         (a)   Business signs in Use Unit 21 (see Use Unit 21 for
permitted business signs).



         (b)   Bulletin board.



         (c)   Identification sign.



         (d)   Real estate sign.



         (e)   Construction sign.



      (5)   Shelter (storm).



      (6)   Private swimming pool.



      (7)   Child care in home (four or less).



      (8)   Yard sales on residential lots.



   (E)   Accessory use conditions.



      (1)   General conditions.



         (a)   An accessory building erected as an integral part
of the principal building shall be made structurally a part thereof, shall
have a common wall therewith, and shall comply with the requirements
applicable to the principal building.



         (b)   A detached accessory building shall not be located
in the front or side yard or encroach upon a minimum building setback line,
but this limitation shall not apply to garages and carports, provided the
minimum required front yard or side yard set back line is observed.



         (c)   Within the rear yard, a detached accessory
building shall be located at least five feet from interior lot line.



      (2)   Signs for residential uses and community services of Use
Unit 4 are permitted as follows in accordance with the yard requirement of §
153.024(B)(5). Office and business signs are permitted in accordance with Use
Unit 21 (excluding outdoor advertising or off-premises signs).



         (a)   One bulletin board may be erected on each street
frontage of any educational, religious, institutional, or similar use in Use
Unit 4 by special exception or other uses by special exception requiring
announcement of its activities. The bulletin board shall not exceed 12 square
feet in surface area, nor 15 feet in height, and illumination, if any, shall
be by constant light.



         (b)   One identification sign may be erected on each
perimeter street frontage of a single-family detached subdivision, townhouse
development, duplex structure, quadruplex development, multifamily-family
development or permitted non- residential use. The sign shall not be
permitted to exceed 48 square feet of display surface area. The sign shall
not exceed 12 feet in height, and illumination, if any, shall be by constant
light.



         (c)   During the period of construction, a temporary
sign advertising the construction of improvements on the street premises, may
be erected on each perimeter street frontage of the development. The sign
shall not exceed 40 square feet in surface area, nor 15 feet in height, and
illumination, if any, shall be by constant light.



         (d)   A temporary Real Estate Sign advertising the sale,
rental, or lease of the premises may be erected on each street frontage of a
lot. The sign shall not exceed eight square feet in surface area, nor 15 feet
in height, and illumination, if any, shall be by constant light.



      (3)   Private swimming pools (and all accessories thereto)
shall meet safety requirements of state and local building codes.



      (4)   Child care - in home.



         (a)   A maximum of four non-related children may be
cared for in the home without state licensing. Five  to ten  children may
be cared for in the home if the resident obtains a special exception and
maintains continuous state licensing. This number does not include those who
reside in the residence.



         (b)   No person shall be employed other than a member of
the immediate family residing on the premises or a substitute caregiver if
the primary caregiver is unavailable.



         (c)   No signs advertising the child care home shall be
permitted on the lot.



         (d)   No exterior alteration of the dwelling or any
customary accessory structure shall be made which would detract from the
residential character of the structures.



         (e)   State-licensed child-care homes in existence on
the effective date of this chapter, but which would be prohibited by these
requirements, may continue as otherwise regulated herein.



      (5)   Yard sales on residential lots shall occur only once a
month for not more than three consecutive days.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12; Am. Ord. 13-9, passed 5-16-13)



§ 153.087  BULK AND AREA REQUIREMENTS: B-2 OR CG COMMERCIAL GENERAL
DISTRICT.



   (A)   Area. Every lot upon which a structure is hereafter erected
shall front onto a dedicated street or public right-of-way and shall conform
to the following minimum lot area and width requirements.



      (1)   Residential use.



         (a)   The tract area shall be a minimum of 10,000 square
feet with a minimum tract width of 1000 feet (where sanitary sewers are
available) for single-family detached and single-family attached uses. For a
quadruplex, (four units with two common walls), the minimum tract area is
14,000 square feet. For multiple family uses and “group quarters” uses
(Use Unit 7), the minimum tract area 10,000 square feet with a minimum tract
width of 1,000 feet.



         (b)   It is assumed that there is a minimum of four
townhouses per structure with a 100-foot tract width; thus, the minimum lot
width is 20 feet (with public sewers) for townhouses. Therefore, the interior
lots of the four townhouses has a minimum lot area of 2,000 square feet and
the exterior townhouse lots are a minimum of 3,000 square feet.



         (c)   It is assumed that there are two units per
structure in a duplex with a 100-foot tract width; thus, the minimum lot
width is 50 feet (with public sewers) with one common wall for duplexes.
Therefore, the minimum lot area is 5,000 square feet, per dwelling unit
(where sanitary sewers are available).



         (d)   It is assumed that there are four units per
structure in a quadruplex with a 100-foot tract width; thus, the minimum lot
width is 50 feet (with public sewers) for a quadruplex with two common walls.
Therefore, the minimum lot area is 5,000 square feet per dwelling unit (where
sanitary sewers are available).



         (e)   Where no sanitary sewers are available and
disposal is by soil absorption, the minimum lot area shall be one acre per
single-family detached dwelling and one acre per duplex structure. The lot
size for townhouse, quadruplex, multi-family structures and “group
quarters” (Use Unit 7) structures shall not be less than one acre, and the
Posey County Health Department may require a larger lot size. For all
residential uses, the Posey County Health Department may require a larger lot
for any type of residential use.



      (2)   Non-residential use.



         (a)   The lot area shall be at least 10,000 square feet
with a minimum width of 1,000 feet.



         (b)   Where no sanitary sewers are available and
disposal is by soil absorption, minimum lot of the area shall be one acre.
The Posey County Health Department may require a larger lot.



   (B)   Yards.



      (1)   Front yard and street side yard.



         (a)   Every lot or tract shall have a front yard (or
street side yard) not less than ten  feet in depth proposed structure falls
between two developed lots, the front yard setback should be the average of
the two abutting lot structure setbacks.



         (b)   When a B or C District abuts an O or R District,
the front yard requirements of the O or R District should be observed for 200
feet into the B or C District (except the CBD). When a B or C District abuts
an O or R District, off-street parking is prohibited in the front and street
side yards; however, off-street parking would be permitted in front and
street side yards greater than ten feet provided the side yards are
landscaped to hide the parking area and the parking area does not extend into
the first ten feet of the front or street side yard. The front yard and
street side yard requirements of the B and C District may be reduced to none
if adjacent lots or the majority of the lots on the blockface have no front
yard or street side yard setback.



         (c)   If there is no dedicated roadway right-of-way, the
front yard (or corner lot side yard) setback from the center of the roadway
is 25 feet plus one-half the right-of-way width of the applicable roadway
functional class as if the roadway had been dedicated (adding 25 feet for a
“local street”, 40 feet for a “collector” or “secondary
arterial”, 60 feet for a “primary arterial”, and 75 feet for a
“divided primary arterial”).



      (2)   Side yard.



         (a)   Every lot shall have a side yard not less than ten
feet in depth.



         (b)   The interior lot (or unit) of a townhouse
structure with two common walls has no side yard requirement. The adjoining
lots of a duplex with one common wall or adjoining lots of a zero lot-line
development have no side yard requirement. The adjoining portion of lots of
quadruplex structure with two common walls has no side yard requirements.



         (c)   When a B or C District (except CBD) abuts an R-3,
RM, O or R-O District, the side yard requirement is 20 feet, but may be
reduced to ten feet if landscaped. When a B or C District (except the CBD)
abuts an R-1, RS, RT or R-2 District, the minimum side yard requirement is 20
feet, and is to be increased one additional foot for each foot of building
height exceeding 28 feet and cannot be reduced by landscaping.



      (3)   Rear yard.



         (a)   Every lot or tract shall have a rear yard of not
less than 20 feet in depth. For a quadruplex, the rear yard must be observed
for the tract holding the quadruplex structure, but is not observed for the
adjoining portion of lots where a common wall exists between abutting units.



         (b)   When a B or C District (except the CBD) abuts an
R-l, RS, RT or R-2 District, the minimum rear yard requirement of 20 feet is
to be increased one additional foot for each foot of building height
exceeding 28 feet and cannot be reduced by landscaping.



   (C)   Height. No building or structure, or part thereof, shall be
erected or altered to a height exceeding four stories, not to exceed 75 feet.



   (D)   Lot coverage. For residential uses on individual lots or
tracts not mixed with office or commercial uses, the combined area occupied
by all principal and accessory buildings shall not exceed 50% of the area of
the lot.



   (E)   Minimum floor area.



      (1)   Minimum livable floor area for a single-family detached
dwelling unit shall be 950 square feet and a minimum of 23 feet wide.



      (2)   Minimum livable floor area for a single-family attached
(townhouse, duplex, zero lot-line or quadruplex) shall be 650 square feet per
dwelling unit, total of 1,950 square feet for a townhouse structure (assuming
three units) total 1,300 square feet per duplex structure (two units) total
of 650 square feet per zero lot-line unit, and total of 2,600 square feet per
quadruplex structure (four units).



      (3)   Minimum livable floor area for a multiple-family
dwelling shall be 400 square feet for an efficiency apartment, 500 square
feet for a one-bedroom apartment, 600 square feet for a two-bedroom
apartment, and 700 for a three-bedroom apartment.



   (F)   Minimum lot area per dwelling unit. For residential uses on
individual lots or tracts not mixed with office or commercial uses, the
minimum lot area per dwelling unit shall be 1,500 square feet for multiple
family uses and other residential uses in the Use Unit 7 containing multiple
dwelling units.



   (G)   Floor area ratio. The floor area ratio shall not exceed 0.75.



   (H)   Dwelling unity density. The maximum number of dwelling units
per acre is 29.04.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12)



§ 153.088  USE REGULATIONS: B-3 OR CH COMMERCIAL HIGH INTENSITY DISTRICT.



   (A)   Use by right. The principal uses permitted in the commercial
high intensity districts are designed by use units. These units are groupings
of individual uses and are fully described, including their respective
off-street parking, loading, and screening requirements and other use
conditions in §§ 153.141 to 153.174. No building or structure, or part
thereof, shall be erected, altered, or used, or land used in whole or in part
for other than one or more of the following specified permitted principal
uses in accordance with the limitations herein-after specified.



      (1)   Use Unit 1 - areawide uses by right.



      (2)   Use Unit 3 - public protection and utility facilities.



      (3)   Use Unit 4 - community services [including protective
shelters, residential treatment centers and transitional living centers; and
including children’s nursery/day care center for more than four unrelated
children (excluding those who live in the home)].



      (4)   Use Unit 5 - single-family detached dwelling.



      (5)   Use Unit 6 - Single-family attached dwelling (including
townhouses, duplex, zero lot-line, quadruplexes).



      (6)   Use Unit 7 - multiple family dwelling (including
“group quarters” uses, but excluding funeral homes, hotels and motels).



      (7)   Use Unit 8 - manufactured or modular home dwelling.



      (8)   Use Unit 10 - off-street parking areas.



      (9)   Use Unit 11 - offices and studios.



      (10)   Use Unit 12 - entertainment and eating establishments.



      (11)   Use Unit 13 - convenience goods and services.



      (12)   Use Unit 14 - shopping goods and services.



      (13)   Use Unit 15   - other trades and services (sexually
oriented businesses only by special Exception).



      (14)   Use Unit 16 - gasoline service stations.



      (15)   Use Unit 17 - automotive and allied activities.



      (16)   Use Unit 18 - drive-in restaurants.



      (17)   Use Unit l9 - hotel, motel and recreation facilities.



      (18)   Use Unit 21 - business signs and outdoor advertising.



      (19)   Use Unit 23   - warehousing and wholesaling.



      (20)   Use Unit 28 - home occupations.



      (21)   Other uses. Other uses or enterprises similar to the
above, which in the judgment of the Area Plan Commission Board or Board of
Zoning Appeals are similar to and not more objectionable to the general
welfare, than the uses listed. Other uses so determined shall be regarded as
listed uses. In no instance, however, shall the Area Plan Commission Board or
Board of Zoning Appeals determine nor the regulations be so interpreted, that
a use shall be permitted in a district where such use is specifically listed
as first permissible in a less restricted district or where such use is
permitted by special exception in this district.



      (22)   Use unit 29 - mobile office trailer, so long as
property does not abut a residential district.



   (B)   Use by special exception. Special exception uses may be
permitted by the Board of Zoning Appeals following a public hearing, as
indicated below, when such are deemed essential or desirable to the public
convenience or welfare and are in harmony with the various elements or
objectives of the Comprehensive Plan:



      (1)   Use Unit 2 - areawide special exception uses.



      (2)   Use Unit 15 - sexually oriented businesses.



      (3)   Use Unit 20 - commercial recreation: intensive.



      (4)   Use Unit 22 - research and development.



      (5)   Use Unit 25 - light manufacturing.



      (6)   Use unit 29 - mobile office trailer when property abuts
a residential district.



   (C)   Limitations on uses by right and special exception.



      (1)   All activities including sales, display, preparations
and storage shall be conducted entirely within a completely enclosed building
except:



         (a)   Accessory parking lots and service stations;



         (b)   Retail stores in Use Units 14 and 15 involving the
sale or rental of building materials, lawn and garden equipment, lumber,
shrubs, trees and flowers;



         (c)   Uses in Use Unit 17 (automobile and allied
products); and



         (d)   Uses that may be permitted by the Board of Zoning
Appeals in granting a special exception.



      (2)   All products shall be sold as retail on the premises.



      (3)   All on-site lighting shall be directed toward the
structures on-site and away from any neighboring residential districts.
Areawide loudspeakers or paging systems will not be allowed.



      (4)   Sexually oriented business.



         (a)   No person shall cause or permit the establishment
of any sexually-oriented businesses as defined in § 153.270 unless that
business is specifically approved as a special exception by the Board of
Zoning Appeals. This business may be established only within those conditions
set by the Board of Zoning Appeals. (See § 153.246(C)(4)).



         (b)   The terminology “establishment of a sexually
oriented business” shall be defined to include within its meaning the
opening of such business as a new business, the relocation of such business,
the enlargement of such business in either scope or area, and/or the
conversion of an existing business location to any of the sexually oriented
uses as defined in § 153.270.



   (D)   Accessory uses permitted. Those accessory uses which are
customarily incidental to a principal permitted use are as follows.



      (1)   Management office, private recreation, laundry, and
storage facilities for Use Unit 7 (Multiple Family Dwelling).



      (2)   Garage.



      (3)   Carport.



      (4)   Signs.



         (a)   Business signs in Use Unit 21 (see Use Unit 21 for
permitted business signs).



         (b)   Bulletin board.



         (c)   Identification sign.



         (d)   Real estate sign.



         (e)   Construction sign.



      (5)   Shelter (storm).



      (6)   Private swimming pool.



      (7)   Child care in home (four or less).



      (8)   Yard sales on residential lots.



   (E)   Accessory use conditions.



      (1)   General conditions.



         (a)   An accessory building erected as an integral part
of the principal building shall be made structurally a part thereof, shall
have a common wall therewith, and shall comply with the requirements
applicable to the principal building.



         (b)   A detached accessory building shall not be located
in the front or side yard or encroach upon a minimum building setback line,
but this limitation shall not apply to garages and carports, provided the
minimum required front yard or side yard set back line is observed.



         (c)   Within the rear yard, a detached accessory
building shall be located at least five feet from interior lot line.



      (2)   Signs for residential uses and community services of Use
Unit 4 are permitted as follows in accordance with the yard requirement of §
153.024(B)(5). Office and business signs are permitted in accordance with Use
Unit 21 (excluding outdoor advertising or off-premises signs).



         (a)   One bulletin board may be erected on each street
frontage of any educational, religious, institutional, or similar use in Use
Unit 4 by special exception or other uses by special exception requiring
announcement of its activities. The bulletin board shall not exceed eight
square feet in surface area, nor 15 feet in height, and illumination, if any,
shall be by constant light.



         (b)   One identification sign may be erected on each
perimeter street frontage of a single-family detached subdivision, townhouse
development, duplex structure, quadruplex development, multifamily-family
development or permitted non- residential use. The sign shall not be
permitted to exceed 48 square feet of display surface area. The sign shall
not exceed eight feet in height, and illumination, if any, shall be by
constant light.



         (c)   During the period of construction, a temporary
sign advertising the construction of improvements on the street premises, may
be erected on each perimeter street frontage of the development. The sign
shall not exceed forty square feet in surface area, nor 15 feet in height,
and illumination, if any, shall be by constant light.



         (d)   A temporary real estate sign advertising the sale,
rental, or lease of the premises may be erected on each street frontage of a
lot. The sign shall not exceed eight square feet in surface area, nor 15 feet
in height, and illumination, if any, shall be by constant light.



      (3)   Private swimming pools (and all accessories thereto)
shall meet safety requirements of state and local building codes.



      (4)   Child care - in home.



         (a)   A maximum of four non-related children may be
cared for in the home without state licensing. Five  to ten  children may
be cared for in the home if the resident obtains a special exception and
maintains continuous state licensing. This number does not include those who
reside in the residence.



         (b)   No person shall be employed other than a member of
the immediate family residing on the premises or a substitute caregiver if
the primary caregiver is unavailable.



         (c)   No signs advertising the child care home shall be
permitted on the lot.



         (d)   No exterior alteration of the dwelling or any
customary accessory structure shall be made which would detract from the
residential character of the structures.



         (e)   State-licensed child-care homes in existence on
the effective date of this chapter, but which would be prohibited by these
requirements, may continue as otherwise regulated herein.



      (5)   Yard sales on residential lots shall occur only once a
month for not more than three consecutive days.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12; Am. Ord. 12-22, passed 11-1-12; Am. Ord. 13-9,
passed 5-16-13)



§ 153.089  BULK AND AREA REQUIREMENTS: B-3 OR CH COMMERCIAL HIGH INTENSITY
DISTRICT.



   (A)   Area. Every lot upon which a structure is hereafter erected
shall front onto a dedicated street or public right-of-way and shall conform
to the following minimum lot area and width requirements.



      (1)   Residential use.



         (a)   The tract area shall be a minimum of 10,000 square
feet with a minimum tract width of 1,000 feet (where sanitary sewers are
available) for single-family detached and single-family attached uses. For a
quadruplex, (four units with two common walls), the minimum tract area is
14,000 square feet. For multiple family uses and “group quarters” uses
(Use Unit 7), the minimum tract area 10,000 square feet with a minimum tract
width of 1,000 feet.



         (b)   It is assumed that there is a minimum of four
townhouses per structure with a 100-foot tract width; thus, the minimum lot
width is 20 feet (with public sewers) for townhouses. Therefore, the interior
lot of the three townhouses has a minimum lot area of 2,000 square feet and
the exterior townhouse lots are a minimum of 3,000 square feet.



         (c)   It is assumed that there are two units per
structure in a duplex with a 100-foot tract width; thus, the minimum lot
width is 50 feet (with public sewers) with one common wall for duplexes.
Therefore, the minimum lot area is 5,000 square feet per dwelling unit (where
sanitary sewers are available).



         (d)   It is assumed that there are four units per
structure in a quadruplex with a 100-foot tract width; thus, the minimum lot
width is 50 feet (with public sewers) for a quadruplex with two common walls.
Therefore, the minimum lot area is 5,000 square feet per dwelling unit (where
sanitary sewers are available).



         (e)   Where no sanitary sewers are available and
disposal is by soil absorption, the minimum lot area shall be one acre per
single-family detached dwelling and one acre per duplex structure. The lot
size for townhouse, quadruplex, multi-family structures and “group
quarters” (Use Unit 7) structures shall not be less than one acre, and the
Posey County Health Department may require a larger lot size. For all
residential uses, the Posey County Health Department may require a larger lot
for any type of residential use.



      (2)   Non-residential use.



         (a)   The lot area shall be at least 10,000 square feet
with a minimum width of 1,000 feet.



         (b)   Where no sanitary sewers are available and
disposal is by soil absorption, minimum lot of the area shall be one acre.
The Posey County Health Department may require a larger lot.



   (B)   Yards.



      (1)   Front yard and street side yard.



         (a)   Every lot or tract shall have a front yard (or
street side yard) not less than ten  feet in depth proposed structure falls
between two developed lots, the front yard setback should be the average of
the two abutting lot structure setbacks.



         (b)   When a B or C District abuts an O or R District,
the front yard requirements of the O or R District should be observed for 200
feet into the B or C District (except the CBD). When a B or C District abuts
an O or R District, off-street parking is prohibited in the front and street
side yards; however, off-street parking would be permitted in front and
street side yards greater than ten feet provided the side yards are
landscaped to hide the parking area and the parking area does not extend into
the first ten feet of the front or street side yard. The front yard and
street side yard requirements of the B and C District may be reduced to none
if adjacent lots or the majority of the lots on the blockface have no front
yard or street side yard setback.



         (c)   If there is no dedicated roadway right-of-way, the
front yard (or corner lot side yard) setback from the center of the roadway
is 25 feet plus one-half the right-of-way width of the applicable roadway
functional class as if the roadway had been dedicated (adding 25 feet for a
“local street”, 40 feet for a “collector” or “secondary
arterial”, 60 feet for a “primary arterial”, and 75 feet for a
“divided primary arterial”).



      (2)   Side yard.



         (a)   Every lot shall have a side yard not less than ten
feet in depth.



         (b)   The interior lot (or unit) of a townhouse
structure with two common walls has no side yard requirement. The adjoining
lots of a duplex with one common wall or adjoining lots of a zero lot-line
development have no side yard requirement. The adjoining portion of lots of
quadruplex structure with two common walls has no side year requirements.



         (c)   When a B or C District (except CBD) abuts an R-3,
RM, O or R-O District, the side yard requirement is 20 feet, but may be
reduced to ten feet if landscaped. When a B or C District (except the CBD)
abuts an R-1, RS, RT or R-2 District, the minimum side yard requirement is 20
feet, and is to be increased one additional foot for each foot of building
height exceeding 28 feet and cannot be reduced by landscaping.



      (3)   Rear yard.



         (a)   Every lot or tract shall have a rear yard of not
less than 20 feet in depth. For a quadruplex, the rear yard must be observed
for the tract holding the quadruplex structure, but is not observed for the
adjoining portion of lots where a common wall exists between abutting units.



         (b)   When a B or C District (except the CBD) abuts an
R-1, RS, RT or R-2 District, the minimum rear yard requirement of 20 feet is
to be increased one additional foot for each foot of building height
exceeding 28 feet and cannot be reduced by landscaping.



   (C)   Height. No building or structure, or part thereof, shall be
erected or altered to a height exceeding four stories, not to exceed 75 feet.



   (D)   Lot coverage. For residential uses on individual lots or
tracts not mixed with office or commercial uses, the combined area occupied
by all principal and accessory buildings shall not exceed 50% of the area of
the lot.



   (E)   Minimum floor area.



      (1)   Minimum livable floor area for a single-family detached
dwelling unit shall be 950 square feet and a minimum of 23 feet wide.



      (2)   Minimum livable floor area for a single-family attached
(townhouse, duplex, zero lot-line or quadruplex) shall be 650 square feet per
dwelling unit, total of 1,950 square feet for a townhouse structure (assuming
three units) total 1,300 square feet per duplex structure (two units) total
of 650 square feet per zero lot-line unit, and total of 2,600 square feet per
quadruplex structure (four units).



      (3)   Minimum livable floor area for a multiple-family
dwelling shall be 400 square feet for an efficiency apartment, 500 square
feet for a one-bedroom apartment, 600 square feet for a two-bedroom
apartment, and 700 for a three-bedroom apartment.



   (F)   Minimum lot area per dwelling unit. For residential uses on
individual lots or tracts not mixed with office or commercial uses, the
minimum lot area per dwelling unit shall be 1,500 square feet for multiple
family uses and other residential uses in the Use Group 7 containing multiple
dwelling units.



   (G)   Floor area ratio. The floor area ratio shall not exceed 1.00.



   (H)   Dwelling unit density. The maximum number of dwelling units
per acre is 29.04.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12)



§ 153.090  USE REGULATIONS: CBD CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT.



   (A)   Use by right. The principal uses permitted in the Central
Business District are designed by use units. These units are groupings of
individual uses and are fully described, including their respective
off-street parking, loading, and screening requirements and other use
conditions in §§ 153.141 to 153.174. However, land uses in the Central
Business District are exempt from off-street parking and off-street loading
berth requirements. No building or structure, or part thereof, shall be
erected, altered, or used, or land used in whole or in part for other than
one or more of the following specified permitted principal uses in accordance
with the limitations hereinafter specified.



      (1)   Use Unit 1 - areawide uses by right.



      (2)   Use Unit 3 - public protection and utility facilities.



      (3)   Use Unit 4 - community services [including protective
shelters, residential treatment centers and transitional living centers; and
including children’s nursery/day care center for more than four unrelated
children (excluding those who live in the home)].



      (4)   Use Unit 6 - single-family attached dwelling (including
townhouses, duplex, zero lot-line, quadruplexes).



      (5)   Use Unit 7 - multiple family dwelling (including
“group quarters” uses, but excluding funeral homes, hotels and motels).



      (6)   Use Unit 8 - manufactured or modular home dwelling.



      (7)   Use Unit 10 - off-street parking areas.



      (8)   Use Unit 11 - offices and studios.



      (9)   Use Unit 12 - entertainment and eating establishments.



      (10)   Use Unit 13 - convenience goods and services.



      (11)   Use Unit 14 - shopping goods and services.



      (12)   Use Unit 19 - hotel, motel and recreation facilities.



      (13)   Use Unit 28 - home occupations.



      (14)   Use unit 29 - mobile office trailer, so long as
property does not abut a residential district.



   (B)   Use by special exception. Special exception uses may be
permitted by the Board of Zoning Appeals following a public hearing, as
indicated below, when such are deemed essential or desirable to the public
convenience or welfare and are in harmony with the various elements or
objectives of the Comprehensive Plan.



      (1)   Use Unit 2 - areawide special exception uses.



      (2)   Use Unit 5 - single-family detached dwelling.



      (3)   Use Unit 15 - other trades and services (excluding
sexually oriented businesses).



      (4)   Use Unit 16 - gasoline service stations.



      (5)   Use Unit 17 - automotive and allied activities.



      (6)   Use Unit 18 - drive-in restaurants.



      (7)   Use Unit 20 - commercial recreation: intensive.



      (8)   Part Use Unit 21 - business signs and outdoor
advertising - excluding outdoor advertising (off-premises) signs.



      (9)   Use Unite 23 - warehousing and wholesaling.



      (10)   Use unit 29 - mobile office trailer when property abuts
a residential district.



   (C)   Limitations on uses by right and special exception.



      (1)   Except for accessory parking lots and service stations,
all activities including sales, display, preparations and storage shall be
conducted entirely within a completely enclosed building. (Except those that
may be permitted by the Board of Zoning Appeals in granting a special
exception.)



      (2)   All products shall be sold as retail on the premises.



      (3)   All on-site lighting shall be directed toward the
structures on-site and away from any neighboring residential districts.
Areawide loudspeakers or paging systems will not be allowed.



   (D)   Accessory uses permitted. Those accessory uses which are
customarily incidental to a principal permitted use are as follows.



      (1)   Management office, private recreation, laundry, and
storage facilities for Use Unit 7 (multiple family dwelling).



      (2)   Garage.



      (3)   Carport.



      (4)   Signs.



         (a)   Business signs in Use Unit 21 (see Use Unit 21 for
permitted business signs).



         (b)   Bulletin board.



         (c)   Identification sign.



         (d)   Real estate sign.



         (e)   Construction sign.



      (5)   Shelter (storm).



      (6)   Private swimming pool.



      (7)   Child care in home (four or less).



      (8)   Yard sales on residential lots.



   (E)   Accessory use conditions.



      (1)   General conditions.



         (a)   An accessory building erected as an integral part
of the principal building shall be made structurally a part thereof, shall
have a common wall therewith, and shall comply with the requirements
applicable to the principal building.



         (b)   A detached accessory building shall not be located
in the front or side yard or encroach upon a minimum building setback line,
but this limitation shall not apply to garages and carports, provided the
minimum required front yard or side yard set back line is observed.



         (c)   Within the rear yard, a detached accessory
building shall be located at least five feet from interior lot line.



      (2)   Signs for residential uses and community services of Use
Unit 4 are permitted as follows in accordance with the yard requirement of §
153.024(B)(5). Office and business signs are permitted in accordance with Use
Unit 21 (excluding outdoor advertising or off-premises signs).



         (a)   One bulletin board may be erected on each street
frontage of any educational, religious, institutional, or similar use in Use
Unit 4 by special exception or other uses by special exception requiring
announcement of its activities. The Bulletin Board shall not exceed 12 square
feet in surface area, nor 15 feet in height, and illumination, if any, shall
be by constant light.



         (b)   One identification sign may be erected on each
perimeter street frontage of a single-family detached subdivision, townhouse
development, duplex structure, quadruplex development, multifamily-family
development or permitted non- residential use. The sign shall not be
permitted to exceed 48 square feet of display surface area. The sign shall
not exceed 12 feet in height, and illumination, if any, shall be by constant
light.



         (c)   During the period of construction, a temporary
sign advertising the construction of improvements on the street premises, may
be erected on each perimeter street frontage of the development. The sign
shall not exceed 40 square feet in surface area, nor 15 feet in height, and
illumination, if any, shall be by constant light.



         (d)   A temporary real estate sign advertising the sale,
rental, or lease of the premises may be erected on each street frontage of a
lot. The sign shall not exceed eight square feet in surface area, nor 15 feet
in height, and illumination, if any, shall be by constant light.



      (3)   Private swimming pools (and all accessories thereto)
shall meet safety requirements of state and local building codes.



      (4)   Child care - in home.



         (a)   A maximum of four non-related children may be
cared for in the home without state



licensing. Five to ten children may be cared for in the home if the resident
obtains a special exception and maintains continuous state licensing. This
number does not include those who reside in the residence.



         (b)   No person shall be employed other than a member of
the immediate family residing on the premises or a substitute caregiver if
the primary caregiver is unavailable.



         (c)   No signs advertising the child care home shall be
permitted on the lot.



         (d)   No exterior alteration of the dwelling or any
customary accessory structure shall be made which would detract from the
residential character of the structures.



         (e)   State-licensed child-care homes in existence on
the effective date of this ordinance, but which would be prohibited by these
requirements, may continue as otherwise regulated herein.



      (5)   Yard sales on residential lots shall occur only once a
month for not more than three consecutive days.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12; Am. Ord. 13-9, passed 5-16-13)



§ 153.091  BULK AND AREA REQUIREMENTS: CBD CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT.



   (A)   Area. Every lot upon which a structure is hereafter erected
shall front onto a dedicated street or public right-of-way, shall be served
by sanitary sewers, and shall conform to the following minimum lot area and
width requirements.



      (1)   There is no minimum lot area or width or tract area or
width in the CBD.



   (B)   Yards. There are no yard requirements for the CBD.



   (C)   Height. No building or structure, or part thereof, shall be
erected or altered to a height exceeding four stories, not to exceed 75 feet,
unless a special exception is approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals.



   (D)   Lot coverage. The combined area occupied by all principal and
accessory buildings may be 100% of the area of the lot.



   (E)   Minimum floor area.



      (1)   Minimum livable floor area for a single-family detached
dwelling unit shall be 950 square feet and a minimum of 23 feet wide.



      (2)   Minimum livable floor area for a single-family attached
(townhouse, duplex, zero lot-line or quadruplex) shall be 650 square feet per
dwelling unit, total of 1,950 square feet for a townhouse structure (assuming
three units) total 1,300 square feet per duplex structure (two units) total
of 650 square feet per zero lot-line unit, and total of 2,600 square feet per
quadruplex structure (four units).



      (3)   Minimum livable floor area for a multiple-family
dwelling shall be 400 square feet for an efficiency apartment, 500 square
feet for a one-bedroom apartment, 600 square feet for a two-bedroom
apartment, and 700 for a three-bedroom apartment.



   (F)   Minimum lot area per dwelling unit. For residential uses on
individual lots or tracts not mixed with office or commercial uses, the
minimum lot area per dwelling unit shall be 1,500 square feet for multiple
family uses and other residential uses in the Use Group 7 containing multiple
dwelling units.



   (G)   Floor area ratio. The floor area ratio shall not exceed 4.00
unless a special exception is approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals.



   (H)   Dwelling unit density. The maximum number of dwelling units
per acre is 29.04.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12)



§ 153.092  SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN REVIEW FOR ALL BUSINESS AND COMMERCIAL
DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Purpose. By reason of potential adverse effects on public
services or to neighboring land uses, site plan review and approval is
required for all commercial developments for the purposes of assuring proper
accessibility, circulation, functional relationships of uses, and
compatibility with adjoining and nearby development. No building permit shall
be issued nor use commenced within this development except in accordance with
an approved site development plan in accordance with § 153.223.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12)



MANUFACTURING DISTRICT PROVISIONS



§ 153.101  PURPOSE.



   (A)   General purposes. The manufacturing districts are designed to:



      (1)   Achieve the manufacturing objectives of the
Comprehensive Plan;



      (2)   Meet the needs for industrial services and goods of
Posey County; and



      (3)   Preserve and promote the development of efficient
industrial areas and to minimize the adverse effects of industrial uses on
other land uses and thoroughfares by:



         (a)   Differentiating the types and purposes of
industrial activities;



         (b)   Establishing bulk and area controls;



         (c)   Requiring off-street loading and parking
facilities;



         (d)   Controlling the number, area, location, and types
of signs; and



         (e)   Protecting the character of industrial districts
and their peculiar suitability for manufacturing use.



   (B)   Purposes of the M-1 - Light Manufacturing and Research and
Development District. The M-1 District is designed to provide an environment
conducive to the development and conservation of modern manufacturing and
scientific research facilities. Additionally, it is to provide areas suitable
for manufacturing, wholesaling, warehousing, and other industrial activities
which have no objectionable environmental influences. All activities and
storage are to be entirely within a completely enclosed building.



   (C)   Purposes of the M-2 - Medium Manufacturing District. The M-2
District is designed to group together a wide range of industrial uses which
may produce moderately objectionable environmental influences in their
operation and appearance. All processes and activities are to be within an
enclosed building; while outdoor storage is permitted, it must be completely
screened from the public right-of-way and abutting properties (unless
permitted through a use requiring a special exception approved by the Board
of Zoning Appeals).



   (D)   Heavy manufacturing. Heavy manufacturing generally involve the
conversion of raw materials to products; processes often entail nuisances
such as light, noise, vibration, fumes, and raw materials and products are
delivered and shipped by a variety of transportation modes (truck, train and
barge). Further, processes may not be fully enclosed within a building; and,
while visually screened to the extent possible, raw material storage and
final products may prove difficult to fully screen due to their size and
height. Because a unique zoning district does not exist for heavy
manufacturing uses, these uses are permitted in the M-2 Medium Manufacturing
District by special exception approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12)



§ 153.102  USE REGULATIONS: M-1 LIGHT MANUFACTURING DISTRICT.



   (A)   Use by right. The principal uses permitted in the M-1 Light
Manufacturing District are designed by Use Units. The Use Units are groupings
of individual uses and are fully described, including their respective
off-street parking, loading, and screening requirements and other use
conditions in §§ 153.141 to 153.174. The use units permitted in the M-1
Light Manufacturing District are set forth below.



      (1)   Use Unit 1 - areawide uses by right.



      (2)   Use Unit 3 - public protection and utility facilities.



      (3)   Use Unit 10 - off-street parking areas.



      (4)   Use Unit 11 - offices and studios.



      (5)   Use Unit 15 - other trades and services (sexually
oriented uses only by special exception).



      (6)   Use Unit 16 - gasoline service stations.



      (7)   Use Unit 17 - automotive and allied activities.



      (8)   Use Unit 21 - business signs and outdoor advertising.



      (9)   Use Unit 22 - research and development.



      (10)   Use Unit 23 - warehousing and wholesaling.



      (11)   Use Unit 25 - light manufacturing.



      (12)   Other uses. Other uses or enterprises similar to the
above, which in the judgment of the Area Plan Commission Board or Board of
Zoning Appeals are similar to and not more objectionable to the general
welfare, than the uses listed. Other uses so determined shall be regarded as
listed uses. In no instance, however, shall the Area Plan Commission Board or
Board of Zoning Appeals determine nor the regulations be so interpreted, that
a use shall be permitted in a district where such use is specifically listed
as first permissible in a less restricted district or where such use is
permitted by special exception in this district.



      (13)   Use unit 29 - mobile office trailer, so long as
property does not abut a residential district.



   (B)   Use by special exception. Special exception uses may be
permitted by the Board of Zoning Appeals following a public hearing, as
indicated below, when such are deemed essential or desirable to the public
convenience or welfare and are in harmony with the various elements or
objectives of the Comprehensive Plan.



      (1)   Use Unit 2 - areawide special exception uses.



      (2)   Use Unit 4 - community services [excluding protective
shelters, treatment centers, and transitional living centers, but including
children’s nursery/day care center for more than four unrelated children
(excluding those who live in the home)].



      (3)   Use Unit 12 - entertainment and eating establishments.



      (4)   Use Unit 13 - convenience goods and services.



      (5)   Use Unit 14 - shopping goods and services.



      (6)   Use Unit 15 - sexually oriented businesses.



      (7)   Use Unit 18 - drive-in restaurants.



      (8)   Use Unit 19 - hotel, motel and recreation facilities.



      (9)   Use Unit 20 - commercial recreation: intensive.



      (10)   Use unit 29 - mobile office trailer when property abuts
a residential district.



   (C)   Limitations on uses by right and special exception.



      (1)   All activities including sales, display, preparations
and storage shall be conducted entirely within a completely enclosed building
except:



         (a)   Accessory parking lots and service stations;



         (b)   Retail stores in Use Units 14 and 15 involving the
sale or rental of building materials, lawn and garden equipment, lumber,
shrubs, trees and flowers;



         (c)   Uses in Use Unit 17 (automobile and allied
products); and



         (d)   Uses that may be permitted by the Board of Zoning
Appeals in granting a special exception.



      (2)   All products shall be sold as retail on the premises.



      (3)   All on-site lighting shall be directed toward the
structures on-site and away from any neighboring residential districts.



      (4)   Sexually oriented business.



         (a)   No person shall cause or permit the establishment
of any sexually oriented businesses as defined in § 153.270 unless that
business is specifically approved as a special exception by the Board of
Zoning Appeals. This business may be established only within those conditions
set by the Board of Zoning Appeals. (See § 153.246(C)(4)).



         (b)   The terminology “establishment of a sexually
oriented business” shall be defined to include within its meaning the
opening of such business as a new business, the relocation of such business,
the enlargement of such business in either scope or area, and/or the
conversion of an existing business location to any of the sexually oriented
uses as defined in § 153.270.



   (D)   Accessory uses permitted. Those accessory uses which are
customarily incidental to a permitted principal use are also permitted in the
M-2 Districts.



   (E)   Accessory use conditions.



      (1)   Accessory buildings shall meet the minimum building
setback lines of the applicable district.



      (2)   An accessory building which is erected as an integral
part of the principal building shall be structurally a part thereof. The
accessory building shall have a common wall therewith, and shall comply with
the requirements applicable to the principal building.



      (3)   Accessory storage of materials, equipment, or products
within 200 feet of an abutting R District shall be screened by the erection
of a screening wall or fence along the lot line or lines in common with the
abutting R District.



      (4)   Signs in the manufacturing districts, whether accessory
or principal uses, are subject to the use conditions set forth in Use Unit 21.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12; Am. Ord. 13-9, passed 5-16-13)



§ 153.103  BULK AND AREA REQUIREMENTS: M-1 LIGHT MANUFACTURING DISTRICT.



   (A)   Area. Every lot upon which a structure is hereafter erected
shall front onto a dedicated street or public right-of-way, and shall conform
to the following.



      (1)   There is no minimum lot area or tract area (where
sanitary sewers are available), but the minimum lot area or tract width is
150 feet.



      (2)   The minimum principal structure width is 20 feet.



      (3)   Where no sanitary sewers are available and disposal is
by soil absorption, the minimum lot area shall not be less than one acre. The
Posey County Health Department may require a larger lot.



   (B)   Yards.



      (1)   Front yard and street side yard.



         (a)   Every lot or tract shall have a front yard (or
street side yard) not less than 25 feet in depth. The front yard and street
side yard requirement may be reduced to none if adjacent lots or the majority
of the lots on a blockface have no front yard or street side yard.



         (b)   If the there is no dedicated roadway right-of-way,
the front yard (or corner lot side yard) setback from the center of the
roadway is 25 feet plus one-half the right-of-way width of the applicable
roadway functional class as if the roadway had been dedicated (adding 25 feet
for a “local street”, 40 feet for a “collector” or “secondary
arterial”, 60 feet for a “primary arterial”, and 75 feet for a
“divided primary arterial”).



      (2)   Side yard.



         (a)   Every lot shall have a side yard not less than ten
feet in depth.



         (b)   When an M District abuts an R or O District, the
side yard and rear yard requirement is increased to 20 feet, is further
increased an additional foot for each additional foot of building height
exceeding 28 feet, and cannot be reduced by landscaping. A fence is required
between industrial lots, and an opaque fence and evergreen screen is required
in the side and rear yard adjacent to non-industrial zones. Further, when an
M District abuts an R or O District, a combination of opaque fence, evergreen
screen and earthen berm is required.



      (3)   Rear yard.



         (a)   Every lot or tract shall have a rear yard of not
less than 20 feet in depth.



         (b)   When an M District abuts an R or O District, the
side yard and rear yard requirement is increased to 20 feet, is further
increased an additional foot for each additional foot of building height
exceeding 28 feet, and cannot be reduced by landscaping. A fence is required
between industrial lots, and an opaque fence and evergreen screen is required
in the side and rear yard adjacent to non-industrial zones. Further, when an
M District abuts an R or O District, a combination of opaque fence, evergreen
screen and earthen berm is required.



   (C)   Height. There is no height limitation for the M-1 District.



   (D)   Lot coverage. The combined area occupied by all principal and
accessory buildings shall not exceed 65% of the area of the lot.



   (E)   Minimum floor area. There is no minimum livable floor area.



   (F)   Floor area ratio. There is no maximum floor area ratio.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12)



§ 153.104  SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN REVIEW.



   By reason of potential adverse effects on public services or to
neighboring land uses, site plan review and approval is required for all
manufacturing development for the purpose of assuring proper accessibility,
circulation, functional relationships of uses and compatibility with
adjoining and nearby development. No building permit shall be issued, nor use
commenced within this development except in accordance with an approved site
development plan. See § 153.223 which also governs the manufacturing site
development plan review process.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12)



§ 153.105  USE REGULATIONS: M-2 MEDIUM MANUFACTURING DISTRICT.



   (A)   Use by right. The principal uses permitted in the M-2 Medium
Manufacturing District are designed by use units. The use units are groupings
of individual uses and are fully described, including their respective
off-street parking, loading, and screening requirements and other use
conditions in §§ 153.141 to 153.174. The use units permitted in the M-2
Medium Manufacturing District are set forth below.



      (1)   Use Unit 1 - areawide uses by right.



      (2)   Use Unit 3 - public protection and utility facilities.



      (3)   Use Unit 10 - off-street parking areas.



      (4)   Use Unit 11 - offices and studios.



      (5)   Use Unit 15 - other trades and services (sexually
oriented businesses only by special exception).



      (6)   Use Unit 16 - gasoline service stations.



      (7)   Use Unit 17 - automotive and allied activities.



      (8)   Use Unit 21 - business signs and outdoor advertising.



      (9)   Use Unit 22 - research and development.



      (10)   Use Unit 23 - warehousing and wholesaling.



      (11)   Use Unit 25 - light manufacturing.



      (12)   Use Unit 26 - medium manufacturing and Industry.



      (13)   Other uses. Other uses or enterprises similar to the
above, which in the judgment of the Area Plan Commission Board or Board of
Zoning Appeals are similar to and not more objectionable to the general
welfare, than the uses listed. Other uses so determined shall be regarded as
listed uses. In no instance, however, shall the Area Plan Commission Board or
Board of Zoning Appeals determine nor the regulations be so interpreted, that
a use shall be permitted in this district where such use is specifically
listed as a Use by special exception in this district.



      (14)   Use unit 29 - mobile office trailer, so long as
property does not abut a residential district.



   (B)   Use by special exception. Special exception uses may be
permitted by the Board of Zoning Appeals following a public hearing, as
indicated below, when such are deemed essential or desirable to the public
convenience or welfare and are in harmony with the various elements or
objectives of the Comprehensive Plan.



      (1)   Use Unit 2 - areawide special exception uses.



      (2)   Use Unit 12 - entertainment and eating establishments.



      (3)   Use Unit 13 - convenience goods and services.



      (4)   Use Unit 14 - shopping goods and services.



      (5)   Use Unit 15 - sexually oriented businesses.



      (6)   Use Unit 18 - drive-in restaurants.



      (7)   Use Unit 19 - hotel, motel and recreation facilities.



      (8)   Use Unit 20 - commercial recreation: intensive.



      (9)   Use Unit 24 - mining and mineral processing.



      (10)   Use Unit 27 - heavy manufacturing and industry.



      (11)   Use unit 29 - mobile office trailer when property abuts
a residential district.



   (C)   Limitations on uses by right and special exception.



      (1)   All processes and activities are to be within an
enclosed building; while outdoor storage is permitted, it must be completely
screened from the public right-of-way and abutting properties:



         (a)   Unless permitted through a use requiring a special
exception approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals;



         (b)   Except accessory parking lots and service stations;



         (c)   Except retail stores in Use Units 14 and 15
involving the sale or rental of building materials, lawn and garden
equipment, lumber, shrubs, trees and flowers; and



         (d)   Except uses in Use Unit 17 (automobile and allied
products).



      (2)   All products shall be sold as retail on the premises.



      (3)   All on-site lighting shall be directed toward the
structures on-site and away from any neighboring residential districts.



      (4)   Sexually oriented business.



         (a)   No person shall cause or permit the establishment
of any sexually oriented businesses as defined in § 153.270 unless that
business is specifically approved as a special exception by the Board of
Zoning Appeals. This business may be established only within those conditions
set by the Board of Zoning Appeals. See § 153.246(C)(4).



         (b)   The terminology “establishment of a sexually
oriented business” shall be defined to include within its meaning the
opening of such business as a new business, the relocation of such business,
the enlargement of such business in either scope or area, and/or the
conversion of an existing business location to any of the sexually oriented
uses as defined in § 153.270.



      (5)   All junkyards, salvage yards, storage yards, outside
storage yards, commercial vehicle and equipment parking lots, scrap yards,
scrap metal reduction operations, garbage reduction operations, or similar
operations to any of the afore listed shall be completely enclosed with an
opaque fence not less than eight feet in height. This fencing requirement is
mandatory for all storage areas for inoperable vehicles or inoperable
equipment in conjunction with repair shops or similar operations when such
storage areas abut the residential or office districts or are visible from
the public way.



   (D)   Accessory uses permitted. Those accessory uses which are
customarily incidental to a permitted principal use are also permitted in the
M-2 Districts.



   (E)   Accessory use conditions.



      (1)   Accessory buildings shall meet the minimum building
setback lines of the applicable district.



      (2)   An accessory building which is erected as an integral
part of the principal building shall be structurally a part thereof. The
accessory building shall have a common wall therewith, and shall comply with
the requirements applicable to the principal building.



      (3)   Accessory storage of materials, equipment, or products
within 200 feet of an abutting R District shall be screened by the erection
of a screening wall or fence along the lot line or lines in common with the
abutting R District.



      (4)   Signs in the manufacturing districts, whether accessoiy
or principal uses, are subject to the use conditions set forth in Use Unit 21.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12; Am. Ord. 12-22, passed 11-1-12; Am. Ord. 13-9,
passed 5-16-13)



§ 153.106  BULK AND AREA REQUIREMENTS: M-2 MEDIUM MANUFACTURING DISTRICT.



   (A)   Area. Every lot upon which a structure is hereafter erected
shall front onto a dedicated street or public right-of-way, and shall conform
to the following.



      (1)   There is no minimum lot area or tract area (where
sanitary sewers are available), but the minimum lot area or tract width is
200 feet.



      (2)   The minimum principal structure width is 20 feet.



      (3)   Where no sanitary sewers are available and disposal is
by soil absorption, the minimum lot area shall not be less than one acre. The
Posey County Health Department may require a larger lot.



   (B)   Yards.



      (1)   Front yard and street side yard.



         (a)   Every lot or tract shall have a front yard (or
street side yard) not less than 25 feet in depth. The front yard and street
side yard requirement may be reduced to none if adjacent lots or the majority
of the lots on a blockface have no front yard or street side yard.



         (b)   If the there is no dedicated roadway right-of-way,
the front yard (or corner lot side yard) setback from the center of the
roadway is 25 feet plus one-half the right-of-way width of the applicable
roadway functional class as if the roadway had been dedicated (adding 25 feet
for a “local street”, 40 feet for a “collector” or “secondary
arterial”, 60 feet for a “primary arterial”, and 75 feet for a
“divided primary arterial”).



      (2)   Side yard.



         (a)   Every lot shall have a side yard not less than ten
feet in depth.



         (b)   When an M District abuts an R or O District, the
side yard and rear yard requirement is increased to 20 feet, is further
increased an additional foot for each additional foot of building height
exceeding 28 feet, and cannot be reduced by landscaping. A fence is required
between industrial lots, and an opaque fence and evergreen screen is required
in the side and rear yard adjacent to non-industrial zones. Further, when an
M District abuts an R or O District, a combination of opaque fence, evergreen
screen and earthen berm is required.



      (3)   Rear yard.



         (a)   Every lot or tract shall have a rear yard of not
less than 20 feet in depth.



         (b)   When an M District abuts an R or O District, the
side yard and rear yard requirement is increased to 20 feet, is further
increased an additional foot for each additional foot of building height
exceeding 28 feet, and cannot be reduced by landscaping. A fence is required
between industrial lots, and an opaque fence and evergreen screen is required
in the side and rear yard adjacent to non-industrial zones. Further, when an
M District abuts an R or O District, a combination of opaque fence, evergreen
screen and earthen berm is required.



   (C)   Height. There is no height limitation for the M-2 District.



   (D)   Lot coverage. The combined area occupied by all principal and
accessory buildings shall not exceed 65% of the area of the lot.



   (E)   Minimum floor area. There is no minimum livable floor area.



   (G)   Floor area ratio. There is no maximum floor area ratio.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12)



§ 153.107  SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN REVIEW.



   By reason of potential adverse effects on public services or to
neighboring land uses, site plan review and approval is required for all
manufacturing development for the purpose of assuring proper accessibility,
circulation, functional relationships of uses and compatibility with
adjoining and nearby development. No building permit shall be issued, nor use
commenced within this development except in accordance with an approved site
development plan. See § 153.223 which also governs the manufacturing site
development plan review process.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12; Am. Ord. 2016-2A, passed 1-21-16)



FLOOD HAZARD (FH) AREA OR FLOOD PRONE DISTRICT



§ 153.111  STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE AND
OBJECTIVES.



   (A)   Statutory authorization. The Indiana Legislature has in I.C.
36-7-4 granted the power to local government units to control land use within
their jurisdictions. Therefore, the Posey County Commissioners of Posey
County (Unincorporated Areas), the Mount Vernon City Council of the City of
Mount Vernon, Posey County, the Poseyville Town Council of the Town of
Poseyville, Posey County and the Cynthiana Town Council of the Town of
Cynthiana, Posey County do hereby adopt the following floodplain management
regulations.



   (B)   Findings of fact.



      (1)   The flood hazard areas of the unincorporated areas of
Posey County, the City of Mount Vernon, the Town of Cynthiana, and the Town
of Poseyville are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of
life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and
governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection
and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the
public health, safety, and general welfare.



      (2)   These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect
of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and
velocities, and by the occupancy in flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to
floods or hazardous to other lands which are inadequately elevated,
inadequately flood-proofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages.



   (C)   Statement of purpose. It is the purpose of this subchapter to
promote the public health, safety, and general welfare and to minimize public
and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions
designed to:



      (1)   Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health,
safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, which result in
damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities.



      (2)   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including
facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the
time of initial construction.



      (3)   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream
channels, and natural protective barriers which are involved in the
accommodation of flood waters.



      (4)   Control filling, grading, dredging, and other
development which may increase erosion or flood damage.



      (5)   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers
which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards
to other lands.



      (6)   Make federal flood insurance available for structures
and their contents in the unincorporated areas of Posey County, the City of
Mount Vernon, the Town of Cynthiana, and the Town of Poseyville by fulfilling
the requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program.



   (D)   Objectives. The objectives of this subchapter are:



      (1)   To protect human life and health.



      (2)   To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood
control projects.



      (3)   To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts
associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the
general public.



      (4)   To minimize prolonged business interruptions.



      (5)   To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities
such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone, and sewer lines, streets,
and bridges located in floodplains.



      (6)   To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the
sound use and development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to
minimize flood blight areas.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12; Am. Ord. 14-17, passed 9-4-14)



§ 153.112  DEFINITIONS.



   Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this
subchapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in
common usage and to give this subchapter it’s most reasonable application.



   A ZONE.  Portions of the SFHA in which the principal source of
flooding is runoff from rainfall, snowmelt, or a combination of both. In A
ZONES, floodwaters may move slowly or rapidly, but waves are usually not a
significant threat to buildings. These areas are labeled as Zone A, Zone AE,
Zones A1-A30, Zone AO, Zone AH, Zone AR. and Zone A99 on a FIRM. The
definitions are presented below:



      ZONE A.  Areas subject to inundation by the 1% annual chance
flood event. Because detailed hydraulic analyses have not been performed, no
base flood elevation or depths are shown.



      ZONE AE AND A1-A30.  Areas subject to inundation by the 1%
annual chance flood event determined by detailed methods. Base flood
elevations are shown within these zones. (Zone AE is on new and revised maps
in place of Zones A1-A30.)



      ZONE AO.  Areas subject to inundation by one-percent annual
chance shallow flooding (usually sheet flow on sloping terrain) where average
depths are between one and three feet. Average flood depths derived from
detailed hydraulic analyses are shown within this zone.



      ZONE AH.  Areas subject to inundation by 1% annual chance
shallow flooding (usually areas of ponding) where average depths are between
one and three feet. Average flood depths derived from detailed hydraulic
analyses are shown within this zone.



      ZONE AR.  Areas that result from the decertification of a
previously accredited flood protection system mat is determined to be in the
process of being restored to provide base flood protection.



      ZONE A99.  Areas subject to inundation by the one-percent annual
chance flood event, but which will ultimately be protected upon completion of
an under-construction federal flood protection system. These are areas of
special flood hazard where enough progress has been made on the construction
of a protection system, such as dikes, dams, and levees, to consider it
complete for insurance rating purposes. ZONE A99 may only be used when the
flood protection system has reached specified statutory progress toward
completion. No base flood elevations or depths are shown.



   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE (APPURTENANT STRUCTURE).  A structure with a floor
area 400 square feet or less that is located on the same parcel of property
as the principal structure and the use of which is incidental to the use of
the principal structure. ACCESSORY STRUCTURES should constitute a minimal
initial investment, may not be used for human habitation, and be designed to
have minimal flood damage potential. Examples of ACCESSORY STRUCTURES are
detached garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, and hay sheds.



   ADDITION (TO AN EXISTING STRUCTURE).  Any walled and roofed expansion
to the perimeter of a structure in which the addition is connected by a
common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed
addition, which is connected by a firewall or is separated by independent
perimeter load-bearing walls, is new construction.



   APPEAL.  A request for a review of the floodplain administrator’s
interpretation of any provision of this subchapter.



   AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING.  A designated AO or AH Zone on the
community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one
to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path
of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may
be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.



   BASE FLOOD.  The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded
in any given year.



   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE).  The elevation of the 1% annual chance
flood.



   BASEMENT.  That portion of a structure having its floor sub-grade
(below ground level) on all sides.



   BOUNDARY RIVER.  The part of the Ohio River that forms the boundary
between Kentucky and Indiana.



   BOUNDARY RIVER FLOODWAY.  The floodway of a boundary river.



   BUILDING.  See STRUCTURE.



   COMMUNITY.  A political entity that has the authority to adopt and
enforce floodplain ordinances for the area under its jurisdiction.



   COMMUNITY RATING SYSTEM (CRS).  A program developed by the Federal
Insurance Administration to provide incentives for those communities in the
regular program that have gone beyond the minimum floodplain management
requirements to develop extra measures to provide protection from flooding.



   CRITICAL FACILITY.  A facility for which even a slight chance of
flooding might be too great. CRITICAL FACILITIES include, but are not limited
to, schools, nursing homes, hospitals, police, fire, and emergency response
installations, installations which produce, use or store hazardous materials
or hazardous waste.



   DEVELOPMENT.  Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate including but not limited to:



      (1)   Construction, reconstruction, or placement of a
structure or any addition to a structure;



      (2)   Installing a manufactured home on a site, preparing a
site for a manufactured home or installing a recreational vehicle on a site
for more than 180 days;



      (3)   Installing utilities, erection of walls and fences,
construction of roads, or similar projects;



      (4)   Construction of flood control structures such as levees,
dikes, dams, channel improvements, and the like;



      (5)   Mining, dredging, filling, grading, excavation, or
drilling operations;



      (6)   Construction and/or reconstruction of bridges or
culverts;



      (7)   Storage of materials; or



      (8)   Any other activity that might change the direction,
height, or velocity of flood or surface waters.



   DEVELOPMENT does not include activities such as the maintenance of
existing structures and facilities such as painting, re-roofing; resurfacing
roads; or gardening, plowing, and similar agricultural practices that do not
involve filling, grading, excavation, or the construction of permanent
structures.



   ELEVATED STRUCTURE.  A non-basement structure built to have the lowest
floor elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation
perimeter walls, filled stem wall foundations (also called chain walk),
pilings, or columns (posts and piers).



   ELEVATION CERTIFICATE.  A certified statement that verifies a
structure’s elevation information.



   EMERGENCY PROGRAM.  The first phase under which a community
participates in the NFIP. It is intended to provide a first layer amount of
insurance at subsidized rates on all insurable structures in that community
before the effective date of the initial FIRM.



   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION.  A manufactured home
park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed
before the effective date of the community’s first floodplain ordinance.



   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION.  The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).



   FEMA.  The Federal Emergency Management Agency.



   FLOOD.  A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow, the unusual and
rapid accumulation, or the runoff of surface waters from any source.



   FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM).  An official map on which the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) or Federal Insurance
Administration (FIA) has delineated the areas of flood hazards and regulatory
floodway.



   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM).  An official map of a community, on
which FEMA has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk
premium zones applicable to the community.



   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS).  The official hydraulic and hydrologic
report provided by FEMA. The report contains flood profiles, as well as the
FIRM, FBFM (where applicable), and the water surface elevation of the base
flood.



   FLOOD PRONE AREA.  Any land area acknowledged by a community as being
susceptible to inundation by water from any source. (See FLOOD).



   FLOOD PROTECTION GRADE (FPG).  The elevation of the regulatory flood
plus two feet at any given location in the SFHA. (see FREEBOARD).



   FLOODPLAIN.  The channel proper and the areas adjoining any wetland,
lake, or watercourse which have been or hereafter may be covered by the
regulatory flood. The FLOODPLAIN includes both the floodway and the fringe
districts.



   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT.  The operation of an overall program of
corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving
and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including
but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works,
floodplain management regulations, and open space plans.



   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS.  This subchapter and other zoning
ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations,
special purpose ordinances, and other applications of police power which
control development in flood-prone areas. This term describes federal, state,
or local regulations in any combination thereof, which provide standards for
preventing and reducing flood loss and damage. FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
REGULATIONS are also referred to as floodplain regulations, floodplain
ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, and floodplain management
requirements,



   FLOODPROOFING (DRY FLOODPROOFING).  A method of protecting a structure
that ensures that the structure, together with attendant utilities and
sanitary facilities, is watertight to the floodproofed design elevation with
walls that are substantially impermeable to the passage of water. All
structural components of these walls are capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic flood forces, including the effects of buoyancy, and anticipated
debris impact forces.



   FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATE.  A form used to certify compliance for
non-residential structures as an alternative to elevating structures to or
above the FPG. This certification must be by a registered professional
engineer or architect



   FLOODWAY.  The channel of a river or stream and those portions of the
floodplains adjoining the channel which are reasonably required to
efficiently carry and discharge the peak flood flow of the regulatory flood
of any river or stream.



   FREEBOARD.  A factor of safety, usually expressed in feet above the
BFE, which is applied for the purposes of floodplain management. It is used
to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood
heights greater than those calculated for the base flood.



   FRINGE.  Those portions of the floodplain lying outside the floodway.



   HARDSHIP (as related to variances of this subchapter).  The
exceptional hardship that would result from a failure to grant the requested
variance. The Board of Zoning Appeals requires that the variance is
exceptional, unusual, and peculiar to the property involved. Mere economic or
financial hardship alone is NOT exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic
considerations, physical handicaps, personal preferences, or the disapproval
of one’s neighbors likewise cannot, as a rule, qualify as an exceptional
hardship. All of these problems can be resolved through other means without
granting a variance, even if the alternative is more expensive, or requires
the property owner to build elsewhere or put the parcel to a different use
than originally intended.



   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE.  The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface, prior to the start of construction, next to the proposed walls of a
structure.



   HISTORIC STRUCTURES.  Any structures individually listed on the
National Register of Historic Places or the Indiana State Register of
Historic Sites and Structures.



   INCREASED COST OF COMPLIANCE (ICC).  The cost to repair a
substantially damaged structure that exceeds the minimal repair cost and that
is required to bring a substantially damaged structure into compliance with
the local flood damage prevention ordinance. Acceptable mitigation measures
are elevation, relocation, demolition, or any combination thereof. All
renewal and new business flood insurance policies with effective dates on or
after June 1,1997, will include ICC coverage.



   LETTER OF FINAL DETERMINATION (LFD).  A letter issued by FEMA during
the mapping update process which establishes final elevations and provides
the new flood map and flood study to the community. The LFD initiates the
six-month adoption period. The community must adopt or amend its floodplain
management regulations during this six-month period unless the community has
previously incorporated an automatic adoption clause.



   LETTER OF MAP CHANGE (LOMC).  A general term used to refer to the
several types of revisions and amendments to FEMA maps that can be
accomplished by letter. They include Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA), Letter
of Map Revision (LOMR), and Letter of Map Revision based on Fill (LOMR-F).
The definitions are presented below:



      LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA).  An amendment by letter to the
currently effective FEMA map that establishes that a property is not located
in a SFHA through the submittal of property specific elevation data. A LOMA
is only issued by FEMA.



      LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR).  An official revision to the
currently effective FEMA map. It is issued by FEMA and changes flood zones,
delineations, and elevations.



      LETTER OF MAP REVISION BASED ON FILL (LOMR-F).  An official
revision by letter to an effective NFIP map. A LOMR-F provides FEMA’s
determination concerning whether a structure or parcel has been elevated on
fill above the BFE and excluded from the SFHA.



   LOWEST ADJACENT GRADE.  The lowest elevation, after completion of
construction, of the ground, sidewalk, patio, deck support, or basement
entryway immediately next to the structure.



   LOWEST FLOOR.  The lowest elevation described among the following:



      (1)   The top of the lowest level of the structure.



      (2)   The top of the basement floor.



      (3)   The top of the garage floor, if the garage is the lowest
level of the structure.



      (4)   The top of the first floor of a structure elevated on
pilings or pillars.



      (5)   The top of the floor level of any enclosure, other than
a basement, below an elevated structure where the walls of the enclosure
provide any resistance to the flow of flood waters unless:



         (a)   The walls are designed to automatically equalize
the hydrostatic flood forces on the walls by allowing for the entry and exit
of flood waters by providing a minimum of two openings (in addition to
doorways and windows) in a minimum of two exterior walls; if a structure has
more than one enclosed area, each shall have openings on exterior walls;



         (b)   The total net area of all openings shall be at
least one square inch for every one square foot of enclosed area; the bottom
of all such openings shall be no higher than one foot above the exterior
grade or the interior grade immediately beneath each opening, whichever is
higher; and



         (c)   Such enclosed space shall be usable solely for the
parking of vehicles and building access.



   MANUFACTURED HOME.  A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with
or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities.
The term MANUFACTURED HOME does not include a RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.



   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION.  A parcel (or contiguous
parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or
sale.



   MARKET VALUE.  The building value, excluding the land (as agreed to
between a willing buyer and seller), as established by what the local real
estate market will bear. MARKET VALUE can be established by independent
certified appraisal, replacement cost depreciated by age of building (actual
cash value), or adjusted assessed values.



   MITIGATION.  Sustained actions taken to reduce or eliminate long-term
risk to people and property from hazards and their effects. The purpose of
MITIGATION is twofold: to protect people and structures, and to minimize the
cost of disaster response and recovery.



   NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM (NFIP).  The federal program that
makes flood insurance available to owners of property in participating
communities nationwide through the cooperative efforts of the Federal
Government and the private insurance industry.



   NATIONAL GEODETIC VERTICAL DATUM (NGVD) OF 1929 AS CORRECTED IN 1929. 
A vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations
within the floodplain.



   NEW CONSTRUCTION.  Any structure for which the start of construction
commenced after the effective date of the community’s first floodplain
ordinance.



   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION.  A manufactured home park
or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the
lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or
after the effective date of the community’s first floodplain ordinance.



   NON-BOUNDARY RIVER FLOODWAY.  The floodway of any river or stream
other than a boundary river.



   NORTH AMERICAN VERTICAL DATUM OF 1988 (NAVD 88) AS ADOPTED IN 1993.  A
vertical control datum used as a reference for establishing varying
elevations within the floodplain.



   OBSTRUCTION.  Includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf,
embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation,
canalization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel,
refuse, fill, structure, vegetation, or other material in, along, across or
projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the
direction and/or velocity of the flow of water; or due to its location, its
propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of water, or its
likelihood of being carried downstream.



   ONE-PERCENT ANNUAL CHANCE FLOOD.  The flood that has a 1% chance of
being equaled or exceeded in any given year. Any flood zone that begins with
the letter A is subject to the 1% ANNUAL CHANCE FLOOD. See REGULATORY FLOOD.



   PHYSICAL MAP REVISION (PMR).  An official republication of a
community’s FEMA map to effect changes to base (1% annual chance) flood
elevations, floodplain boundary delineations, regulatory floodways, and
planimetric features. These changes typically occur as a result of structural
works or improvements, annexations resulting in additional flood hazard
areas, or correction to base flood elevations or SFHAs.



   PUBLIC SAFETY AND NUISANCE.  Anything which is injurious to the safety
or health of an entire community, neighborhood or any considerable number of
persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary
manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal, or basin.



   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.  A vehicle which is:



      (1)   Built on a single chassis;



      (2)   Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at
the largest horizontal projections;



      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by
a light duty truck; and



      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling,
but as quarters for recreational camping, travel, or seasonal use.



   REGULAR PROGRAM.  The phase of the community’s participation in the
NFIP where more comprehensive floodplain management requirements are imposed
and higher amounts of insurance are available based upon risk zones and
elevations determined in a FIS.



   REGULATORY FLOOD.  The flood having a one 1% chance of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year, as calculated by a method and procedure that
is acceptable to and approved by the Indiana Department of Natural Resources
and the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The regulatory flood elevation
at any location is as defined in § 153.113(B) of this subchapter. The
REGULATORY FLOOD is also known by the term BASE FLOOD, ONE-PERCENT ANNUAL
CHANCE FLOOD, and 100-YEAR FLOOD.



   REPETITIVE LOSS.  Food-related damages sustained by a structure on two
separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at
the time of each such flood event, on the average, equaled or exceeded 25% of
the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.



   SECTION 1316.  That section of the National Flood Insurance Act of
1968, as amended, which states that no new flood insurance coverage shall be
provided for any property that the Administrator finds has been declared by a
duly constituted state or local zoning authority or other authorized public
body to be in violation of state or local laws, regulations, or ordinances
that intended to discourage or otherwise restrict land development or
occupancy in flood-prone areas.



   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA).  Those lands within the jurisdiction
of Posey County, the City of Mount Vernon, the Town of Cynthiana, and the
Town of Poseyville subject to inundation by the regulatory flood. The SFHAs
of Posey County, the City of Mount Vernon, the Town of Cynthiana, and the
Town of Poseyville are generally identified as such on the Posey County,
Indiana and Incorporated Areas Flood Insurance Rate Map dated November 5,
2014 as well as any future updates, amendments, or revisions, prepared by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency with the most recent date. (These areas
are shown on a FIRM as Zone A, AE, Al- A30, AH, AR, A99, or AO).



   START OF CONSTRUCTION.  Includes substantial improvement, and means
the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of
the-permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of
permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of a
slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or
any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured
home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land
preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the
installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a
basement, footings, piers, foundations, or the erection of temporary forms;
nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings,
such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the
main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual START OF
CONSTRUCTION means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other
structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the
external dimensions of the building.



   STRUCTURE.  A structure that is principally above ground and is
enclosed by walls and a roof. The term includes a gas or liquid storage tank,
a manufactured home, or a prefabricated building. The term also includes
recreational vehicles to be installed on a site for more than 180 days.



   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE.  Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to it’s before damaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure
before the damage occurred.



   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.  Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or
exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the “start of
construction” of the improvement. This term includes structures that have
incurred “repetitive loss” or “substantial damage” regardless of the
actual repair work performed. The term does not include improvements of
structures to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary,
or safety code requirements or any alteration of a “historic structure”,
provided that the alteration will not preclude the structures continued
designation as a “historic structure”.



   SUSPENSION.  The removal of a participating community from the NFIP
because the community has not enacted and/or enforced the proper floodplain
management regulations required for participation in the NFIP.



   VARIANCE.  A grant of relief from the requirements of this ordinance,
which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this ordinance
where specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship.



   VIOLATION.  The failure of a structure or other development to be
fully compliant with this subchapter. A structure or other development
without the elevation, other certification, or other evidence of compliance
required in this subchapter is presumed to be in VIOLATION until such time as
that documentation is provided.



   WATERCOURSE.  A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel or other
topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically.
WATERCOURSE includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood
damage may occur.



   X ZONE.  The area where the flood hazard is less than that in the
SFHA. Shaded X ZONES shown on recent FIRMs (B zones on older FIRMs) designate
areas subject to inundation by the flood with a 0.2% chance of being equaled
or exceeded (the 500-year flood). Unshaded X ZONES (C zones on older FIRMs)
designate areas where the annual exceedance probability of flooding is less
than 0.2%.



   ZONE.  A geographical area shown on a FIRM that reflects the severity
or type of flooding in the area.



   ZONE A.  See definition for A ZONE.



   ZONE B, C, AND X.  Areas identified in the community as areas of
moderate or minimal hazard from the principal source of flood in the area.
However, buildings in these zones could be flooded by severe, concentrated
rainfall coupled with inadequate local drainage systems. Flood insurance is
available in participating communities but is not required by regulation in
these zones. (Zone X is used on new and revised maps in place of Zones B and
C).



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12; Am. Ord. 14-17, passed 9-4-14)



§ 153.113  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Lands to which this subchapter applies. This subchapter shall
apply to all SFHAs and known flood prone areas within the jurisdiction of
Posey County, the City of Mount Vernon, the Town of Cynthiana, and the Town
of Poseyville.



   (B)   Basis for establishing regulatory flood data. This
subchapter’s protection standard is the regulatory flood. The best
available regulatory flood data is listed below.



      (1)   The regulatory flood elevation, floodway, and fringe
limits for the studied SFHAs within the jurisdiction of Posey County, the
City of Mount Vernon, the Town of Cynthiana, and the Town of Poseyville shall
be as delineated on the one-percent annual chance flood profiles in the Flood
Insurance Study of Posey County, Indiana and incorporated areas and the
corresponding Flood Insurance Rate Map dated November 5, 2014 as well as any
future updates, amendments, or revisions, prepared by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency with the most recent date.



      (2)   The regulatory flood elevation, floodway, and fringe
limits for each of the SFHAs within the jurisdiction of Posey County, the
City of Mount Vernon, the Town of Cynthiana, and the Town of Poseyville,
delineated as an “A Zone” on the Posey County, Indiana and Incorporated
Areas Flood Insurance Rate Map dated November 5, 2014 as well as any future
updates, amendments, or revisions, prepared by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency with the most recent date, shall be according to the best
data available as provided by the Indiana Department of Natural Resources;
provided the upstream drainage area from the subject site is greater than one
square mile. Whenever a party disagrees with the best available data, the
party needs to replace existing data with better data that meets current
engineering standards. To be considered, this data must be submitted to the
Indiana Department of Natural Resources for review and subsequently approved.



      (3)   In the absence of a published FEMA map, or absence of
identification on a FEMA map, the regulatory flood elevation, floodway, and
fringe limits of any watercourse in the communities’ known flood prone
areas shall be according to the best data available as provided by the
Indiana Department of Natural Resources; provided the upstream drainage area
from the subject site is greater than one square mile.



      (4)   Upon issuance of a Letter of Final Determination (LFD),
any more restrictive data in the new (not yet effective) mapping/study shall
be utilized for permitting and construction (development) purposes, replacing
all previously effective less restrictive flood hazard data provided by FEMA.



   (C)   Establishment of floodplain development permit. A floodplain
development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of
this subchapter prior to the commencement of any development activities in
areas of special flood hazard.



   (D)   Compliance. No structure shall hereafter be located, extended,
converted or structurally altered within the SFHA without full compliance
with the terms of this subchapter and other applicable regulations. No land
or stream within the SFHA shall hereafter be altered without full compliance
with the terms of mis ordinance and other applicable regulations.



   (E)   Abrogation and greater restrictions. This subchapter is not
intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or
deed restrictions. However, where this subchapter and another conflict or
overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.



   (F)   Discrepancy between mapped floodplain and actual ground
elevations.



      (1)   In cases where there is a discrepancy between the mapped
floodplain (SFHA) on the FIRM and the actual ground elevations, the elevation
provided on the profiles shall govern.



      (2)   If the elevation of the site in question is below the
base flood elevation, that site shall be included in the SFHA and regulated
accordingly.



      (3)   If the elevation (natural grade) of the site in question
is above the base flood elevation and not located within the floodway, that
site shall be considered outside the SFHA and the floodplain regulations will
not be applied. The property owner shall be advised to apply for a LOMA.



   (G)   Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this
subchapter all provisions shall be:



      (1)   Considered as minimum requirements;



      (2)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and



      (3)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers
granted under state statutes.



   (H)   Warning and disclaimer of liability. The degree of flood
protection required by this subchapter is considered reasonable for
regulatory purposes and is based on available information derived from
engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods can and will occur
on rare occasions. Therefore, this subchapter does not create any liability
on the part of Posey County, the City of Mount Vernon, the Town of Cynthiana,
the Town of Poseyville, the Indiana Department of Natural Resources, or the
State of Indiana, for any flood damage that results from reliance on this
subchapter or any administrative decision made lawfully thereunder.



   (I)   Penalties for violation. Failure to obtain a floodplain
development permit in the SFHA or failure to comply with the requirements of
a floodplain development permit or conditions of a variance shall be deemed
to be a violation of this subchapter. All violations shall be considered a
common nuisance and shall be punishable by a fine not less than $25 and not
more than $500.



      (1)   A separate offense shall be deemed to occur for each day
the violation continues to exist.



      (2)   The Floodplain Administrator shall inform the owner that
any such violation is considered a willful act to increase flood damages and
therefore may cause coverage by a Standard Flood Insurance Policy to be
suspended.



      (3)   Nothing herein shall prevent Posey County, the City of
Mount Vernon, the Town of Cynthiana, and the Town of Poseyville from taking
such other lawful action to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs
connected therewith shall accrue to the person or persons responsible.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12; Am. Ord. 14-17, passed 9-4-14)



§ 153.114  ADMINISTRATION.



   (A)   Designation of Administrator. The Executive Director of the
Posey County Area Plan Commission shall administer and implement the
provisions of this subchapter and is herein referred to as the Floodplain
Administrator.



   (B)   Permit procedures. Application for a floodplain development
permit shall be made to the Floodplain Administrator on forms furnished by
him or her prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be
limited to, the following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the
nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question;
existing or proposed structures, earthen fill, storage of materials or
equipment, drainage facilities, and the location of the foregoing.
Specifically the following information is required:



      (1)   Application stage.



         (a)   A description of the proposed development.



         (b)   Location of the proposed development sufficient to
accurately locate property and structure(s) in relation to existing roads and
streams.



         (c)   A legal description of the property site.



         (d)   A site development plan showing existing and
proposed development locations and existing and proposed land grades.



         (e)   Elevation of the top of the planned lowest floor
(including basement) of all proposed buildings. Elevation should be in NAVD
88 or NGVD.



         (f)   Elevation (in NAVD 88 or NGVD) to which any
non-residential structure will be floodproofed.



         (g)   Description of the extent to which any watercourse
will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. A
hydrologic and hydraulic engineering study is required and any watercourse
changes submitted to DNR for approval and then to FEMA as a Letter of Map
Revision. (See § 153.114(C)(6) for additional information.)



      (2)   Construction stage.



         (a)   Upon establishment of the lowest floor of an
elevated structure or structure constructed on fill, it shall be the duty of
the applicant to submit to the Floodplain Administrator a certification of
the NAVD 88 or NGVD elevation of the lowest floor, as built. The
certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a
registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by the same.
The Floodplain Administrator shall review the lowest floor elevation survey
data submitted. The applicant shall correct deficiencies detected by such
review before any further work is allowed to proceed. Failure to submit the
survey or failure to make the corrections required hereby shall be cause to
issue a stop-work order for the project. Any work undertaken prior to
submission of the elevation certification shall be at the applicant’s risk.



         (b)   Upon establishment of the floodproofed elevation
of a floodproofed structure, it shall be the duty of the applicant to submit
to the Floodplain Administrator a floodproofing certificate. Certification
shall be prepared by or under the direction supervision of a registered
professional engineer and certified by same. (The Floodplain Administrator
shall review the floodproofing certification submitted.) The applicant shall
correct any deficiencies detected by such review before any further work is
allowed to proceed. Failure to submit the floodproofing certification or
failure to make correction required shall be cause to issue a stop-work order
for the project.



      (3)   Finished construction. Upon completion of construction,
an elevation certification which depicts the “as-built” lowest floor
elevation is required to be submitted to the Floodplain Administrator. If the
project includes a floodproofing measure, floodproofing certification is
required to be submitted by the applicant to the Floodplain Administrator.



   (C)   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator.
The Floodplain Administrator and/or designated staff is hereby authorized and
directed to enforce the provisions of this subchapter. The Administrator is
further authorized to render interpretations of this subchapter, which are
consistent with its spirit and purpose. Duties and responsibilities of the
Floodplain Administrator shall include, but are not limited to:



      (1)   Review all floodplain development permits to assure that
the permit requirements of this subchapter have been satisfied;



      (2)   Inspect and inventory damaged structures in the SFHA and
complete substantial damage determinations;



      (3)   Ensure that construction authorization has been granted
by the Indiana Department of Natural Resources for all development projects
subject to § 153.115(E) and (G)(1) of this subchapter, and maintain a record
of such authorization (either copy of actual permit/authorization or
floodplain analysis/regulatory assessment);



      (4)   Ensure that all necessary federal or state permits have
been received prior to issuance of the local floodplain development permit.
Copies of such permits/authorizations are to be maintained on file with the
floodplain development permit;



      (5)   Maintain and track permit records involving additions
and improvements to residences located in the floodway;



      (6)   Notify adjacent communities and the State Floodplain
Coordinator prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and
submit copies of such notifications to FEMA;



      (7)   Maintain for public inspection and furnish upon request
local permit documents, damaged structure inventories, substantial damage
determinations, regulatory flood data, SFHA maps, Letters of Map Change
(LOMC), copies of DNR permits, letters of authorization, and floodplain
analysis and regulatory assessments (letters of recommendation), federal
permit documents, and “as-built” elevation and floodproofing data for all
buildings constructed subject to this subchapter;



      (8)   Utilize and enforce all Letters of Map Change (LOMC) or
Physical Map Revisions (PMR) issued by FEMA for the currently effective SFHA
maps of the community;



      (9)   Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered
or relocated portion of the watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity
is not diminished;



      (10)   Review certified plans and specifications for
compliance;



      (11)   Verify and record the actual elevation of the lowest
floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures,
in accordance with § 153.114(B);



      (12)   Verify and record the actual elevation to which any new
or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed in accordance
with § 153.114(B);



      (13)   Inspect sites for compliance. For all new and/or
substantially improved buildings constructed in the SFHA, inspect before,
during and after construction. Authorized county, city, and town officials
shall have the right to enter and inspect properties located in the SFHA;



      (14)   Stop work orders.



         (a)   Upon notice from the Floodplain Administrator,
work on any building, structure or premises that is being done contrary to
the provisions of this subchapter shall immediately cease.



         (b)   Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given
to the owner of the property, or to his or her agent, or to the person doing
the work, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed; and



      (15)   Revocation of permits.



         (a)   The Floodplain Administrator may revoke a permit
or approval, issued under the provisions of the subchapter, in cases where
there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to the material
fact in the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based.



         (b)   The Floodplain Administrator may revoke a permit
upon determination by the Floodplain Administrator that the construction,
erection, alteration, repair, moving, demolition, installation, or
replacement of the structure for which the permit was issued is in violation
of, or not in conformity with, the provisions of this subchapter.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12; Am. Ord. 14-17, passed 9-4-14)



§ 153.115  PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION.



   (A)   General standards. In all SFHAs and known flood prone areas
the following provisions are required:



      (1)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure;



      (2)   Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include,
but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors.
This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state
requirements for resisting wind forces;



      (3)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage
below the FPG;



      (4)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage;



      (5)   Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air
conditioning equipment, utility meters, and other service facilities shall be
located at/above the FPG or designed so as to prevent water from entering or
accumulating within the components below the FPG. Water and sewer pipes,
electrical and telephone lines, submersible pumps, and other waterproofed
service facilities may be located below the FPG;



      (6)   New and replacement water supply systems shall be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the
system;



      (7)   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the
system;



      (8)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and
constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during
flooding; and



      (9)   Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements
to a structure that is in compliance with the provisions of this ordinance
shall meet the requirements of “new construction” as contained in this
subchapter.



   (B)   Specific standards. In all SFHAs, the following provisions are
required:



      (1)   In addition to the requirements of division (A) of this
section, all structures to be located in the SFHA shall be protected from
flood damage below the FPG. This building protection requirement applies to
the following situations:



         (a)   Construction or placement of any structure having
a floor area greater than 400 square feet;



         (b)   Addition or improvement made to any existing
structure where the cost of the addition or improvement equals or exceeds 50%
of the value of the existing structure (excluding the value of the land);



         (c)   Reconstruction or repairs made to a damaged
structure where the costs of restoring the structure to it’s before damaged
condition equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure
(excluding the value of the land) before damage occurred;



         (d)   Installing a travel trailer or recreational
vehicle on a site for more than 180 days;



         (e)   Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a
new manufactured home on an existing site. This ordinance does not apply to
returning the existing manufactured home to the same site it lawfully
occupied before it was removed to avoid flood damage;



         (f)   Reconstruction or repairs made to a repetitive
loss structure; and



         (g)   Addition or improvement made to any existing
structure with a previous addition or improvement constructed since the
community’s first floodplain ordinance.



      (2)   Residential structures. New construction or substantial
improvement of any residential structure (or manufactured home) shall have
the lowest floor; including basement, at or above the FPG (two feet above the
base flood elevation). Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to
elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded
movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with the standards
of division (B)(4) of this section.



      (3)   Non-residential structures. New construction or
substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial, or non-residential
structure (or manufactured home) shall either have the lowest floor,
including basement, elevated to or above the FPG (two feet above the base
flood elevation) or be floodproofed to or above the FPG. Should solid
foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings
sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be
provided in accordance with the standards of division (B)(4) of this section.
Structures located in all “A Zones” may be floodproofed in lieu of being
elevated if done in accordance with the following:



         (a)   A registered professional engineer or architect
shall certify that the structure has been designed so that below the FPG, the
structure and attendant utility facilities are watertight and capable of
resisting the effects of the regulatory flood. The structure design shall
take into account flood velocities, duration, rate of rise, hydrostatic
pressures, and impacts from debris or ice. Such certification shall be
provided to the official as set forth in § 153.114(C)(12); and



         (b)   Floodproofing measures shall be operable without
human intervention and without an outside source of electricity.



      (4)   Elevated structures. New construction or substantial
improvements of elevated structures shall have the lowest floor at or above
the FPG. Elevated structures with fully enclosed areas formed by foundation
and other exterior walls below the flood protection grade shall be designed
to preclude finished living space and designed to allow for the entry and
exit of floodwaters to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on
exterior walls. Designs must meet the following minimum criteria:



         (a)   Provide a minimum of two openings located in a
minimum of two exterior walls (having a total net area of not less than one
square inch for every one square foot of enclosed area);



         (b)   The bottom of all openings shall be no more than
one foot above the exterior grade or the interior grade immediately beneath
each opening, whichever is higher;



         (c)   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers,
valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow
of floodwaters in both directions;



         (d)   Access to me enclosed area shall be the minimum
necessary to allow for parking for vehicles (garage door) or limited storage
of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises (standard
exterior door) or entry to the living area (stairway or elevator);



         (e)   The interior portion of such enclosed area shall
not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms; and



         (f)   The interior grade of such enclosed area shall be
at an elevation at or higher than the exterior grade.



      (5)   Structures constructed on fill. A residential or
nonresidential structure may be constructed on a permanent-land fill in
accordance with the following:



         (a)   The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than
one foot deep before compacting to 95% of the maximum density obtainable with
either the Standard or Modified Proctor Test method. The results of the test
showing compliance shall be retained in the permit file;



         (b)   The fill shall extend ten feet beyond the
foundation of the structure before sloping below the BFE;



         (c)   The fill shall be protected against erosion and
scour during flooding by vegetative cover, riprap, or bulkheading. If
vegetative cover is used, the slopes shall be no steeper than three
horizontal to one vertical;



         (d)   The fill shall not adversely affect the flow of
surface drainage from or onto neighboring properties; and



         (e)   The top of the lowest floor including basements
shall be at or above the FPG.



      (6)   Standards for manufactured homes and recreational
vehicles. Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles to be installed or
substantially improved on a site for more than 180 days must meet one of the
following requirements:



         (a)   These requirements apply to all manufactured homes
to be placed on a site outside a manufactured home park or subdivision; in a
new manufactured home park or subdivision; in an expansion to an existing
manufactured home park or subdivision; or in an existing manufactured home
park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred “substantial
damage” as a result of a flood:



            1.   The manufactured home shall be elevated on a
permanent foundation such that the lowest floor shall be at or above the FPG
and securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement;



            2.   Fully enclosed areas formed by foundation and
other exterior walls below the FPG shall be designed to preclude finished
living space and designed to allow for the entry and exit of floodwaters to
automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls as required
for elevated structures in division (B)(4) of this section; and



            3.   Flexible skirting and rigid skirting not
attached to the frame or foundation of a manufactured home are not required
to have openings;



         (b)   These requirements apply to all manufactured homes
to be placed on a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision
that has not been substantially damaged by a flood:



            1.   The manufactured home shall be elevated so
that the lowest floor of the manufactured home chassis is supported by
reinforced piers or other foundation elevations that are no less than 36
inches in height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately
anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral
movement;



            2.   Fully enclosed areas formed by foundation and
other exterior walls below the FPG shall be designed to preclude finished
living space and designed to allow for the entry and exit of floodwaters to
automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls as required
for elevated structures in Section 153.115(B)(4); and



            3.   Flexible skirting and rigid skirting not
attached to the frame or foundation of a manufactured home are not required
to have openings; or



         (c)   Recreational vehicles placed on a site shall
either:



            1.   Be on site for less than 180 days;



            2.   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use
(defined as being on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site
only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no
permanently attached additions); or



            3.   Meet the requirements for manufactured homes
as stated earlier in this section.



      (7)   Accessory structures.  Relief to the elevation or dry
floodproofing standards may be granted for accessory structures. Such
structures must meet the following standards:



         (a)   Shall not be used for human habitation;



         (b)   Shall be constructed of flood resistant materials;



         (c)   Shall be constructed and placed on the lot to
offer the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters;



         (d)   Shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation;



         (e)   Service facilities such as electrical and heating
equipment shall be elevated or floodproofed to or above the FPG; and



         (f)   Shall be designed to allow for the entry and exit
of floodwaters to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior
walls as required for elevated structures in division (B)(4) of this section.



      (8)   Above ground gas or liquid storage tanks. All above
ground gas or liquid storage tanks shall be anchored to prevent flotation or
lateral movement.



   (C)   Standards for subdivision proposals.



      (1)   All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the
need to minimize flood damage.



      (2)   All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities
and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and
constructed to minimize flood damage.



      (3)   All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage
provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.



      (4)   Base flood elevation data shall be provided for
subdivision proposals and other proposed development (including manufactured
home parks and subdivisions), which is greater than the lesser of 50 lots or
five acres.



   (D)   Critical facility. Construction of new critical facilities
shall be, to the extent possible, located outside the limits of the SFHA.
Construction of new critical facilities shall be permissible within the SFHA
if no feasible alternative site is available. Critical facilities constructed
within the SFHA shall have the lowest floor elevated to or above the FPG at
the site. Floodproofing and sealing measures must be taken to ensure that
toxic substances will not be displaced by or released into floodwaters.
Access routes elevated to or above the FPG shall be provided to all critical
facilities to the extent possible.



   (E)   Standards for identified floodways.



      (1)   Located within SFHAs, established in § 153.113(B), are
areas designated as floodways. The floodway is an extremely hazardous area
due to the velocity of floodwaters, which carry debris, potential
projectiles, and has erosion potential. If the site is in an identified
floodway, the Floodplain Administrator shall require the applicant to forward
the application, along with all pertinent plans and specifications, to the
Indiana Department of Natural Resources and apply for a permit for
construction in a floodway. Under the provisions of I.C. 14-28-1 a permit for
construction in a floodway from the Indiana Department of Natural Resources
is required prior to the issuance of a local building permit for any
excavation, deposit, construction, or obstruction activity located in the
floodway. This includes land preparation activities such as filling, grading,
clearing and paving etc. undertaken before the actual start of construction
of the structure. However, it does exclude non-substantial
additions/improvements to existing (lawful) residences in a non-boundary
river floodway. (I.C. 14-28-1-26 allows construction of a non-substantial
addition/improvement to a residence in a non-boundary river floodway without
obtaining a permit for construction in the floodway from the Indiana
Department of Natural Resources. Please note that if fill is needed to
elevate an addition above the existing grade, prior approval for the fill is
required from the Indiana Department of Natural Resources).



      (2)   No action shall be taken by the Floodplain Administrator
until a permit or letter of authorization (when applicable) has been issued
by the Indiana Department of Natural Resources granting approval for
construction in the floodway. Once a permit for construction in a floodway or
letter of authorization has been issued by the Indiana Department of Natural
Resources, the Floodplain Administrator may issue the local floodplain
development permit, provided the provisions contained in § 153.115 of this
subchapter have been met. The floodplain development permit cannot be less
restrictive than the permit for construction in a floodway issued by the
Indiana Department of Natural Resources. However, a community’s more
restrictive regulations (if any) shall take precedence.



      (3)   No development shall be allowed, which acting alone or
in combination with existing or future development, that will adversely
affect the efficiency of, or unduly restrict the capacity of the floodway.
This adverse affect is defined as an increase in the elevation of the
regulatory flood of at least fifteen-hundredths (0.15) of a foot as
determined by comparing the regulatory flood elevation under the project
condition to that under the natural or pre-floodway condition as proven with
hydraulic analyses.



For all projects involving channel modifications or fill (including levees)
the Floodplain Administrator shall submit the data and request that the
Federal Emergency Management Agency revise the regulatory flood data per
mapping standard regulations found at 44 CFR § 65.12.



   (F)   Standards for identified fringe. If the site is located in an
identified fringe, then the Floodplain Administrator may issue the local
floodplain development permit provided the provisions contained in § 153.115
of this subchapter have been met. The key provision is that die top of the
lowest floor of any new or substantially improved structure shall be at or
above the FPG.



   (G)   Standards for SFHAs without established base flood elevation
and/or floodways/fringes.



      (1)   Drainage area upstream of the site is greater than one
square mile.



         (a)   If the site is in an identified floodplain where
the limits of the floodway and fringe have not yet been determined, and the
drainage area upstream of the site is greater than one square mile, the
Floodplain Administrator shall require the applicant to forward the
application, along with all pertinent plans and specifications, to the
Indiana Department of Natural Resources for review and comment.



         (b)   No action shall be taken by the Floodplain
Administrator until either a permit for construction in a floodway (including
letters of authorization) or a floodplain analysis/regulatory assessment
citing the 1% annual chance flood elevation and the recommended flood
protection grade has been received from the Indiana Department of Natural
Resources.



         (c)   Once the Floodplain Administrator has received the
proper permit for construction in a floodway (including letters of
authorization) or floodplain analysis/regulatory assessment approving the
proposed development, a floodplain development permit may be issued provided
the conditions of the floodplain development permit are not less restrictive
than the conditions received from the Indiana Department of Natural Resources
and the provisions contained in § 153.115 of this subchapter have been met.



      (2)   Drainage area upstream of the site is less than one
square mile.



         (a)   If the site is in an identified floodplain where
the limits of the floodway and fringe have not yet been determined and the
drainage area upstream of the site is less than one square mile, the
Floodplain Administrator shall require the applicant to provide an
engineering analysis showing the limits of the floodplain and one-percent
annual chance flood elevation for the site.



         (b)   Upon receipt, the Floodplain Administrator may
issue the local floodplain development permit, provided the provisions
contained in § 153.115 of this subchapter have been met.



      (3)   The total cumulative effect of the proposed development,
when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, shall not
increase the regulatory flood more than 0.14 of one foot and shall not
increase flood damages or potential flood damages.



   (H)   Standards for flood prone areas. All development in known
flood prone areas not identified on FEMA maps, or where no FEMA published map
is available, shall meet applicable standards as required per § 153.115.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12; Am. Ord. 14-17, passed 9-4-14)



§ 153.116  VARIANCE PROCEDURES.



   (A)   Designation of Variance and Appeals Board. The Board of Zoning
Appeals shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from
requirements of this subchapter.



   (B)   Duties of Variance and Appeals Board. The Board shall hear and
decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or
determination is made by the Floodplain Administrator in the enforcement or
administration of this subchapter. Any person aggrieved by the decision of
the board may appeal such decision to the Posey County Circuit Court.



   (C)   Variance procedures. In passing upon such applications, the
board shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant standards
specified in other sections of this subchapter, and:



      (1)   The danger of life and property due to flooding or
erosion damage;



      (2)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its
contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner;



      (3)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community;



      (4)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location,
where applicable;



      (5)   The availability of alternative locations for the
proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;



      (6)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;



      (7)   The relationship of the proposed use to the
comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area;



      (8)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood
for ordinary and emergency vehicles;



      (9)   The expected height, velocity, duration, rate of rise,
and sediment of transport of the floodwaters at the site; and



      (10)   The costs of providing governmental services during and
after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities
and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets
and bridges.



   (D)   Conditions for variances.



      (1)   Variances shall only be issued when there is:



         (a)   A showing of good and sufficient cause;



         (b)   A determination that failure to grant the variance
would result in exceptional hardship; and



         (c)   A determination that the granting of a variance
will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public
safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud or
victimization of the public, or conflict with existing laws or ordinances.



      (2)   No variance for a residential use within a floodway
subject to § 153.115(E) or (G)(1) of this subchapter may be granted.



      (3)   Any variance granted in a floodway subject to §
153.115(E) or (G)(1) of this subchapter will require a permit from the
Indiana Department of Natural Resources.



      (4)   Variances to the provisions for flood hazard reduction
of § 153.115(B), may be granted only when a new structure is to be located
on a lot of one-half acre or less in size, contiguous to and surrounded by
lots with existing structures constructed below the flood protection grade.



      (5)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that
the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to
afford relief.



      (6)   Variances may be granted for the reconstruction or
restoration of any structure individually listed on the National Register of
Historic Places or the Indiana State Register of Historic Sites and
Structures.



      (7)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be
given written notice specifying the difference between the flood protection
grade and the elevation to which the lowest floor is to be built and stating
that the cost of the flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased
risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation (See § 153.116(E)).



      (8)   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain the records
of appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency or the Indiana Department of Natural Resources upon request
(See § 153.116(E)).



   (E)   Variance notification.



      (1)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted that allows
the lowest floor of a structure to be built below the flood protection grade
shall be given written notice over the signature of a community official that:



         (a)   The issuance of a variance to construct a
structure below the flood protection grade will result in increased premium
rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance
coverage; and



         (b)   Such construction below the flood protection grade
increases risks to life and property.



      (2)   The Floodplain Administrator will maintain a record of
all variance actions, including justification for their issuance.



   (F)   Historic structure. Variances may be issued for the repair or
rehabilitation of “historic structures” upon a determination that the
proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure’s
continued designation as an “historic structure” and the variance is the
minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.



   (G)   Special conditions. Upon the consideration of the factors
listed in § 153.116, and the purposes of this subchapter, the Board of
Zoning Appeals may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it
deems necessary to further the purposes of this subchapter.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12; Am. Ord. 14-17, passed 9-4-14)



§ 153.117  SEVERABILITY.



   If any section, clause, sentence, or phrase of this subchapter is held
to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction,
then the holding shall in no way effect the validity of the remaining
portions of this subchapter.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12; Am. Ord. 14-17, passed 9-4-14)



USE UNITS



§ 153.141  INTRODUCTION OF THE USE UNITS.



   (A)   General. The use unit is a grouping of individual uses that
have similarities in characteristics of function and/or performance which
enable systematic consideration of location and other regulation. Within each
zoning district, the permitted uses are the included uses of the designated
use unit. The unit, herein established, are identified by number and name.
Set forth in each use unit is a descriptive statement, an alphabetical
listing of the included uses, use conditions, and off-street parking and
loading requirements.



   (B)   Interpretation. Questions of the inclusion of a particular use
within a use unit shall be decided by the Area Board of Zoning Appeals. A
use, if specifically listed in a Use Unit, shall not be interpreted as being
included as a principal use within any other use unit.



   (C)   Applicability of use conditions. A use shall be subject to the
provisions of the district in which located and, in addition, shall be
subject to the use conditions specified in the applicable use unit. Where the
requirements of the use unit are greater than the requirements of the use
district, the use unit requirements shall govern.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12)



§ 153.145  USE UNIT 0 ACTIVE AGRICULTURE.



   (A)   Description. Active agricultural uses.



   (B)   Included uses.



      (1)   Horticulture, forestry, crop and tree farming.



      (2)   Dairy.



      (3)   Livestock, livestock facilities and livestock pasturing
operation.



      (4)   Feed lot operations [concentrated feeding operations
(CFOs) and confined animal feeding operations (CAFOs) are permitted only by
special exception, and shall meet all state and federal requirements].



      (5)   Operation of any machinery or vehicle associated with
agricultural production.



      (6)   Other uses customarily incidental thereto.



   (C)   Off-street parking requirements. None.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12)



§ 153.146  USE UNIT 1 AREA-WIDE USES BY RIGHT.



   (A)   Description. Certain public uses, agricultural uses, open land
uses, and similar uses which are either subject to other public controls or
which do not have adverse effects on other land uses.



   (B)   Included uses.



      (1)   Passive agricultural uses such as: cultivation,
forestry, planting.



      (2)   Open land uses such as: arboretum, flood management
project, reservoir, wildlife preserve.



      (3)   Public uses such as: fire alarm, historical marker,
street sign, thoroughfares, utility lines, and political campaign signs.



   (C)   Off-street parking requirements. None.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12)



§ 153.147  USE UNIT 2 AREA-WIDE SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES.



   (A)   Description. Uses which in some instances may be suitable for
location in any use district but, because of their potential adverse
influence on adjacent properties, require site review and are, therefore,
permitted in all use districts as a special exception requiring Board of
Zoning Appeals approval.



   (B)   Included uses.



      (1)   Adult detention facility, correction facility, detention
facility, jail, prison.



      (2)   Airport, heliport, private landing field.



      (3)   Cemetery.



      (4)   Convict pre-release center.



      (5)   Crematory.



      (6)   Governmental offices and services, NEC (not elsewhere
classified) - any building or structure leased or owned that is used by any
department of local, state or federal government.



      (7)   Hydroelectric generation plant.



      (8)   Juvenile delinquency center.



      (9)   Mausoleum.



      (10)   Post office.



      (11)   Sewage disposal facility, waste water treatment plant.



      (12)   Water treatment plant.



      (13)   Temporary open air activities such as:



         (a)   Carnival;



         (b)   Circus;



         (c)   Construction facilities (off site); and



         (d)   Tent revival.



      (14)   Residential storage structure.



   (C)   Use conditions.



      (1)   Construction facilities.



         (a)   The use may continue for a period not to exceed
two years in the same location.



         (b)   Ingress and egress must be from arterial or
collector streets, provided that the Zoning Board of Appeals may approve a
location with access to a minor street upon finding that such location would
not result in increased traffic on streets in residential areas.



         (c)   The use shall not be located nearer than 100 feet
to any lot containing an occupied dwelling without the consent of the owner
thereof.



      (2)   Temporary open air activities, except construction
facilities, may continue for a period not to exceed 30 days per each
application for special exception approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals.



   (D)   Off-street parking and loading requirements. Off-street
parking and loading as may be required by the Board of Zoning Appeals in
granting the special exception use.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12; Am. Ord. 14-22, passed 10-16-14)



§ 153.148  USE UNIT 3 PUBLIC PROTECTION AND UTILITY FACILITIES.



   (A)   Description. Public protection and utility facilities which
may have technical location requirements necessitating specific locations in
or around area services, and certain temporary open air land uses which can
be objectionable to certain other uses and are, therefore, permitted in
certain districts by special exception and in the remaining districts by
right.



   (B)   Included uses.



      (1)   Ambulance service.



      (2)   Electric regulation station, electric substation
(excluding storage or service garages and yards).



      (3)   Fire protection facility, fire station.



      (4)   Pressure control station (gas or liquid, excluding
storage or service garages and yards).



      (5)   Shelter (civil defense or storm).



      (6)   Services and protection.



      (7)   Transmitting tower (excluding amateur radio tower).



      (8)   Water storage facility NEC.



      (9)   Other structures and appurtenances incidental to the
maintenance and operation of utilities and services, radio, television,
transmitter or tower.



   (C)   Use conditions. None.



   (D)   Off-street parking and loading requirements. None.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12)



§ 153.149  USE UNIT 4 COMMUNITY SERVICES AND SIMILAR USES.



   (A)   Description. Community services, cultural and recreational and
religious facilities and certain residential facilities which are needed in
residential areas to serve the residents or need a residential environment,
but which are or can be objectionable to nearby residential uses. These uses
are permitted by special exception in some districts, by right in some
districts, and prohibited in other districts.



   (B)   Included uses.



      (1)   Aquarium.



      (2)   Art gallery ( not operated for profit).



      (3)   Children’s nursery / day care center.



      (4)   Church.



      (5)   College.



      (6)   Community center.



      (7)   Cultural facility, NEC.



      (8)   Day camp.



      (9)   Emergency and protective shelters.



      (10)   Golf course.



      (11)   Hospital.



      (12)   Library.



      (13)   Lodge (tax exempt).



      (14)   Marina.



      (15)   Museum.



      (16)   Nursery school.



      (17)   Planetarium.



      (18)   Private club or lodge (the chief activity which is a
service and is not operated as a business or for profit, and which hold and
maintain an income tax exempt status).



      (19)   Protective shelter.



      (20)   Public park.



      (21)   Public school.



      (22)   Public tennis court.



      (23)   Residential treatment center.



      (24)   Schools, offering a compulsory education curriculum.



      (25)   Transitional living center.



      (26)   University.



   (C)   Use conditions.



      (1)   College, university, hospital. A minimum site area of
one acre shall apply.



      (2)   Residential treatment center, transitional living
center, emergency or protective shelter. To avoid clustering, a residential
treatment center, transitional living center, or emergency or protective
shelter shall not be located on a lot within 1/4 mile (1,320 feet) from any
other lot containing such facilities or any lot containing a neighborhood
group home, community group home or detention/correctional facility.



   (D)   Off-street parking and loading requirements.



 


Use

 

Parking Spaces

 

Loading Berths





Aquarium
Art gallery
Museum
Planetarium
Cultural facility
NEC
 
1 per 800 sq. ft. of floor area
 
1 per 10,000-200,000 sq.ft. plus 1 per each additional 200,000 sq.ft. of
floor area


Children’s nursery
 
1 per 40 sq.ft.
 
N/A


Church
 
1 per 40 sq.ft. chapel, sanctuary floor area
 
1 per 10,000-200,000 sq.ft. plus 1 per each additional 200,000 sq.ft. of
floor area


College, university
 
1 per 600 sq.ft. classroom floor area, plus 1 per 4 dormitory beds, plus 1
per 4 stadium seats
 
1 per 10,000-200,000 sq.ft., plus 1 per each additional 200,000 sq.ft. of
floor area


Community center
 
1 per 500 sq.ft. of floor area
 
1 per 10,000-100,000 sq.ft., plus 1 per each additional 100,000 sq.ft. of
floor area


Emergency and protective shelter
 
1 per 1,000 sq.ft. of floor area
 
1 per 10,000-100,000 sq.ft., plus 1 per each additional 100,000 sq.ft. of
floor area


Hospital
 
1 per bed
 
1 per 10,000-100,000 sq.ft. Plus 1 per each additional 100,000 sq.ft. of
floor area


Library
 
1 per 500 sq.ft. floor area
 
1 per 10,000-200,000 sq.ft. plus 1 per each additional 200,000 sq.ft. of
floor area


Private club
 
1 per 400 sq.ft. floor area
 
1 per 10,000-100,000 sq.ft. plus 1 per each additional 100,000 sq.ft. of
floor area


Public park
 
1 per 4 stadium seats Plus 1 per 500 sq.ft. of community center of recreation
bldg plus 1 per 300 sq.ft. of pool area
 
1 per 10,000-100,000 sq.ft. Plus 1 per each additional 100,000 sq.ft. of
floor area


Residential treatment center/

Transitional living center
 
1 per 1,000 sq.ft. of floor area
 
1 per 10,000-100,000 sq.ft. plus 1 per each additional 100,000 sq.ft. of
floor area


Schools:
   elementary and
   junior high
 
1 per 1,000 sq.ft. of floor area
 
1 per 10,000-200,000 sq.ft.

Plus 1 per each additional 200,000 sq.ft. of floor area


Senior high
   if parking areas are combined
   if parking is separate and if stadium does not exist
 
1 per 800 sq.ft. of floor area plus 1 per 4 seats or gymnasium seats

1 per 400 sq.ft. of floor area
 
1 per 10,000-200,000 sq.ft. plus 1 per each additional stadium 200,000 sq.ft.
of floor area


Tennis court
 
2 per court plus 1 per 400 sq.ft. of club house area
 
1 per 10,000-100,000 sq.ft. plus 1 per each additional 100,000 sq.ft. of
floor area


See §§ 153.181 through 153.185 for required minimum dimensions and design
criteria for parking facilities.




 



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12)



§ 153.150  USE UNIT 5 SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED DWELLING.



   (A)   Description. Single-family detached dwelling.



   (B)   Included uses.



      (1)   Single-family detached dwelling.



      (2)   Foster home.



   (C)   Use conditions. None.



   (D)   Off-street parking and loading requirements.



 


Use

 

Parking Spaces

 

Loading Berths



Single-family detached and foster home
 
2 per dwelling unit
 
N/A


See § 153.181 through 153.185 for required minimum dimensions and design
criteria for parking facilities.



 



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12)



§ 153.151  USE UNIT 6 SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED DWELLING.



   (A)   Description. Single-family attached dwellings.



   (B)   Included uses. Duplex, patio home, townhouse, quadruplex, zero
lot-line dwellings.



   (C)   Use conditions.



      (1)   Townhouse. A townhouse development is subject to
approval of a subdivisions plat by the Planning Commission in accord with
existing laws and regulations, and the subsequent filing in the office of the
County Clerk where the property is located.



      (2)   Quadruplex. A quadruplex development is subject to
approval of a subdivisions plat by the Planning Commission in accord with
existing laws and regulations, and the subsequent filing in the office of the
County Clerk where the property is located.



   (D)   Off-street parking and loading requirements.



 


Use

 

Parking Spaces

 

Loading Berths



Single-family attached
 
2 per dwelling unit
 
None


Townhouse
 
1.5 per efficiency or 1 bedroom dwelling unit; or more bedroom dwelling unit
 
None


See §§ 153.181 through 153.185 for required minimum dimensions and design
criteria for parking facilities.



 



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12)



§ 153.152  USE UNIT 7 MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLING AND SIMILAR USES.



   (A)   Description. Multifamily dwellings, group homes, and similar
uses.



   (B)   Included uses.



      (1)   Apartment.



      (2)   Apartment hotel.



      (3)   Bed-and-breakfast.



      (4)   Boarding house.



      (5)   Convalescent home.



      (6)   Convent, monastery, novitiate.



      (7)   Elderly/retirement housing.



      (8)   Extended care facility



      (9)   Fraternity or sorority house.



      (10)   Group home.



      (11)   Multifamily dwelling.



      (12)   Nursing home.



      (13)   Resident hotel.



      (14)   Retirement center.



      (15)   Rooming/boarding house.



      (16)   Sanitarium.



      (17)   Tourist home.



   (C)   Use conditions.



      (1)   Intensity of use.



         (a)   Fraternity, sorority, rooming/boarding house. In
the determination of the applicable bulk and area requirements a fraternity,
sorority or rooming/boarding house shall be considered a multi-family
dwelling, with each 600 square feet of floor area constituting a one-bedroom
dwelling unit.



         (b)   Convent, monastery and novitiate, community group
home, life care retirement center and nursing home. the maximum floor area
ratio is .5.



         (c)   Covent, monastery, novitiate. A minimum site area
of one acre shall apply.



      (2)   Group home.



         (a)   Must be licensed by the State of Indiana, Indiana
State Health Department and meet contracting standards of the state of
Indiana Department of Human Services for group homes for mentally retarded
persons.



         (b)   No building may be occupied after the effective
date of this amendment until a zoning clearance permit is obtained. This
permit, will be revoked automatically upon revocation of the state license.



         (c)   No signs advertising the neighborhood group home
shall be permitted on the lot.



         (d)   No exterior alteration of the dwelling or any
customary accessory structure shall be made which would detract from the
residential character of the structure. Fire escapes, if required, must be
located on the rear of the structure if architecturally feasible or on the
side of the structure and screened.



         (e)   To avoid clustering, neighborhood group home shall
not be located on a lot within 1/4 mile (1,3 20 feet) of any other lot
containing a neighborhood group home, a community group home, a residential
treatment center, a transitional living center, an emergency of protective
shelter, or detention/correctional facility.



      (3)   Retirement center. The nursing facility or medical
facility must be licensed by the State of Indiana, Indiana State Health
Department as an intermediate care or a skilled nursing home.



      (4)   Nursing home. The nursing home must be licensed by the
State of Indiana, Indiana State Health Department as an intermediate care
facility or as a skilled nursing home.



   (D)   Off-street parking and loading requirements.



 


Use

 

Parking Spaces

 

Loading Berths





Bed-and-breakfast
 
1 per sleeping
 
1 per 10,000-200,000 sq.ft.


Convent, monastery and novitiate
 
1 per 1,000 sq.ft. of floor area
 
1 per 10,000-200,000 plus 1 per each additional 200,000 sq. ft. of floor area


Elderly/retirement housing
 
0.75 per dwelling unit
 
None


Community group home
 
1 per 500 sq.ft. of floor
 
None


Fraternity or sorority house
 
1 per 2 beds
 
None


Life care
 
0.75 per dwelling unit
 
1 per 10,000-200,000


Retirement center
 
and .35 per nursing center bed
 
Sq. ft. Plus 1 per each additional 200,00 sq. ft. of floor area


Multifamily dwelling
 
1.5 per efficiency or 1 bedroom dwelling 2 per 2 or more bedroom dwelling unit
 
None


Nursing home
 
3.5 per nursing center bed
 
1 per 10,000-100,000 sq. ft. plus 1 per each additional 100,000 sq. ft. of
floor area


Rooming/ Boarding house/ Resident hotel
 
1 per sleeping room
 
1 per 10,000-200,000 sq.ft. plus 1 per each additional 200,000 sq. ft.


Tourist Home
 
1 per sleeping room
 
1 per 10,000-200,000 sq.ft.


See §§ 153.181 through 153.185 for required minimum dimensions and design
criteria for parking facilities.




 



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12)



§ 153.153  USE UNIT 8 MANUFACTURED OR MODULAR HOME DWELLING.



   (A)   Description. Manufactured or modular home.



   (B)   Included uses. Manufactured or modular housing.



   (C)   Use conditions. Manufactured or modular homes shall be
permitted in all residential, office, and commercial/business districts as
follows.



      (1)   Manufactured or modular home shall:



         (a)   Have more than 950 square feet of occupied space
in a double-section or larger multi-section unit, with a minimum width of 23
feet;



         (b)   Be placed onto a permanent under floor foundation
in accordance with approved installation standards;



         (c)   Be placed onto a permanent perimeter foundation,
in accordance with approved installation standards;



         (d)   Be anchored to the ground, in accordance with
installation standards;



         (e)   Have the hitch mechanisms removed; and



         (f)   Meet appropriate utility connections standards, in
accordance with approved installation standards.



      (2)   Improvement location permit required.



         (a)   Requirements.



            1.   Prior to the location, relocation or
establishment of any manufactured or modular home, the home owner or
authorized representative shall secure from the Plan Commission’s
designated administrator an improvement location permit. Permit states that
the building and its location conform to the Comprehensive Plan and the
zoning ordinance.



            2.   Each application for an improvement location
permit shall be accompanied by:



               (i)   Plot plans as required for all
dwelling units, but which shall include manufacturer home data sheet; and



               (ii)   An agreement signed by the home owner
or authorized representative pledging compliance with the terms set by the
Plan Commission in the improvement location permit.



         (b)   Issuance of permit. After receipt of the
information required for an improvement location permit, the Plan Commission
designated administrator shall review the standards set in this subchapter.
If the applicant has met all required standards, the improvement location
permit shall be issued.



         (c)   Denial of permit. If any of the major elements do
not comply with the standards, the Improvement Location permit will be
denied, with a written statement specifying the reasons for the denial.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12)



§ 153.154  USE UNIT 9 MOBILE HOME DWELLING.



   (A)   Description. Mobile home dwelling.



   (B)   Included uses. Mobile home dwellings.



   (C)   Off-street parking and loading requirements.



 


Use

 

Parking Spaces

 

Loading Berths



Mobile Home
 
2 per mobile home
 
None



 



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12)



§ 153.155  USE UNIT 10 OFF-STREET PARKING AREAS.



   (A)   Description. Off-street parking areas which are principal uses.



   (B)   Included uses. Off-street parking lots, garages and structures.



   (C)   Use conditions. Off-street parking areas shall conform to the
design, lighting and improvement requirements for off-street parking
contained in §§ 153.181 through 153.185.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12)



§ 153.156  USE UNIT 11 OFFICES AND STUDIOS.



   (A)   Description. Offices, studios, medical and dental
laboratories, and certain other compatible or supporting services.



   (B)   Included uses.



      (1)   Abstract company.



      (2)   Accounting services.



      (3)   Advertising agency.



      (4)   Architectural services.



      (5)   Artist’s studio.



      (6)   Bank (without drive-through services).



      (7)   Broadcasting or recording studio.



      (8)   Chiropractor.



      (9)   Computing service.



      (10)   Copy service.



      (11)   Credit Union without drive through services.



      (12)   Data processing service.



      (13)   Dental clinic and laboratory.



      (14)   Dentist office.



      (15)   Doctor’s office.



      (16)   Drafting service.



      (17)   Employment agency.



      (18)   Engineering and surveying services.



      (19)   Financial services (excluding banks, credit unions and
savings and loan with drive-through services; pawn shop).



      (20)   General business offices, excluding on premise sale of
merchandise.



      (21)   Insurance services.



      (22)   Interior design consultant (no retail sales).



      (23)   Loan office (without drive-through services).



      (24)   Medical and dental offices, clinics, and laboratories.



      (25)   Medical Clinic Lab.



      (26)   Mini-storage buildings.



      (27)   Office building.



      (28)   Offices and studios.



      (29)   Optician or optical offices and laboratories.



      (30)   Photocopy.



      (31)   Photography studio.



      (32)   Pharmacy (provided that no sundry or other merchandise
is sold or offered for sale).



      (33)   Radio station.



      (34)   Tax services.



      (35)   Transportation ticket office.



      (36)   Travel agency.



      (37)   Savings and loan (without drive-through services).



      (38)   Veterinarian clinic (small animals, all activities in
building, no exterior runs).



   (C)   Use conditions.



      (1)   The uses included in Use Unit 11, when located on a lot
which is abutting an R district, shall be screened from the abutting R
district by the erection and maintenance of a screening wall or fence along
the lot line or lines in common with the R district.



      (2)   Mini-storage buildings should be surrounded by fences or
wall compatible with residential areas. Chain-link fences topped with barded
or razor wire are inappropriate.



   (D)   Off-street parking and loading requirements.



 


Use

 

Parking Spaces

 

Loading Berths



Medical and dental offices, clinics and laboratories
 
1 per 250 sq.ft. of floor area
 
1 per 10,000- 100,000 sq.ft. plus 1 per each additional 100,000 sq.ft. of
floor area


Mini-storage
 
1 per 5,000 sq.ft. of floor area
 
N/A


Other uses
 
1 per 300 sq.ft.
 
same as above


See §§ 153.181 through 153.185 for required minimum dimensions and design
criteria for parking facilities.



 



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12)



§ 153.157  USE UNIT 12 ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS AND EATING
ESTABLISHMENTS OTHER THAN DRIVE-INS.



   (A)   Description. Eating places offering on premise consumption of
food and drink within the principal structure and/or providing carry-out
service if no curb service is provided, and if no in-car on premise
consumption is permitted, drinking establishments and/or entertainment
establishments, dancing establishments and motion picture theaters (enclosed).



   (B)   Included uses.



      (1)   Eating establishments.



         (a)   Café.



         (b)   Cafeteria.



         (c)   Coffee shop.



         (d)   Delicatessen.



         (e)   Eating establishments other than drive-in.



         (f)   Restaurant.



      (2)   Entertainment and/or drinking establishments such as:



         (a)   Bar.



         (b)   Dance hall.



         (c)   Motion picture theater (enclosed).



         (d)   Night club.



         (e)   Tavern.



         (f)   Theater (enclosed).



   (C)   Use conditions. The uses included in Use Unit 12, when located
within a district other than an residential or office district and located on
a lot which is abutting a R or O district, shall be screened from the
abutting R or O district by the erection and maintenance of a screening wall
or fence along the lot line or lines in common with the R or O district.



   (D)   Off-street parking and loading requirements.



 


Use

 

Parking Spaces

 

Loading Berths



Eating places
 
1 per 100 sq.ft. of floor area
 
1 per 5,000-10,000 sq.ft. plus 1 per each addition 15,000 sq.ft. of floor area


Entertainment and/or drinking establishments other than theater
 
1 per 75 sq.ft. of floor area
 
1 per 5,000-10,000 sq.ft. plus 1 per each additional 15,000 sq.ft. of floor
area


Motion picture theater or other indoor theater
 
1 per 4 seats
 
same as above


See §§ 153.181 through 153.185 for required minimum dimensions and design
criteria for parking facilities.



 



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12)



§ 153.158  USE UNIT 13 CONVENIENCE GOODS AND SERVICES.



   (A)   Description. Retail trade and services establishments which
are desirable conveniences in certain residential and office districts. Use
Unit 13 is established to permit the location of convenience goods and
services in certain environments in which commercial facilities of higher use
intensity would be objectionable.



   (B)   Included uses.



      (1)   Retail trade establishments.



         (a)   Drugstore.



         (b)   Food (convenience).



         (c)   Bakery.



         (d)   Candy and confection and/or nut store.



         (e)   Convenience store, convenient goods and services.



         (f)   Ice cream store.



         (g)   Nut store.



         (h)   Pharmacy.



      (2)   Service establishments.



         (a)   Automated teller machine.



         (b)   Banks with drive-through services.



         (c)   Barbershop.



         (d)   Beauty shop.



         (e)   Credit unions with drive-through services.



         (f)   Dry cleaning pickup.



         (g)   Instant bank machine.



         (h)   Laundry pickup.



         (i)   Loan services with drive-through services.



         (j)   Savings and loan with drive-through services.



   (C)   Use conditions. The uses included in Use Unit 13, when located
within a district other than an R or O district and located on a lot which is
abutting an R or O district, shall be screened from the abutting R or O
district by the erection and maintenance of a screening wall or fence along
the lot line or lines in common with the R or O district.



   (D)   Off-street parking and loading requirements.



 


Use

 

Parking Spaces

 

Loading Berths



Retail trade and Service establishments
 
1 per 225 sq.ft. of floor area
 
1 per 5,000-10,000 sq.ft. plus each additional 15,000 sq.ft. of floor area


See §§ 153.181 through 153.185 for required minimum dimensions and design
criteria for parking facilities.



 



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12)



§ 153.159  USE UNIT 14 SHOPPING GOODS AND SERVICES.



   (A)   Description. Retail establishments engaged in the
merchandising of shopping goods and services.



   (B)   Included uses.



      (1)   Retail trade establishments.



         (a)   Antique shop.



         (b)   Appliance store.



         (c)   Art gallery, commercial.



         (d)   Artist supply store.



         (e)   Automotive parts and accessories store.



         (f)   Bicycle shop.



         (g)   Bookstore.



         (h)   Business and office machine sales establishment.



         (i)   Butcher shop.



         (j)   Camera and photographic supply store.



         (k)   Carpet store.



         (l)   China, glass and metal ware store.



         (m)   Clothing and accessories store.



         (n)   Cosmetic shop.



         (o)   Computer store.



         (p)   Dairy store.



         (q)   Department store.



         (r)   Dressmaking shop.



         (s)   Dry goods store.



         (t)   Electronics store.



         (u)   Florist shop.



         (v)   Food specialty store.



         (w)   Fur storage.



         (x)   Furrier and fur shop.



         (y)   Garden supply shop.



         (z)   Gift/novelty/souvenir shop.



         (aa)   Gun store.



         (bb)   Grocery store.



         (cc)    Hardware store.



         (dd)   Health food.



         (ee)    Hobby shop.



         (ff)   Home furnishing store selling appliances; china,
glassware, metal ware; draperies, curtains, upholstery; floor coverings,
carpet; furniture.



         (gg)   Jewelry repair.



         (hh)   Jewelry shop.



         (ii)   Leather goods and luggage store.



         (jj)   Liquor store.



         (kk)   Luggage store.



         (ll)   Meat market.



         (mm)   Medical, dental, and orthopedic appliances and
supply.



         (nn)   Musical instrument and supply store.



         (oo)   Newsstand.



         (pp)   Novelty store.



         (qq)   Office furnishing establishment.



         (rr)   Office machine sales.



         (ss)   Office supplies store.



         (uu)   Paint store.



         (vv)   Pawn shop.



         (ww)   Pet shop.



         (xx)   Phonograph and record shop.



         (yy)   Photography supply store.



         (zz)   Picture frame store.



         (aaa)   Radio and TV sales.



         (bbb)   Reducing salon.



         (ccc)   Shoe store.



         (ddd)   Shopping goods and services.



         (eee)   Souvenir shop.



         (fff)   Sporting goods store.



         (ggg)   Stationery store.



         (hhh)   Stereo store.



         (iii)   Supermarket.



         (jjj)   Tailor shop.



         (kkk)   Tanning salon.



         (lll)   Television sales.



         (mmm)   Tobacco store.



         (nnn)   Toy shop.



         (ooo)   Variety store.



         (ppp)   Wall paper store.



         (qqq)   Wig shop.



      (2)   Retail building material establishment, exclusive of
fabrication or repair.



         (a)   Building materials.



         (b)   Electrical supply.



         (c)   Plumbing fixtures and shop.



      (3)   Service establishments.



         (a)   Caterer.



         (b)   Costume rental service.



         (c)   Gun smith.



         (d)   Interior decorating, with retail sales.



         (e)   Locksmith.



         (f)   Photo finishing.



         (g)   Radio and television repair.



         (h)   Self service laundromat, coin operated.



         (i)   Shoe repair services.



         (j)   Veterinarian clinic/hospital, excluding outside
animal runs.



         (k)   Watch and jewelry repair.



   (C)   Use conditions.



      (1)   The uses included in Use Unit 14, when located on a lot
which is abutting a R or O district, shall be screened from the abutting R or
O district by the erection and maintenance of a screening wall or fence along
the lot line or lines in common with the R or O district.



      (2)   Retail building material establishments as listed in
division (B)(2) of this section shall store materials in such a way that
materials DO NOT extend over and above the height of the screening wall.



   (D)   Off-street parking and loading requirements.



 


Use

 

Parking Spaces

 

Loading Berths



Furniture store
 
1 per 300 sq.ft. of floor area
 
1 per 5,000-25,000 sq.ft. plus 1 per each additional 25,000 sq.ft. of floor
area


Antique store


All other uses
 
1 per 225 sq.ft. of floor area
 
1 per 5,000-25,000  sq.ft. plus 1 per each additional 25,000 sq.ft. of floor
area


See §§ 153.181 through 153.185 for required minimum dimensions and design
criteria for parking facilities.



 



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12)



§ 153.160  USE UNIT 15 OTHER TRADES AND SERVICES.



   (A)   Description. Trade establishments primarily providing business
and household maintenance goods and services ordinarily not found in the
primary retail districts because of differing market and site requirements.



   (B)   Included uses.



      (1)   Trade establishments, including incidental fabricating,
processing, installation, and repair.



         (a)   Trade establishments.



            1.   Air conditioning and heating.



            2.   Bait shops.



            3.   Bakery, wholesale.



            4.   Bottled gas.



            5.   Decorating, interior (without retail sales)



            6.   Fence sales and installation.



            7.   Flea market, permanent.



            8.   General merchandising establishments, NEC



            9.   Glass store.



            10.   Greenhouse, retail sales.



            11.   Heating equipment.



            12.   Ice plant.



            13.   Lumber yard (materials enclosed or screened
from public view).



            14.   Model homes (for display only).



            15.   Monument (excluding shaping).



            16.   Newspaper printing and publishing.



            17.   Other trades and service, NEC.



            18.   Nursery, horticulture sales.



            19.   Plastic materials.



            20.   Plumbing shop.



            21.   Portable storage building sales.



            22.   Printing and publishing.



            23.   Reproduction services.



            24.   Vending machines sales and services.



         (b)   Sexually oriented business (allowed only as a
special exception see § 153.270 and § 153.246(C)(4).



            1.   Arcade.



            2.   Adult book store.



            3.   Massage parlor.



            4.   Adult amusement center.



      (2)   Service establishment.



         (a)   Building services.



            1.   Cesspool cleaning services.



            2.   Disinfecting and exterminating services.



            3.   Janitorial services.



            4.   Window cleaning.



         (b)   Other services.



            1.   Dry cleaning/laundry, including coin operated
(1,500 sq.ft. maximum floor area).



            2.   Funeral home.



         (c)   Contract construction services (all activities
enclosed and materials stored in structure).



            1.   Air conditioning.



            2.   Carpentry.



            3.   Decorating.



            4.   Electrical.



            5.   Fence installation.



            6.   Furnace cleaning and repair.



            7.   Landscape contractor.



            8.   Painting contractor.



            9.   Paper hanging.



            10.   Plastering.



            11.   Plumbing.



            12.   Sign painting.



            13.   Tile setting.



         (d)   Business services. Armored car service.



         (e)   Personal services.



            1.   Auctioneer.



            2.   Bindery.



            3.   Cabinet maker.



            4.   Drapery service.



            5.   Frozen food locker.



            6.   kennel.



            7.   Laundry.



            8.   Linen supply.



            9.   Packing and crating of household and other
similar goods.



            10.   Rug and carpet cleaning.



            11.   Taxidermist.



            12.   Veterinarian (outside cages and exterior
animal runs).



            13.   Woodworking shop.



         (f)   Repair services.



            1.   Appliance repair, household.



            2.   Armature rewinding service.



            3.   Business machine repair.



            4.   Carpet installation and repair.



            5.   Computer repair.



            6.   Data processing machine repair.



            7.   Electrical repair service.



            8.   Furniture repair.



            9.   Mattress and pillow repair.



            10.   Re-upholstery.



            11.   Rug repair.



         (g)   Recycling center/collection point (aluminum,
glass, paper and plastics).



      (3)   Schools.



         (a)   Art.



         (b)   Ballet.



         (c)   Barber.



         (d)   Beauty.



         (e)   Business.



         (f)   Dance.



         (g)   Drama.



         (h)   Fine arts.



         (i)   Language.



         (j)   Modeling.



         (k)   Music.



         (l)   Trade.



   (C)   Use conditions. The uses included in Use Unit 15, when located
on a lot which is abutting a R or O district, shall be screened from the
abutting R or O district by the erection and maintenance of a screening wall
or fence along the lot line or lines in common with the R or O district.



   (D)   Off-street parking and loading requirements.



 


Use

 

Parking Spaces

 

Loading Berths



Funeral home
 
1 per 40 sq.ft. of assembly floor area plus 1 per 300 sq.ft. of non-assembly
area
 
1 per 10,000-100,000 sq.ft., plus 1 per each additional 100,000 sq.ft. of
floor area


Trade establishments
 
1 per 400 sq.ft. of floor area
 
1 per 5,000-25,000 sq.ft., plus 1 per each additional 25,000 sq.ft. of floor
area


Service establishments
 
1 per 400 sq.ft. of floor area
 
1 per 5,000-25,000 sq.ft., plus 1 per each additional 25,000 sq.ft. of floor
area


Schools
 
1 per 400 sq.ft. of floor area
 
Same as above


See §§ 153.181 through 153.185 for required minimum dimensions and design
criteria for parking facilities.



 



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12; Am. Ord. 2016-2A, passed 1-21-16)



§ 153.161  USE UNIT 16 GASOLINE SERVICE STATIONS.



   (A)   Description. Establishment engaged in the retail sale of
gasoline, lubricants, tires, batteries, and automobile accessories and
performing minor repair, installation and maintenance services.



   (B)   Included uses.



      (1)   Gasoline service stations.



      (2)   Filling station.



      (3)   Oil and lubrication service.



      (4)   Service station.



      (5)   Tune-up service.



   (C)   Use conditions. The uses included in Use Unit 16, when located
on a lot which is abutting a R or O district, shall be screened from the
abutting R or O district by the erection and maintenance of a screening wall
or fence along the lot lines in common with the R or O district.



   (D)   Off-street parking and loading requirements. Not applicable.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12)



§ 153.162  USE UNIT 17 AUTOMOTIVE AND ALLIED ACTIVITIES.



   (A)   Description. Automotive and allied activities.



   (B)   Included uses.



      (1)   Sales.



         (a)   Agriculture implement.



         (b)   Aircraft.



         (c)   Automobiles (new and used).



         (d)   Boat.



         (e)   Camper.



         (f)   Mobile home.



         (g)   Motorcycle.



         (h)   Recreational vehicles.



         (i)   Trailers.



         (j)   Truck.



      (2)   Services.



         (a)   Auto wash.



         (b)   Automobile rental.



         (c)   Automobile paint and body shop.



         (d)   Automobile repair and service.



         (e)   Bus station.



         (f)   Trailer rental.



         (g)   Truck rental.



         (h)   Vehicle paint and body shop.



         (i)   Vehicle repair and service.



         (j)   Taxi service.



   (C)   Use conditions. The uses included in Use Unit 17, when located
on a lot which is abutting a R or O district, shall be screened from the
abutting R or O district by the erection and maintenance of a screening wall
or fence along the lot line or lines in common with the R or O district.



   (D)   Off-street parking and loading requirements.



 


Use

 

Parking Spaces

 

Loading Berths



Agricultural implements automotive mobile home, camper, truck and motorcycle
 
1 per 600 sq.ft. of floor area plus 1 per 1,000 sq.ft. of open air display
storage or service area
 
1 per 5,000-10,000 sq. ft. plus 1 per each additional 15,000 sq.ft. of floor
area


Automobile rental
 
1 per 600 sq.ft. of floor area plus adequate off-street parking for storage
of rental vehicles. No on-street parking or vehicles shall be permitted
 
N/A


Vehicle repair
 
1 per 600 sq.ft; of floor area
 
N/A


Auto wash
 
N/A
 
N/A


See §§ 153.181 through 153.185 for required minimum dimensions and design
criteria for parking facilities.



 



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12)



§ 153.163  USE UNIT 18 DRIVE-IN RESTAURANTS.



   (A)   Description. Eating establishments providing window or curb
service, or offering food or drink for on-premise consumption within parked
motor vehicles, or permitting the on premise consumption of food or drink
within the parked motor vehicle or outside the principal structure.



   (B)   Included uses. Drive-in restaurants.



   (C)   Use conditions. The uses included in Use Unit 18, when located
on a lot which is abutting an R district, shall be screened from the abutting
R district by the erection and maintenance of a screening wall or fence along
the lot line or lines in common with the R district.



   (D)   Off-street parking and loading requirements.



 


Use

 

Parking Spaces

 

Loading Berths



Drive-in restaurants
 
Min. 10 spaces
 
1 per 5,000-25,000 sq.ft. plus 1 per each additional 25,000 sq.ft. of floor
area


See §§ 153.181 through 153.185 for required minimum dimensions and design
criteria for parking facilities.



 



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12)



§ 153.164  USE UNIT 19 HOTEL, MOTEL AND RECREATION FACILITIES.



   (A)   Description. Overnight lodging and commercial amusement
establishments ordinarily not requiring large sites and which have use
characteristics permitting their location in or near developed commercial
trade areas.



   (B)   Included uses.



      (1)   Billiard parlor.



      (2)   Bowling alley.



      (3)   Commercial recreation establishments (enclosed), NEC.



      (4)   Gymnasium.



      (5)   Health club.



      (6)   Hotel.



      (7)   Ice skating.



      (8)   Miniature golf.



      (9)   Motel.



      (10)   Racquetball club.



      (11)   Rifle range (enclosed).



      (12)   Skating rink (enclosed).



      (13)   Slot car track.



      (14)   Swimming pool (enclosed).



      (15)   Tennis club.



      (16)   Video games arcade (not an adult amusement center).



   (C)   Use conditions. The uses included in Use Unit 19, when located
on a lot which is abutting a R or O district, shall be screened from the
abutting R or O district by the erection of a screening wall of fence along
the lot line or lines in common with the R or O district.



   (D)   Off-street parking and loading requirements.



 


Use

 

Parking Spaces

 

Loading Berths



Hotel, motel
 
1 per sleeping room plus 1 per 225 sq.ft. of accessory facilities such as
flower shop, & beauty and barber shops etc., and 1 per 100 sq.ft. for
facilities such as restaurants & taverns
 
1 per 40,000-150,000 sq.ft. plus 1 per each additional      150,000 sq.ft.
of floor area, plus 1 per 5,000-25,000 sq.ft. of accessory facilities


All other uses
 
1 per 225 sq.ft.
 
1 per 5,000-25,000 sq.ft. plus 1 per each additional 25,000 sq.ft. of floor
area


See §§ 153.181 through 153.185 for required minimum dimensions and design
criteria for parking facilities.



 



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12)



§ 153.165  USE UNIT 20 COMMERCIAL RECREATION: INTENSIVE.



   (A)   Description. Commercial recreation facilities, the principal
activities of which are usually open air, located in undeveloped outlying
sections of the urban area.



   (B)   Includes uses.



      (1)   Amusement activities, NEC.



      (2)   Arena.



      (3)   Campground.



      (4)   Drag strip.



      (5)   Drive-in theatre.



      (6)   Fairgrounds.



      (7)   Go-cart track.



      (8)   Golf driving range.



      (9)   Miniature auto track.



      (10)   Outdoor recreation, NEC.



      (11)   Race tracks (auto, dog, horse).



      (12)   Rifle and skeet range/gun club.



      (13)   Rodeo grounds.



      (14)   Skateboard track.



      (15)   Stadiums, NEC.



      (16)   Water slide (outdoor).



   (C)   Use conditions. The uses included in Use Unit 20, when located
on a lot which is abutting a R or O district, shall be screened from the
abutting R or O district by the erection and maintenance of a screening wall
or fence along the lot line or lines in common with the R or O district.



   (D)   Off-street parking and loading requirements.



 


Use

 

Parking Spaces

 

Loading Berths



Golf driving
 
1 per tee
 
N/A


Drive-in theatre
 
N/A
 
N/A


Uses providing spectator seating such as stadiums arenas and rodeo grounds
 
1 per 4 seats
 
1 per 5,000-25,000 sq.ft. plus 1 per each additional 25,000 sq.ft. of floor
area


Other uses
 
1 per 800 sq.ft. of site area
 
1 per 5,000-25,000 sq.ft. plus 1 per each additional 25,000 sq.ft. of floor
area


See §§ 153.181 through 153.185 for required minimum dimensions and design
criteria for parking facilities.



 



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12)



§ 153.166  USE UNIT 21 BUSINESS SIGNS AND OUTDOOR ADVERTISING.



   (A)   Description. Business (on-premises) signs and outdoor
advertising (off-premises and billboard) signs. (See Appendix C: Zoning Sign
Standards for summary of requirements.)



   (B)   Included uses. Business (on-premises) signs and outdoor
advertising (off-premises and billboard) signs.



   (C)   General location requirements.



      (1)   A sign may not be erected or placed in any district with
the exception of those signs listed in divisions (D)(2) and (K) of this
section until an improvement location permit has been issued by the Area Plan
Commission and written consent has been obtained from the owner or lessee of
the premises on which the display is located. Items needed for an improvement
location permit include a plot plan showing the exact location of the display
relative to property (right-of-way) lines, and frontal elevation showing the
size and height above the street.



      (2)   Street setback. Signs or portions thereof shall not be
permitted in the right-of-way of any street or area designated as a future
street under any circumstances except authorized traffic signals, signs or
devices.



      (3)   Intersection setback. Signs shall not be located within
25 feet from the intersection of the right-of-way lines of two streets or
from the intersection of street pavement and a railroad track. If there is no
dedicated roadway right-of-way, the right-of-way is assumed to be based on
the applicable roadway functional class as if the roadway had been dedicated
(being from the street center line 25 feet for a “local street”, 40 feet
for a “collector” or “secondary arterial”, 60 feet for a “primary
arterial”, and 75 feet for a “divided primary arterial”.



      (4)   Traffic signal clearance. Signs shall not be located in
such a manner as to obstruct or obscure or in any manner interfere with any
traffic signal light or public warning sign.



      (5)   Obstruction of view. Signs which when located in such a
manner so as to prevent any motorists from obtaining a clear view of
approaching vehicles for a distance of 500 feet along an expressway or other
public right-of-way, are prohibited.



      (6)   Business (on-premises) and/or outdoor advertising
(off-premises) signs shall not be located within a 50-foot radius of an R
district property line if visible from such property.



      (7)   Flashing signs shall not be located within 200 feet of
an abutting R district property line if visible from such district.



      (8)   Flashing signs shall not be located within 50 feet of
the edge of pavement of a signaled intersection of two streets or the
intersection of a street pavement and a railroad track.



      (9)   The flashing or animated (moving images) portion of any
sign shall not be located within one foot of the street right-of-way or ten
feet of the edge of pavement, whichever is less, as measured along the ground
from the right-of-way line or edge of pavement to a vertical line coinciding
with the leading edge of the sign nearest to the public way.



      (10)   Flashing signs shall not use incandescent bulbs with
greater than 25 watts illumination, nor use any other color than white, nor
use strobe lights of any kind.



      (11)   No sign shall use rotating or revolving beams of light.



      (12)   No sign shall be animated (moving images), including
electronic message boards, in the Agriculture, Residential, Office and B-1/CN
districts, but may be approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals through a
special exception permit in the B-1A/CS, B-2/CG, B-3/CH, CBD, M-1 and M-2
Districts as described in division (N) of this section.



      (13)   Any roof projection, ground, outdoor advertising or
portable sign shall maintain a minimum separation of 30 feet from any other
roof, projection, ground, outdoor advertising or portable sign.



   (D)   General use conditions.



      (1)   Computation of display surface area. Only one side of a
double-faced sign shall be included in the computation of display surface
area.



      (2)   Signs not included in computation/display area. The
following signs shall not be prohibited by this chapter nor be included in
the computation of display surface area.



         (a)   Nameplates, attached to the face of the wall and
not exceeding two square feet in surface area.



         (b)   Temporary real estate and construction signs may
be located on each arterial street frontage of the development. The sign
shall not exceed one half of a square foot for each lineal foot of arterial
street frontage; provided, however, that in no event shall the sign be
restricted less than 32 square feet or be permitted to exceed 400 square feet
of display surface area.



         (c)   Signs which are not visible from a public street.



         (d)   Tablets built into the wall of a building or other
structure and used for inscriptions or a memorial tablets or historic markers
or for similar purposes.



         (e)   Signs of warning, directive, informational or
instructional nature erected by a public utility, franchised transportation
company or governmental agency, or endorsed by a local legislative body.



         (f)   Legal notices and street numbers.



         (g)   Election campaign signs.



         (h)   Signs located within a building.



         (i)   Signs not exceeding three square feet of display
surface area of a warning, directive or instructional nature, including
entrance, exit and restroom signs.



         (j)   Signs which are attached labels of a commodity
offered for sale.



         (k)   Flags and insignia of a governmental unit, church
or organization.



         (1)   An exempt sign may be illuminated, but may not be
flashing or animated.



      (3)   Computation of display surface area. In computing
permitted display surface area, the lineal footage of an abutting
non-arterial street shall not be combined with the lineal footage of any
abutting arterial street which is included in the computation of permitted
display surface area. The lineal footage of the street abutting the front of
the property shall be used for computation of the surface area of the ground
sign and the lineal frontage of the street abutting the side of the property
shall only be added to the computation of the surface area if the side street
is of equal or higher functional classification.



      (4)   Ground sign setback. Ground signs shall be setback at
least one foot from the property line and shall not encroach on the public
right-of-way If there is no dedicated roadway right-of-way, the right-of-way
is assumed to be based on the applicable roadway functional class as if the
roadway had been dedicated (being from the street center line 25 feet for a
“local street”, 40 feet for a “collector” or “secondary
arterial”, 60 feet for a “primary arterial”, and 75 feet for a
“divided primary arterial”.



      (5)   Sign permit. Signs that have not been issued a sign
permit shall not be located in any district. Each sign requiring a permit
shall display the permit number.



      (6)   Promotional signs. Promotional signs such as tinsel
advertising flags, searchlights, balloons and banners shall be placed no
earlier than 14 days prior to and removed within seven days after a
promotional ends and shall be maintained in a clean, non-offensive, safe and
reasonable condition, and not be placed within the street ride-of-way or
sidewalk while displayed.



      (7)   Number of sign per lot of record. Except for wall,
canopy and promotional business signs, the maximum number or signs per lot of
record shall be as follows.



         (a)   B-1/CN, B-1A/CS, B-2/CG, B-3/CH Districts. One per
100 feet of arterial street frontage or fraction thereof.



         (b)   M-1 Districts. One per 150 feet of arterial street
frontage or fraction thereof.



         (c)   M-2 District. One per 200 feet of arterial street
frontage or fraction thereof.



      (8)   Roof signs. Roof signs are prohibited from and after the
effective date of this subchapter. Existing roof signs may continue as
regulated by §§ 153.201 through 153.209, Nonconforming Uses. Existing roof
signs shall be included in the computation or permitted display surface area,
number of signs per lot and spacing of signs.



      (9)   Wall, canopy and projecting signs - height. Wall, canopy
and projecting signs shall not exceed above the top of the parquet or
building wall oh which it is located; provided, however, that in instances
where the height of the parquet or building wall, or where construction or
architectural features will not permit a wall sign of at least three feet in
height, a wall sign may extend above the parquet or building wall a distance
which will permit a sign of at least three feet in height. In no instance
shall the wall, canopy or projecting sign be greater than six about the top
of the canopy nor be greater in height than a ground sign at that setback
distance from the property line.



   (E)   B-1/CN District use conditions.



      (1)   Ground signs shall not exceed 25 feet in height,
measured from the mean curb level of the lot upon which it is erected.



      (2)   Wall and canopy signs shall not exceed an aggregate
display surface area of three square feet per each lineal foot of the
building wall to which the sign or signs are affixed, shall not exceed 20% of
the facade area, and shall not exceed an aggregate display surface area of
200 square feet.



      (3)   Other signs, including but not limited to roof,
projecting, ground and portable signs (except wall, canopy and promotional
business signs), whether permitted as provided herein or nonconforming, shall
not exceed an aggregate display, surface area of two square feet per each
lineal floor of street frontage if only one such sign is erected; shall not
exceed one square foot per each lineal foot of street frontage if more than
one such sign is erected; and shall not exceed 200 square feet of face area
for any side of any sign regardless of the setback.



      (4)   An unimproved lot may, as a matter or right, erect a
real estate sign on each public street front not to exceed 15 feet in height
and eight square feet to be setback at least one foot from the front (or side
street) property line.



      (5)   Animated (moving image) or electronic message board
(changing image) are prohibited in this district.



   (F)   B-1A/CS Districts use conditions.



      (1)   Ground signs shall not exceed 30 feet in height,
measured from the mean curb level of the lot upon which it is erected.



      (2)   Wall and canopy signs shall not exceed an aggregate
display surface area of three square feet per each lineal foot of the
building wall to which the sign or signs are affixed, shall not exceed 20% of
the facade area, and shall not exceed an aggregate display surface area of
300 square feet.



      (3)   Other signs, including, but not limited to roof,
projecting, ground, and portable signs (except wall, canopy and promotional
business signs), whether permitted as provided herein, or nonconforming,
shall not exceed an aggregate display surface area of two square feet per
each lineal floor of street frontage if only one such sign is erected; shall
not exceed one square foot per each lineal foot of street frontage if more
than one such sign is erected; and shall not exceed 300 square feet of face
area for any side of any sign regardless of the setback.



      (4)   An unimproved lot may, as a matter or right, erect a
real estate sign on each public street front not to exceed 15 feet in height
and eight square feet to be setback at least one foot from the front (or side
street) property line.



      (5)   If any sign is animated (moving image) or electronic
message board (changing image), the sign may be permitted only by the Board
of Zoning Appeals through a special exception permit as described in division
(N) of this section.



   (G)   B-2/CG Districts use conditions.



      (1)   Ground signs shall not exceed 35 feet in height,
measured from the mean curb level of the lot upon which it is erected.



      (2)   Wall and canopy signs shall not exceed an aggregate
display surface area of three square feet per each lineal foot of the
building wall to which the sign or signs are affixed, shall not exceed 20% of
the facade area, and shall not exceed an aggregate display surface area of
500 square feet.



      (3)   Other signs, including, but not limited to roof,
projecting, ground, portable and outdoor advertising (off-premises) signs
(except wall, canopy and promotional business signs), whether permitted as
provided herein, or nonconforming; shall not exceed an aggregate display
surface area of three square feet per each lineal floor of street frontage if
only one such sign is erected; shall not exceed one and one-half square foot
per each lineal foot of street frontage if more than one such sign is
erected; and shall not exceed 500 square feet of face area for any side of
any sign regardless of setback.



      (4)   An unimproved lot may, as a matter of right, erect
outdoor advertising (off-premise) signs not to exceed an aggregate surface
area of 500 square feet, if located behind the building setback line,
provided that upon the occupancy of any building on the lot, any sign not
complying with the display surface area limitations set out above shall be
removed within 30 days from such occupancy.



      (5)   Outdoor advertising (off-premises) signs shall also
comply with the requirements set forth in division (J) of this section.



      (6)   If any sign is animated (moving image) or electronic
message board (changing image), the sign may be permitted only by the Board
of Zoning Appeals through a special exception permit as described in division
(N) of this section.



   (H)   B-3/CH and M District use conditions.



      (1)   Ground signs shall not exceed 50 feet in height,
measured from the mean curb level of the lot upon which it is erected.



      (2)   Wall and canopy signs shall not exceed an aggregate
display surface area of three square feet per each lineal foot of the
building wall to which the sign or signs are affixed, shall not exceed 20% of
the facade area, and shall not exceed an aggregate display surface area of
700 square feet.



      (3)   Other signs, including, but not limited to roof,
projecting, ground, portable and outdoor advertising (off-premises) signs
(except wall, canopy and promotional business signs), whether permitted as
provided herein, or nonconforming, shall not exceed an aggregate display
surface area of three square feet per each lineal floor of street frontage if
only one such sign is erected; shall not exceed one and one-half square foot
per each lineal foot of street frontage if more than one such sign is
erected; and shall not exceed 700 square feet of face area for any side of
any sign regardless of setback.



      (4)   An unimproved lot may, as a matter of right, erect
outdoor advertising (off-premise) signs not to exceed an aggregate surface
area of 500 square feet, if located behind the building setback line,
provided that upon the occupancy of any building on the lot, any sign not
complying with the display surface area limitations set out above shall be
removed within 30 days from such occupancy.



      (5)   Outdoor advertising (off-premises) signs shall also
comply with the requirements set forth in division (J) of this section.



      (6)   If any sign is animated (moving image) or electronic
message board (changing image), the sign may be permitted only by the Board
of Zoning Appeals through a special exception permit as described in division
(N) of this section.



   (I)   CBD use conditions (signs only by special exception).



      (1)   Ground signs shall not exceed 35 in height, measured
from the mean curb level of the lot upon which it is erected.



      (2)   Wall and canopy signs shall not exceed an aggregate
display surface area of three square feet per each lineal foot of the
building wall to which the sign or signs are affixed, shall not exceed 20% of
the facade area, shall not be higher than six feet above the canopy, and
shall not exceed an aggregate display surface area of 150 square feet.



      (3)   Other signs, including, but not limited to roof,
projecting, ground, and portable signs (except wall, canopy and promotional
business signs), whether permitted as provided herein, or nonconforming,
shall not exceed an aggregate display surface area of three square feet per
each lineal floor of street frontage if only one such sign is erected; shall
not exceed one and one-half square foot per each lineal foot of street
frontage if more than one such sign is erected; and shall not exceed 150
square feet of face area for any side of any sign regardless of setback.



      (4)   An unimproved lot may, as a matter of right, erect
outdoor advertising (off-premise) signs not to exceed an aggregate surface
area of 500 square feet, if located behind the building setback line,
provided that upon the occupancy of any building on the lot, any sign not
complying with the display surface area limitations set out above shall be
removed within 30 days from such occupancy.



      (5)   Outdoor advertising (off-premises) signs are prohibited
in this district.



      (6)   If any sign is animated (moving image) or electronic
message board (changing image), the sign may be permitted only by the Board
of Zoning Appeals through a special exception permit as described in division
(N) of this section.



   (J)   Use conditions for outdoor advertising (off-premises) signs.



      (1)   An outdoor advertising (off-premises) sign shall be
separated a minimum distance of 1,200 feet from any other outdoor advertising
sign on the same side of the street and not within a 600 foot radius of any
other outdoor advertising sign.



      (2)   Outdoor advertising (off-premises) signs shall not be
within 150 feet of a residential or office district.



      (3)   No portion of an outdoor advertising shall be within ten
feet of a major thoroughfare.



      (4)   Outdoor advertising signs shall not contain more than
two sides, not shall the total display surface area for each side exceed 500
square feet in the B-2/CG District and 700 square feet in the B-3 and M
Districts. The two sides shall face in opposite directions. OPPOSITE shall in
addition to its ordinary meaning include V-shaped signs when not more than 15
feet separated the open side of the display surfaces.



      (5)   Outdoor advertising signs shall be oriented to be
visible from the adjacent major thoroughfare.



      (6)   Outdoor advertising signs shall not exceed 35 feet in
height in the B-2/CG District and 50 feet in height in the B-3/CH and M
Districts.



      (7)   The aggregate display surface for all ground roof or
projecting signs whether business (on-premises) or outdoor advertising
(off-premises), shall not exceed the display surface area permitted in the
zoning district where located.



      (8)   If an outdoor advertising sign is animated (moving
image) or electronic message board (changing image), the sign may be
permitted only by the Board of Zoning Appeals through a special exception
permit as described in division (N) of this section.



   (K)   Portable signs.



      (1)   Portable signs shall comply with all other provisions of
this subchapter. No portable sign shall be placed on a sidewalk. No portable
sign shall flash on or off nor be animated, but be of a continuous light.



      (2)   No portable sign shall be permitted in the right-of-way
of a public street, any sign situated in the right-of-way of a public street
for a continuous period exceeding 24 hours is hereby declared a public
nuisance endangering public safety and may be impounded by the Area Plan
Commission or any Police Officer of the local jurisdiction.



   (L)   Non-commercial signs. Nothing contained in this subchapter
shall prevent the use of the permitted display surface area, in whole or in
part, on any sign authorized by the ordinance and wherever located and/or
being used non-commercial message.



   (M)   Prohibited signs.



      (1)   Signs that have not been issued a sign permit shall not
be located in any district, with the exception of signs in divisions (D) and
(K) of this section.



      (2)   Signs or posters affixed to telephone and utility poles,
trees, street signs, or other structures in the public right-of-way.



      (3)   A sign placed over or in a public right-of-way, public
street right-of-way, or public road.



      (4)   A sign erected at a location where it may interfere
with, obstruct the view of, or be confused with a traffic or railroad sign or
signal, or oncoming traffic, or where it would pose a traffic hazard.



      (5)   Display lights resembling danger, emergency or traffic
signal lights.



      (6)   Use the words “stop”, “danger”, or “look” or
any other words which would confuse traffic.



      (7)   Use rotating or revolving beams of light.



      (8)   Signs which move or rotate, or which have moving parts
or pieces.



      (9)   Animated (moving images) or electronic message boards
(changing images) unless approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals through a
special exception permit per division (N) of this section.



      (10)   Strobe lights.



      (11)   Placement or projection of a sign nearer than one-foot
of a street right-of-way line or assumed right-of-way based on the functional
class of the road if there is no dedicated right-of-way.



   (N)   Animated (moving images) or electronic message board (changing
imaged) signs.



      (1)   Business (on-premises) signs or outdoor
advertising/billboard (off-premises) signs that are animated (moving images)
or have electronic message boards (changing images) shall only be permitted
through a special exception permit approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals.



      (2)   Moving images or changing images shall not change more
frequently than eight second intervals.



      (3)   Shall have automatic dimmers so that night time lumens
do not exceed those of the daylight hours.



      (4)   Such meet all other applicable conditions as set forth
in this section.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12)



§ 153.167  USE UNIT 22 RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT.



   (A)   Description. Facilities for scientific research, development
and testing, which are customarily located on large, landscaped sites and the
operation of which does not produce objectionable environmental effects.



   (B)   Included uses. Enclosed scientific research, testing and
development.



   (C)   Use conditions. The uses included in Use Unit 22, when located
on a lot which is abutting an R or O district, shall be screened from the
abutting R or O district, by the erection and maintenance of a screening wall
or fence along lot line or lines in common with the R or O district.



   (D)   Off-street parking and loading requirements.



 


Use

 

Parking Spaces

 

Loading Berths



All uses
 
1 per 300 sq.ft.
 
1 per 5,000-40,000 sq.ft. or floor area plus 1 per 40,000-100,000 sq.ft. plus
1 per each additional 100,000 sq.ft. of floor area


See §§ 153.181 through 153.185 for required minimum dimensions and design
criteria for parking facilities.



 



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12)



§ 153.168  USE UNIT 23 WAREHOUSING AND WHOLESALING.



   (A)   Description. Warehousing, wholesaling and trucking often
located adjacent to areas served by rail and highway transportation and port
areas.



   (B)   Included uses.



      (1)   Moving and storage facilities.



      (2)   Warehouses, NEC.



      (3)   Wholesale establishments, NEC.



      (4)   Storage, NEC.



      (5)   Trucking establishments.



      (6)   Truck rentals.



   (C)   Use conditions. The uses included in Use Unit 23, when located
on lot which is abutting the boundary of an R District, shall be screened
from the abutting R district by the erection and maintenance of a screening
wall or fence along the lot line or lines in common with the R District.



   (D)   Off-street parking and loading requirements.



 


Use

 

Parking Spaces

 

Loading Berths



All uses
 
1 per 3,000 sq.ft. of floor area
 
1 per 5,000-25,000 sq.ft. per each additional 25,000 sq.ft. of floor area


See §§ 153.181 through 153.185 for required minimum dimensions and design
criteria for parking facilities.



 



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12)



§ 153.169  USE UNIT 24 MINING AND MINERAL PROCESSING.



   (A)   Description. Extractive operations, certain mineral processing
operations and manufacturing operations which directly minerals at or near
the source.



   (B)   Included uses.



      (1)   Mining and quarrying. Mining, quarrying extraction of
coal, ores, stone, sand or gravel.



      (2)   Processing of mineral products. Such as crashing,
washing and grading of coal, ore, stone, sand or gravel manufacture of
Portland Cement, concrete or asphalting concrete, at the source of supply of
crushed rock, sand or gravel for utilization off the premises.



   (C)   Use conditions. The Board of Zoning Appeals, in granting a
mining and mineral processing use by special exception, shall consider
potential environmental influences, such as dust and vibration, and shall
establish in the particular instance appropriate protective conditions, such
as setbacks, screening and method of operation as will mitigate the adverse
effects on appropriate land uses.



   (D)   Off-street parking and loading berths.



 


Use

 

Parking Spaces

 

Loading Berths



All uses
 
1 per 2 employees
 
N/A


See §§ 153.181 through 153.185 for required minimum dimensions and design
criteria for parking facilities.



 



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12)



§ 153.170  USE UNIT 25 LIGHT MANUFACTURING.



   (A)   Description. Light manufacturing and industrial uses having
slight or no objectionable environmental influences by reason of the emission
of odor, heat, smoke, noise or vibration. All activities and storage is to be
entirely within a completely enclosed building.



   (B)   Included uses.



      (1)   Bottling plant.



      (2)   Fuel oil storage and distribution.



      (3)   Glass manufacture and blowing.



      (4)   Laundry (industrial).



      (5)   Machine shop.



      (6)   Music instrument manufacture.



      (7)   Plastic products manufacture



      (8)   Porcelain manufacture.



      (9)   Sheet metal shop.



      (10)   Other light industrial or manufacturing uses that are
fully enclosed in a building excluding the uses first cited in Use Units 26
and 27.



   (C)   Use conditions.



      (1)   All uses included in Use Unit 25, which are located
within 300 feet of an R or O district, shall be conducted with enclosed
buildings.



      (2)   The uses included in Use Unit 25, when located on a lot
which is abutting an R or O district, shall be screened from the abutting R
or O district by the erection and maintenance of screening wall or fence
along the lot line or lines in common with the R or O district.



   (D)   Off-street parking and loading requirements.



 


Use

 

Parking Spaces

 

Loading Berths



All uses
 
1 per 1,000 sq.ft. of developed site
 
1 per 2,000-40,000 sq.ft. plus 1 per each 40,000-100,000 sq.ft., plus 1 per
each additional 100,000 sq.ft. of floor area


See §§ 153.181 through 153.185 for required minimum dimensions and design
criteria for parking facilities.



 



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12)



§ 153.171  USE UNIT 26 MEDIUM MANUFACTURING AND INDUSTRY.



   (A)   Description. Manufacturing and industrial uses having
moderately objectionable environmental influences by reason of the emission
of odor, heat, smoke, noise or vibration. All processes and activities are to
be within an enclosed building; while outdoor is permitted, it must be
completely screened from the public right-of-way and abutting properties.



   (B)   Included uses.



      (1)   Building contract construction service and storage such
as concrete construction services, grain elevators.



      (2)   Heavy construction contracting.



         (a)   Heating construction contract services.



         (b)   Masonry construction contracting.



         (c)   Oil well drilling cleaning service and storage
yard.



         (d)   Painting contractor and storage.



         (e)   Roofing construction service.



         (f)   Sheet metal construction contractor.



         (g)   Stonework contracting.



         (h)   Water well cleaning and drilling.



      (3)   Industrial or manufacturing uses which have processes
that may be fully enclosed in a building and which have assembly materials
and products that may be fully screened from the public right-of-way and
abutting properties but excluding uses first cited in Use Unit 27.



         (a)   Brass manufacture.



         (b)   Copper manufacture.



         (c)   Blast furnaces as a minor and incidental part of
another permitted industrial use.



         (d)   Cellophane and celluloid manufacture.



         (e)   Concrete manufacture, ready mix plant.



         (f)   Dyestuff manufacture.



         (g)   Feed milling and processing.



         (h)   Garbage contract pickup.



         (i)   Gas (heating or illuminating) manufacture or
storage.



         (j)   Graphite manufacture.



         (k)   Ink manufacture.



         (1)   Lamp black manufacture.



         (m)   Meat and fish processing.



         (n)   Metal and/or silver plating and polishing.



         (o)   Monument sales and shaping.



         (p)   Oilcloth or linoleum manufacture.



         (q)   Paper or pulp manufacturing by sulfide processes
emitting noxious gases or odors.



         (r)   Pickle, sausage, sauerkraut or vinegar manufacture.



         (s)   Starch, glucose, dextrin manufacture.



         (t)   Textile manufacture.



         (u)   Trades, industries, or uses having moderately
objectionable environmental influences by reason of the emission of odor,
heat, smoke, noise or vibration.



         (v)   Washing compound manufacture.



         (w)   Welding shop.



         (x)   Wool scouring, hair manufacture



         (y)   Yeast manufacture for wholesale.



   (C)   Use conditions.



      (1)   The uses included in Use Unit 26, which are located
within 300 feet of an R district, shall be conducted within enclosed
buildings.



      (2)   The uses included in Use Unit 26, when located on a lot
which shall be screened from the abutting residential or office district by
the erection and maintenance of screening wall or fence along the lot line or
lines in common with the R or O district.



   (D)   Off-street parking and loading requirements.



 


Use

 

Parking Spaces

 

Loading Berths



Airport
 
1 per each 500 sq.ft. of enclosed passenger terminal area
 
1 per 2,000-40,000 sq.ft. of floor area, plus 1 per 40,000-100,000 sq.ft.,
plus 1 per each additional 100,000 sq.ft.


All other uses
 
1 per 1,000 sq.ft. of developed site
 
1 per 2,000-40,000 sq.ft. plus 1 per 40,000-100,000 sq.ft. plus 1 per each
additional 100,000 sq.ft. of floor area


See §§ 153.181 through 153.185 for required minimum dimensions and design
criteria for parking facilities.



 



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12)



§ 153.172  USE UNIT 27 HEAVY MANUFACTURING AND INDUSTRY.



   (A)   Description. Manufacturing and industrial use have substantial
objectionable environment influences by reason of the emission of odor, heat,
smoke, noise or vibration. Processes, raw materials and completed products
materials need not be fully enclosed in a building; however, such must be
completely screened from the public right-of-way and abutting properties
unless permitted by the Board of Zoning Appeals in the granting of the
special exception.



   (B)   Included uses. Those manufacturing or Industrial Uses not
elsewhere classified, or allowed may be permitted by special exception, and
the following uses.



      (1)   Acetylene gas manufacture in excess of 15 pounds of
pressure per square inch.



      (2)   Acid manufacture for wholesale.



      (3)   Aluminum works, foundry and manufacture.



      (4)   Ammonia, bleaching powder or chlorine manufacture.



      (5)   Asphalt manufacture or refining.



      (6)   Auto salvage yards.



      (7)   Bio-fuel and ethanol manufacture.



      (8)   Blast furnaces.



      (9)   Boiler works or forage works.



      (10)   Brick, tile or terra cotta manufacture.



      (11)   Cement, lime, gypsum, Plaster of Paris, manufacturing.



      (12)   Chloride or hydrochloric, nitric, picric, sulfurous,
sulfuric acid, or ammonia manufacture.



      (13)   Coke manufacture.



      (14)   Creosote manufacture or treatment.



      (15)   Dextrin manufacture.



      (16)   Disinfectant or insecticide manufacture.



      (17)   Distillation of bones, coal, tar or wood.



      (18)   Ethanol manufacture.



      (19)   Explosive manufacture and/or storage.



      (20)   Fat rendering.



      (21)   Fertilizer manufacture from mineral or organic
materials.



      (22)   Foundry, metal.



      (23)   Garbage, offal or dead animal reduction or dumping glue.



      (24)   Gelatin, glue or size manufacture.



      (25)   Glucose manufacture.



      (26)   Gypsum manufacture.



      (27)   Incineration or reduction of dead animals, garbage,
offal or refuse.



      (28)   Iron or sheet foundry works.



      (29)   Junk yard.



      (30)   Lime, cement, or Plaster of Paris manufacture match
manufacture.



      (31)   Metal foundry.



      (32)   Paint (oil), varnish and turpentine manufacture.



      (33)   Paper or pulp manufacture by sulfide process emitting
noxious gases or odors.



      (34)   Petroleum or other crude materials refining and tank
farms.



      (35)   Plastic raw material, pounder and resin manufacture.



      (36)   Rayon or cellophane manufacture.



      (37)   Refuse dump.



      (38)   Roofing manufacture.



      (39)   Rolling mill.



      (40)   Rubber manufacture from crude materials.



      (41)   Salvage yards, NEC.



      (42)   Sanitary landfill.



      (43)   Shoddy manufacture.



      (44)   Slaughter of animals.



      (45)   Smelting.



      (46)   Soap manufacture.



      (47)   Soda ash, caustic soda and washing compound manufacture.



      (48)   Soy bean refining.



      (49)   Stock yards.



      (50)   Storage of dismantled automobiles or any form of junk.



      (51)   Sugar refining.



      (52)   Tallow, grease, lard manufacture or refining.



      (53)   Tanning or curing of leather, raw hides or skins or
storage of raw hides or skins.



      (54)   Tar distillation or manufacture.



      (55)   Tar roof or tar water proofing manufacture.



      (56)   Trades, industries, or uses that have heavily
objectionable environmental influences by reason of the emission of odor,
heat, smoke, noise or vibration.



      (57)   Turpentine manufacture.



      (58)   Varnish manufacture.



   (C)   Use conditions. Use conditions will include those in §
153.202(C)(2) for screening. The Board of Zoning Appeals may set other such
conditions as they deem necessary.



   (D)   Off-street parking and loading requirements.



 


Use

 

Parking Spaces

 

Loading Berths



All uses
 
1 per 1,000 sq.ft. of developed site
 
1 per 2,000-40,000 sq.ft. plus 1 per 40,000-100,000 sq.ft. plus 1 per each
additional 100,000 sq.ft. of floor area


See §§ 153.181 through 153.185 for required minimum dimensions and design
criteria for parking facilities.



 



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12)



§ 153.173  USE UNIT 28 HOME OCCUPATIONS.



   (A)   Description. Any occupation or activity conducted within a
dwelling unit or accessory building that is clearly incidental and
subordinate to the principle use of the premises for dwelling purposes, and
the individuals engaged in such occupation or activity reside within the
dwelling.



   (B)   Uses.



      (1)   Beauty or barber shop, provided the non-residential
activity does not occupy more than 20% of the first or ground floor or
basement within a residential dwelling unit and provided that the use is
limited to one beautician or barber who resides within the dwelling.



      (2)   Home occupation conducted within a dwelling unit whose
main use is residential, and occupying not more than 25% of the first floor
or ground floor or basement of such dwelling unit or in an accessory
building. Non-residential activity shall be conducted by the occupant of the
dwelling unit. Such uses as tea rooms, tourist home, veterinary office,
hospitals, shall not be deemed as home occupations. There shall be no display
or indication on the exterior of the dwelling unit that it is being utilized
in part for any non-residential uses. There shall be no commodity sold on the
premises, other than what is produced there. There shall be no person
employed other than a member of the family residing on the premises. Name
plate not exceeding two square feet in area.



      (3)   Conditional use. The Board of Zoning Appeals upon
application and public hearing, may grant a conditional use permit for two
employees or assistants for any permitted home occupation, within the
dwelling or separate structure.



   (C)   Use conditions. The Board of Zoning Appeals may set other such
conditions as they deem necessary.



   (D)   Off-street parking and loading requirements. Off-street
parking and loading as may be required by the Board of Zoning Appeals in
granting the special exception use.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12)



§ 153.174  USE UNIT 29 MOBILE OFFICE TRAILER.



   (A)   Description. Mobile office trailer.



   (B)   Uses. A vehicle designed to serve whenever parked as a
temporary office for a construction project and not for dwelling, living or
sleeping quarters.



   (C)   Use conditions. In zoning districts where the mobile office
trailer is a use by right, the set back requirements for accessory structures
applicable in the respective zoning district shall be met. In zoning
districts where the mobile office trailer is a use by special exception, the
set back requirements shall be established at the discretion of Board of
Zoning Appeals at the time of the hearing on the special exception.



   (D)   Off-street parking and loading requirements. None.



(Ord. 13-9, passed 5-16-13)



OFF-STREET PARKING AND OFF-STREET LOADING



§ 153.181  PURPOSE.



   It is the intent of this subchapter to assure that adequate off-street
parking and off-street loading berths are provided with the construction,
alteration, remodeling or changes of use of the building or change in the use
of land. There are no off-street parking and off-street loading requirements
in the Agricultural District or the Central Business District; however,
parking surface requirements in § 153.183(J) shall apply.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12; Am. Ord. 2015-2, passed 1-22-15)



§ 153.182  APPLICABILITY OF REQUIREMENTS.



   The off-street parking and off-street loading facilities (whether they
are principal uses or accessory uses, or they are minimum requirement for the
initiation, enlargement, or change of use) shall meet the requirements of
this chapter as follows.



   (A)   Effective date. For all buildings and structures erected and
all uses of land established after the effective date of this code, parking
and loading facilities shall be provided as required by the applicable use
unit. (See §§ 153.141 through 153.174).



   (B)   Use expansion. When the intensity of use of any building or
structure or lot is altered through the addition of dwelling units, floor
area, seating capacity or other units of measurement, and said change results
in an increase in the required number of parking or loading berths, the
off-street parking and loading facilities shall provide for such increase in
intensity of use.



   (C)   Use change. Whenever the existing use of a building or
structure shall hereafter be changed to a new use, parking and/or loading
requirements shall comply with such new use. However, if the building or
structure was erected prior to the effective date of this ordinance or the
use is non-conforming as to parking and loading requirements then parking and
loading requirements for a change in use shall be governed by § 153.207,
Parking and Loading Non-Conforming Uses.



   (D)   Accessory off-street parking and loading facilities. Accessory
off-street parking and loading facilities in existence as of the effective
date of this ordinance and located on the same lot as the building or use
served shall not hereafter be reduced below, or if already less than, shall
not be further reduced below the requirements for a similar new building or
use under the provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12)



§ 153.183  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Yard preservation. Off-Street parking and off-street loading
facilities shall not occupy required livability space; shall not occupy the
required front year, street side yard or side yard (except in the
Agricultural, Residential and Office districts where vehicles may be parked
in the required front yard for residential uses); and when a B or C district
abuts an O or R district, shall observe the front yard requirements of the O
or R district for a distance of 200 feet into the B or C district (except the
CBD).



   (B)   Loading berth not for parking space. Space allocated to any
required off-street loading berth shall not be used to satisfy the space
requirements for any off-street parking facilities.



   (C)   Parking space not for loading berth. Space allocated to any
required off-street parking shall not be used to satisfy the space
requirements of any off-street loading facilities.



   (D)   Loading berth not for other purposes. Required off-street
parking spaces and required off-street loading berths shall not be used for
the storage, sales, dismantling, or servicing of any vehicle, equipment,
materials, or supplies.



   (E)   Proximity of off-street parking spaces and loading berths to
land use served. Required off-street parking spaces and required off-street
loading berths shall be located on the lot containing the use for which the
required spaces or berths are to be provided. However, off-street parking
spaces on an abutting property may be used to meet the off-street parking
requirements provided the parking spacing on any abutting properties are
secured through a long-term lease of 25 or more years.



   (F)   Access to parking space. The capacity of an off-street parking
area shall be the number of parking spaces having required dimensions located
thereon. Space design shall be such that each space can be entered without
passing through another space.



   (G)   No maneuvering on public street. Required off-street parking
in commercial, office, industrial and multifamily developments other than
townhouses, zones shall be so arranged that no maneuvering incidental to
parking movements takes place on any public street.



   (H)   Joint use parking area. The number of off-street parking
spaces required for each building or use shall be determined by reference to
the appropriate Use Unit 0-28 (§§ 153.141 through 153.174) within which the
proposed use is classified. Where several different uses will share a joint
parking area, the parking requirements shall be computed based upon the
overall development. For any use not listed, or where listed regulations are
not applicable in the judgment of the Area Plan Commission staff, parking
requirements shall be determined by planning staff. Computations of required
parking spaces by planning staff shall be final.



   (I)   Lighting. Lighting used to illuminate off-street parking
areas, if any, shall be by constant light and shall be so arranged as to
direct the light away from properties within a residential or office district
which do not contain uses for which the parking is being provided.



   (J)   Parking surface. As set forth herein, unenclosed off-street
parking areas, off-street loading areas and driveways associated therein
shall be surfaced with an all-weather material. (See definition ALL-WEATHER
MATERIAL, § 153.270). Surfacing shall be completed prior to the initiation
of the use.



      (1)   Agriculture Zoning District and zoned areas designated
as R-1, R-2, R-3 and RMH which are located in unincoporated Posey County and
not within the City of Mount Vernon, Town of Cynthiana or Town of Poseyville;
and zoned areas designated as B-1, B-1A, B-2 and B-3, which are located in
unincorporated Posey County and not within the City of Mount Vernon, Town of
Cynthiana or Town of Poseyville: all weather material parking surface
requirements shall not apply subject to division (5) below.



      (2)   All zoned areas designated as residential not excluded
in division (1) above: unenclosed parking areas, off-street loading areas and
driveways associated therein shall be surfaced with all-weather material (See
definition ALL-WEATHER MATERIAL, § 153.270). Surfacing shall be completed
prior to the initiation of the use.



      (3)   All PUD, O, R-O, Business, Commercial and CBD Zoning
Districts, not excluded in division (1) above: unenclosed off-street parking
areas, off-street loading areas and driveways associated therein shall be
surfaced with an all-weather material. (See definition ALL-WEATHER MATERIAL,
§ 153.270). Surfacing shall be completed prior to the initiation of the use.



      (4)   All manufacturing districts: all weather material
parking surface requirement shall only apply to the required parking spaces.



      (5)   Not withstanding divisions (1) through (4) above, all
zoning districts must comply with the following: all transitions or
approaches to a paved roadway shall be constructed with a six foot
all-weather material approach to the paved roadway. Paved roadway excludes
“chip and seal.”



      (6)   Nothing in divisions (1) through (5) above supercedes
any local, state, or Federal requirement in contradiction with these
provisions.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12; Am. Ord. 2015-2, passed 1-22-15)



§ 153.184  DESIGN STANDARDS FOR OFF-STREET PARKING AREAS.



   (A)   Dimensions table. Table 10-1 and Figure 10-1 below detail
required dimensions for off-street parking areas. This includes stall width,
aisle width and bay width. Dimensions are provided for 90°, 60° and 45°
orientation.



   (B)   Orientation. The 90° angle orientation is preferable.
However, in the event 60° or 45° angle orientation is employed, the use of
interlocking herringbone patterns shall not be permitted.



   (C)   Pedestrian movement. To ensure full sidewalk width, for
pedestrian movement, a three foot wide overhang area shall be provided when
parking area design is such that parked cars are headed in toward sidewalk. A
three foot overhang shall also be provided where parking is allowed
immediately adjacent to a building. (Note: These requirements do not increase
required stall length. However, they do require that a curb line be
designated three feet back from the diagram. Bumper guards may also be used
for this designation).



   (D)   Parking space access. Each required parking space shall be
accessible via a driveway or parking aisle from a public street without
passing through another required space.



   (E)   Screening. Unenclosed off-street parking areas which are
principal uses shall be screened by the erection of a screening wall or fence
on the lot line or lines in common with a residential or office district.
Unenclosed off-street parking areas, containing six or more spaces, which are
accessory to uses not required to provide screening shall be screened by the
erection of a screening wall or fence on the lot line or lines in common with
an RS/R-1 District. However, if the parking area is located more than 50 feet
from the RS/R-1 lot line the screening requirement shall not apply.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12)



§ 153.185  DESIGN STANDARDS FOR OFF-STREET LOADING AREAS.



   (A)   Loading area. Unless otherwise specified, a required
off-street loading area shall be at least ten feet in width, 30 feet in
length, exclusive of aisles, and shall have a vertical clearance of at least
14 feet.



   (B)   Loading area access. Required off-street loading area shall be
provided access to and from a public street or alley by an access drive of at
least ten feet in width designed to permit convenient access by semi-trailer
trucks.



   (C)   Load area separation. Unenclosed off-street loading areas
shall not be located within 50 feet of any abutting property which is within
a residential or office district unless it is totally within an enclosed
building or screened on all sides abutting the residential or office district
by a screening wall or fence.



   (D)   Lighting. Lighting used to illuminate an off-street loading
area shall be so arranged as to direct the light away from the properties
within a Residential or Office District which do not contain uses for which
the loading area is being provided.



   TABLE 10-1:  REQUIRED PARKING AREA DESIGN DIMENSIONS



 


Degree Orientation

 

(S) Stall Width (ft.)

 

(D) Stall Length or Depth (ft.)

 

(C) Curb Length (ft.)

 

(A) Aisle Width (ft.)

 

(W) Bay Width (ft.)




90

 

9.5

 

19

 

9.5

 

28

 

66




60

 

9.5

 

16.5

 

11

 

22

 

55




45

 

9.5

 

13.5

 

13.4

 

19

 

46




 







   Figure 10-1:  Parking Area Dimensions



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12)



NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES



§ 153.201  GENERAL.



   Within the districts established by this chapter there exists uses,
structures and lots which were lawful before this chapter was adopted or
amended, but which will be prohibited under the terms of this chapter or
future amendments. These uses, structures and lots, herein referred to as
“nonconforming uses” may continue as regulated by this chapter, provided
the nature of the nonconformity is not increased.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12)



§ 153.202  NONCONFORMING USES OF UNIMPROVED LAND.



   Any nonconforming use of land (such as junk yard, and storage areas)
lawfully existing upon the effective date of this chapter may continue
subject to the following provisions.



   (A)   A nonconforming use may be changed only to a use of the same
or more restrictive classification, provided the use is permitted as a use of
right and not by special exception and does not increase any other
nonconforming aspect (building, parking, signing, and the like). (Note: while
most uses may be found to be a use of right in some district, there are some
uses that are not permitted as a use of right in any district and are
permitted only by special exception).



   (B)   No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or increased, nor
extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective
date of this chapter or amendment thereof.



   (C)   No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part
to any portion of the lot or parcel other than that occupied by such use at
the effective date of this chapter or amendment thereof.



   (D)   No additional structure (other than fences) shall be erected
in connection with such nonconforming use of land. If any such nonconforming
use of land ceases for any reason for a period of more than 12 months (except
when government action impedes access to or use of the premises), any
subsequent use of such land shall conform in all respects to the regulations
of the district in which located.



   (E)   A nonconforming use of land, if discontinued for 12
consecutive months shall NOT be resumed.



   (F)   Nonconforming use variances on unimproved lots are expressly
prohibited under I.C. 36-7-918.3.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12)



§ 153.203  NONCONFORMING USE OF BUILDING OR BUILDINGS AND LAND IN
COMBINATION.



   Upon the effective date of this chapter or amendment thereto, if there
exists a lawful use of a building, or use of a principal building and land,
or use of land and accessory structures, and such use would be prohibited by
the terms of the ordinance or amendment thereto, such use shall be deemed
nonconforming and may continue subject to the following provisions.



   (A)   No building devoted to a nonconforming use shall be enlarged
or extended, except in changing the use of the building to a use permitted in
the district in which it is located.



   (B)   A nonconforming use of a portion of a building may be extended
to the remaining portions of the building if such areas were originally
arranged, designed and constructed for such use. However, the use shall not
be extended to occupy any land outside the building.



   (C)   A nonconforming use on part of a lot shall not be expanded or
extended onto any other portion of such lot.



   (D)   A nonconforming use of a building or buildings and land in
combination, if discontinued for 12 consecutive months shall not thereafter
be resumed.



   (E)   A nonconforming use may be changed only to a use permitted in
the same or more restrictive classification provided the use is permitted as
a use of right and not by special exception and does not increase any other
nonconforming aspect (building, parking, signing, lot, and the like). (Note:
while most uses may be found to be a use of right in some district, there are
some uses that are not permitted as a use of right in any district and are
permitted only by special exception).



   (F)   Should the structure, containing a nonconforming, use be
damaged or destroyed by fire, explosion or any Act of God to the extent of
more than 50% of its assessed value, the nonconforming use shall not
hereafter continue or be resumed.



   (G)   Nonconforming use variances in “buildings” or “buildings
and lands in combination” are expressly prohibited under I.C. 36-7-918.3.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12)



§ 153.204  NONCONFORMING SIGNS.



   (A)   Outdoor advertising signs. Outdoor advertising signs existing
on the effective date of this chapter but which would be prohibited by its
terms shall be subject to the following regulations.



      (1)   Should the sign be damaged or partially destroyed to the
extent of more than 50% of its current replacement cost the sign shall be
removed, or made to conform.



      (2)   If the sign is not used for advertising purposes for a
period of 12 consecutive months, the sign shall be deemed abandoned and shall
be removed.



   (B)   Business signs. Business signs existing on the effective date
of this chapter, or amendment thereto, but which would be prohibited by its
terms shall be subject to the following requirements.



      (1)   Should the sign be damaged or partially destroyed to the
extent of more than 50% of its current replacement cost the sign shall be
removed, or made to conform.



      (2)   If the sign is not used for advertising purposes for a
period of 12 consecutive months, the sign shall be deemed abandoned and shall
be removed.



      (3)   Signs with flashing lights lawfully existing on the
effective date of this chapter or amendment thereto, but which would be
prohibited by its terms shall be removed, or made to conform to the
provisions of § 153.166 within one year from the effective date of this
chapter. However, promotional business signs shall comply with this chapter
immediately, from and after its effective date.



   (C)   Record. A record shall be maintained of signs in existence as
of September 1, 2012.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12)



§ 153.205  NONCONFORMING LOTS.



   In residential and office districts, a lot of record of less width and
area, may be used for a single-family detached dwelling. However, compliance
with the requirement for the side yard, which abuts a public street, shall be
followed and in no case shall the other side yard be less than five feet. All
other requirements of the district shall be followed.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12)



§ 153.206  NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES.



   A structure, lawfully existing at the effective date of the adoption or
amendment of this chapter, but which would be prohibited by the terms of this
chapter by reason of restrictions on floor area, density intensity, height,
yards, its location on the lot or other requirements concerning the
structure, shall be deemed nonconforming; and shall be subject to the
following restrictions.



   (A)   Alteration. No such nonconforming structure may be enlarged or
altered in any manner which increases its nonconformity.



   (B)   Damage. No structure which has been damaged by fire or
explosion or any Act of God, to the extent of 50% or more of its assessed
valuation, shall be restored, repaired or rebuilt except to conform to the
requirement of the district in which it is located.



   (C)   Relocation. Should such structure be moved, regardless of the
distance, it shall thereafter conform to the provisions of the district in
which it is to be located.



   (D)   Maintenance. On any building containing a nonconforming use or
any nonconforming structure, ordinary repairs and maintenance may continue,
except as otherwise provided in this chapter.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12)



§ 153.207  NONCONFORMING PARKING, LOADING AND SCREENING REQUIREMENT
NONCONFORMING USES.



   A use lawfully existing at the effective date of this chapter or
amendment thereto, but which does not comply with parking, loading or
screening requirements, may continue, subject to the following conditions.



   (A)   No such use may be enlarged or extended unless parking and
loading is provided as required for the total use, including the enlargement
or extension.



   (B)   No such use may be enlarged or extended unless screening is
provided as required for the use.



   (C)   No such use may be changed unless parking, loading and
screening is provided as required for such use. However, the Board of Zoning
Appeals may modify such parking, loading and screening requirements through a
variance.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12)



§ 153.208  NONCONFORMING MOBILE HOME, PARK AND SUBDIVISION.



   (A)   Mobile home size. Any mobile home which existed upon the
effective date of this chapter and lies in a district that continues to
permit mobile homes by use of right or special exception, but does not meet
the minimum livable floor area requirement of this chapter, may continue as a
nonconforming structure. However, if the mobile home is replaced, it shall
meet the minimum livable floor area of this chapter; and the existing mobile
home shall be removed from the lot.



   (B)   Mobile home use. Any mobile home which existed upon the
effective date of this chapter and lies in a district that no longer permits
a mobile home by use of right or special exception, may continue as a
nonconforming structure. However, if the mobile home is replaced, it shall be
of equal size or meet the minimum livable floor area; which ever is greater;
and the existing mobile home shall be removed from the lot.



   (C)   Mobile home park or mobile home subdivision. Any mobile home
court, park or subdivision which existed upon the effective date of this
chapter and which is located in a district which once but no longer permits a
mobile home park or subdivision either as a permitted use or special
exception use shall be regarded as a nonconforming use and may be continued.
However; any change in layout, expansion or extension shall be subject to all
provisions of § 153.052.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12)



§ 153.209  NONCONFORMING VARIANCE.



   The Board of Zoning Appeals may authorize, upon request and in
specified cases, a variance from the terms of this chapter. Action is to be
determined at a public hearing. At which time the determination will be made
that the variance request is not contrary to the public interest, and where,
owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this
section will result in unnecessary hardship, and so that the spirit of this
chapter shall be observed and substantial justice done. However,
noncomforming use variances for uses on unimproved lands, buildings, and
buildings and lands in combination are expressly prohibited under I.C.
36-7-918.3.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12)



ENFORCEMENT AND FEES



§ 153.211  ENFORCEMENT DUTY OF PLAN COMMISSION.



   It shall be the duty of the Area Plan Commission and/or their designate
to enforce this chapter. If the Area Plan Commission finds that any of the
provisions of this chapter are being violated the Commission shall notify in
writing the owner of the property in violation. Such notification shall
indicate the nature of the violation and order the action necessary to
correct said violation. The Area Plan Commission shall take such action to
ensure compliance with or to prevent violation of this chapter provisions as
is authorized by law. All departments, officials and employees of the
applicable jurisdiction vested with the duty or authority to issue permits or
licenses shall comply with the provisions of this chapter and shall issue no
permit or licenses for any use, purpose, excavation, construction, structure,
building or sign in conflict with the provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12)



§ 153.212  COMPLAINTS REGARDING VIOLATION.



   (A)   Standing. Any person may file a complaint whenever a violation
of this chapter occurs, or is alleged to have occurred. Such complaint shall
be filed in writing with the Area Plan Commission, and shall state fully the
causes and basis of the complaint. The Area Plan Commission shall record such
complaint properly, immediately investigate (within ten calendar days) and
take action thereon as provided by this chapter.



   (B)   Staff investigation. After inspection ofthe complaint, the
Area Plan Commission Executive Director may notify the alleged
offender/defendant, complainant, Area Plan Commission President and Area Plan
Commission Attorney that no violation has been found. Any Area Plan
Commission staff action on a zoning complaint may be appealed to the Area
Plan Commission.



   (C)   Notification of violation. After verification of the violation
by the Area Plan Commission Executive Director, the Executive Director shall
provided notification of the violation to the offender/defendant with copies
to the complainant, Area Plan Commission Board President, and Area Plan
Commission Attorney, and all four shall be given at least ten calendar days
notice of the public hearing on the complaint before the Area Plan Commission.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12)



§ 153.213  PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION.



   (A)   Penalty. Any person, firm of corporation violating any
provision of this chapter or failing to comply with any of its requirements,
including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection
with grants of variance or special exceptions, shall be deemed an ordinance
violation and may carry a fine of not less than $25 nor more than $500. Each
day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.



   (B)   Other remedies. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the
applicable jurisdiction or its authorized officials from taking other action,
authorized by law, to remedy the violation.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12)



§ 153.214  ATTORNEYS FEES.



   Not withstanding anything contained in this chapter to the contrary or
appearing to be contrary, and in addition and supplementary to other
provisions of this chapter, if the Area Plan Commission or Board of Appeals,
or the City of Mt. Vernon, Town of Cynthiana, Town of Poseyville or Posey
County is required to utilize the services of the City, Town or County
Attorney or any other attorney in investigating a possible violation of this
chapter or enforcing the provisions of this chapter pursuant to any section,
before any board or court (including appeals), and such investigation results
in a determination that a violation has occurred or if the Area Plan
Commission, the Board of Zoning Appeals or applicable local jurisdiction is
successful in its enforcement of the chapter by way of suit, appeal or other
appropriate proceeding, the respondent, defendant or party investigated for a
violation shall pay the applicable local jurisdiction reasonable attorney
fees and all cost related to the investigation of the violation and the
enforcement of this chapter, unless such attorney fees of cost are
specifically waived by the applicable local legislative body.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12)



§ 153.215  COST ON APPEAL.



   As to any appeal from a decision of the Area Plan Commission or Board
of Zoning Appeals, costs may not be allowed against the Area Plan Commission
or Board of Zoning Appeals unless it appears to the court that the Board
acted with gross negligence or in bad faith in making the decision brought up
for review.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12)



§ 153.216  CODE OF ETHICS.



   (A)   The Mayor or any member of the City Council, any member of a
town council, Plan Commission, or Board of Zoning Appeals to whom some
private benefit, direct or indirect, financial or otherwise, may come as a
result of a public action concerning this chapter, shall not be a participant
in that action. The possibility, not the actuality, of a conflict shall
govern. The individual experiencing a conflict of interest shall declare his
interest, abstain from voting on the matter, and refrain from any
deliberations on the matter. The individual shall not discuss the matter with
any fellow official for the purpose of influencing a decision thereon.



   (B)   Further, there shall be no “ex parte” (one side only)
communication with members of the Board of County Commissioners, Mount Vernon
City Council, Cynthiana Town Council or Poseyville Town Council, Area Plan
Commission or Board of Zoning Appeals concerning applications or appeals
before the Area Plan Commissioner or Board of Zoning Appeals.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12)



§ 153.217  FEES.



   (A)   Filing fees. Application and petitions filed pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter shall be accompanied by the appropriate filing fee.



   (B)   Plan Commission to establish fees. Pursuant to statute, the
Area Plan Commission shall establish a schedule of reasonable fees to defray
the administrative costs connected with:



      (1)   Processing and hearing administrative appeals and
petitions for rezoning, special exceptions, special uses, conditional uses,
contingent uses and variances;



      (2)   Issuing permits; and



      (3)   Other official action under the Indiana Code’s
planning and zoning laws.



   (C)   Fee schedule set annually. The fee schedule shall be
established at the first meeting each year of the Area Plan Commission. In
the event the fee schedule is not reviewed by the Area Plan Commission at the
first meeting of the year, the existing fee schedule shall remain in full
force and effect until modified by the Area Plan Commission.



   (D)   Posting of fee schedule. The fee schedule shall be posted in
the Area Plan Commission office in an area of public access.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12)



IMPROVEMENT LOCATION PERMIT, SITE PLAN REVIEW AND AGREEMENTS



§ 153.221  IMPROVEMENT LOCATION PERMIT.



   (A)   Improvement location permit required. It shall be unlawful for
any person, firm or corporation to erect, move, add to or structurally alter
any building or structure, or to use or change the use of any building or
land or to permit the afore mentioned actions, until an improvement location
permit has been issued by the Area Plan Commission.



   (B)   Application for improvement location permit. Application for
an improvement location permit shall be made upon forms prescribed by the
Area Plan Commission and accompanied by:



      (1)   A site plan showing:



         (a)   Legal description of the lot and building plans,
drawn to scale in black line or blueprint, showing the actual shape and
dimension of the lot and;



         (b)   The location and dimensions of all easements;



         (c)   The location, setbacks, size and height of any
existing buildings or structures (principal or accessory) to be erected or
altered;



         (d)   The existing and intended use of each building or
structure and portion of the lot;



         (e)   The number of dwellings and buildings it intended
to accommodate; and



         (f)   And such other information with regard to the lot
and neighboring lots as may be necessary to determine and provide for the
enforcement of this chapter;



      (2)   Except for single-family detached and two-family
dwelling units and accessory uses in the agriculture, residential and office
districts related to single-family detached and two-family dwelling units,
the site plan must also show the following:



         (a)   The exact property lines of the property, showing
existing street and right-of-way lines;



         (b)   Adjacent properties on the same and the opposite
frontage, indicating entrances and exits to these properties;



         (c)   The exact location and dimensions of access drives
to the property, service drives, existing and proposed curb cuts, and
proposed directions of traffic flow on the property and into and out of the
public rights-of-way;



         (d)   The exact location and dimensions of any necessary
frontage/service roads, acceleration or deceleration lanes, left-turn lanes
into the property, right and/or left-turn storage lanes, and passing blisters;



         (e)   The exact location, dimensions and type of
pavement off-street parking and loading facilities;



         (f)   The location, dimensions, height, setback and
lighting of all business (on-premises) and outdoor advertising/billboard
(off-premises) signs;



         (g)   Any required landscaping and screening include the
type of materials and height for all walls, fences, berms and vegetation; and



         (f)   Sexually oriented businesses in Use Unit 15 and
animated (moving image) signs in Use Unit 21 are subject to additional
requirements;



      (3)   The name and address of the person seeking approval. The
name shall be the owner(s) of record of the property or include an affidavit
of designee of power of attorney; and



      (4)   Any other plans or specifications which the Area Plan
Commission deems necessary to determine the site plan conforms to the
requirements of this zoning chapter.



      (5)   Site plan approval is not required for those structures
which are exempt pursuant 675 I.A.C. 12-6-4, as may be amended. Site plans
may be approved by the Area Plan Commission Executive Director for
residential and nonresidential uses by right in the Agriculture, R-1/RS, RT,
R-2 and R-3/RM and O/R-O Districts with eight or less attached dwelling
units. The Area Plan Commission Executive Director may approve site plans for
residential or nonresidential uses by right in any zoning district involving
the addition of 300 square feet or less to an existing structure or the
erection of a detached structure of 500 square feet or less, regardless of
whether the addition or erection is a principal or accessory structure. Site
development plans are required for more than eight attached dwelling units
and for uses in the business/commercial and manufacturing districts, are to
be forwarded to the Site Plan Review Committee, and are subject to approval
by the Area Plan Commission after a public hearing as set forth in §
153.223(F). Uses by special exception are subject to approval by the Board of
Zoning Appeals. The site development plan approval in the Planned Unit
Development District or the Residential Mobile Home District is set forth in
those districts.



   (C)   Response to application for improvement location permit.



      (1)   After an application for an improvement location permit
is filed in compliance with the provisions herein and a site plan per
division (B) of this section is approved by the Area Plan Commission
Executive Director or a site development plan per § 153.223(F) is approved
by the Area Plan Commission, the Plan Commission Executive Director shall
issue an improvement location permit or shall notify the applicant, in
writing, of his/her refusal to issue a permit and setting forth the reasons
therefore.



      (2)   Improvement location permit shall be posted in a
prominent and permanent place on the site and protected from destruction.



   (D)   Fees for improvement location permits. No improvement location
permit shall be issued until a fee has been paid in accordance with the
schedule of fees.



   (E)   Time limit: improvement location permit. The permit will be
revoked if active work is not commenced within 60 days after date of
permit’s issue, or if work was started and then stopped for a period of six
months.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12; Am. Ord. 13-1, passed 1-24-13)



§ 153.222  CONSTRUCTION AND USE TO BE AS APPROVED IN APPLICATIONS, PLANS
AND PERMITS.



   Improvement location permits, variances or special exceptions, issued
on the basis of approved plans and applications, authorize only those uses,
arrangement and construction as set forth in said plans and applications. No
other use, arrangement or construction is allowed. Use, arrangement or
construction at deviance with that authorized shall be deemed a violation of
this chapter and punishable as provided by § 153.213.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12)



§ 153.223  SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN APPROVAL FOR MORE THAN EIGHT ATTACHED
DWELLING UNITS AND USES IN THE BUSINESS/COMMERCIAL AND MANUFACTURING ZONING
DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Purpose. Site plan approval is not required for those
structures which are exempt pursuant to 675 I.A.C. 12-6-4, as may be amended.
By reason of potential adverse effects on public services or to neighboring
land uses, site development plan review and approval is required for all
proposed multifamily complexes over eight units and for uses in the
business/commercial and manufacturing districts. This is for the purposes of
assuring proper accessibility, circulation, functional relationships of uses,
and compatibility with adjoining and nearby development. Accordingly, no
building or structure for more than eight attached dwelling units and for
uses in the business/commercial and manufacturing districts shall be erected,
altered, or land used, nor shall an improvement location permit be issued
therefore, unless a development plan for such building structure and/or use
shall have been presented to and approved by the Area Plan Commission. Uses
by special exception are subject to approval by the Board of Zoning Appeals.
The site plan approval in the planned unit development district or the
residential mobile home district is set forth in those districts.



   (B)   Application for site development plan review.



      (1)   The development plan(s) specified herein shall be
submitted to the Area Plan Commission Office along with an application for
approval of development plan(s). Also due at the time of the submission of
the development plan(s), is an application fee as set forth in the fee
schedule adopted by the Area Plan Commission.



      (2)   The property owner(s) of record or an affidavit of
designee by power-of-attorney shall be the applicant.



      (3)   The site development plan review submission deadline is
the second Thursday of each month so that the Plan Commission may take action
the following month.



      (4)   A person desiring the approval of a multifamily complex
with over eight units or any use in the business/commercial and manufacturing
districts shall submit to the Plan Commission one copy of a preliminary site
plan. The preliminary site plan shall be drawn to a scale of not less than
100 feet to one inch, on a sheet 24 by 36 inches. An exception may be made
when the drawing, at that scale, requires more than two sheets. The site plan
may then be drawn at the scale of 200 feet to one inch and shall contain the
following information.



         (a)   Description.



            1.   Proposed name of the development.



            2.   A legal description showing development
location.



            3.   Name and address of property owners.



            4.   Graphics scale, north point, and date.



         (b)   Existing conditions.



            1.   Boundary line of proposed development
indicated by solid heavy line.



            2.   Location of existing sewers, water mains,
culverts, or other underground facilities, indicating pipe sizes and grades,
within and adjoining the proposed development.



            3.   Boundary lines of adjacent land, showing
adjoining streets, easements and owner’s names.



            4.   Existing and proposed topography, contour
interval not to exceed five feet.



            5.   In the case of a revised site plan, all
descriptive lines of the original site plan being vacated shall be shown by
dotted lines in their proper position in relation to the arrangement of the
plan, the new site plan being clearly shown in solid lines so as to avoid
ambiguity and confusion.



         (c)   Proposed conditions.



            1.   Proposed vehicular and pedestrian circulation
plan including:



               (i)   The width of alleys, driveways,
walkways, and easements;



               (ii)   Location of off-street parking
facilities and their dimensions and pavement surface materials; and



               (iii)   The location of all ingress and
egress points with their corresponding dimensions;



            2.   Layout and elevations of proposed buildings
and structures including:



               (i)   Computation of lot area;



               (ii)   Building floor area;



               (iii)   Building coverage;



               (iv)   Building height; and



               (v)   Number of dwelling units to be
included (if any);



            3.   Parcels of land to be dedicated or reserved
for public use;



            4.   Building setback line showing dimensions;



            5.   Location and size of proposed:



               (i)   Recreational areas;



               (ii)   Commercial and service facilities,
and any other structures that may be proposed;



               (iii)   Buffer areas, screening walls, and
landscaping (including the location, height and materials); and



               (iv)   Street lights;



            6.   Location of proposed site improvements
indicating pipe capacities, sizes and grades, this shall include if warranted:



               (i)   Sanitary sewers;



               (ii)   Water mains; and



               (iii)   Storm sewers or on-site stormwater
retention basin if the stormwater is to be released into a natural drainage
way, creek or stream;



            7.   Proposed type, location, height and size,
orientation and illuminations of all signs;



            8.   An explanation of the character of the
development reporting the nature and intensity of uses in the development;



            9.   Any additional information specified for a
site plan in § 153.221(B); and



            10.   Additional information as deemed appropriate
by the Area Plan Commission staff for determining compliance with this zoning
chapter.



   (C)   Referral of site development plan for agency review and
comment.



      (1)   Upon the Area Plan Commission Executive Director’s
receipt of a site development plan, the Executive Director shall send a copy
of the site plan for approval or comment to agencies with responsibilities
for law enforcement, fire protection, potable water, street/road maintenance,
liquid waste processing and disposal, and stormwater drainage. The Area Plan
Commission Executive Director shall request acknowledgment of receipt of the
plan and comment as to the effect the site development design would have on
services from each agency. If a local stormwater drainage ordinance is passed
by the affected jurisdiction, such requirements shall also be met. If there
would be no impact or effect, it shall be so noted by the agency. Responses
by the agencies shall be made to the Area Plan Commission in writing or
verbally at the regular meeting of the Site Development Plan Review Committee.



      (2)   The agencies shall have seven calendar days after the
regular Site Development Plan Review Committee to provide supplemental
responses or comments.



      (3)   The agency responses shall be provided to the applicant
to take corrective action prior to the Plan Commission public hearing. Prior
to the Plan Commission public hearing, the applicant shall provide any
changes to the site development plan and any new letters from any agencies
that previously expressed concerns.



   (D)   Site Development Plan Review Committee membership, review and
action.



      (1)   The site plan committee shall meet no later than 30 days
from the date of the submission of the application and development plan(s) to
review the development plan.



      (2)   The Site Development Plan Review Committee of the Area
Plan Commission shall consist of four members of the Area Plan Commission,
the building commissioner of the affected jurisdiction (if any), the director
of the affected municipal sanitary and storm sewers or the Posey County
Health Department Officer, and the Posey County Surveyor. The Site
Development Plan Review Committee shall submit their proposed findings of
fact and recommendation to the Area Plan Commission.



      (3)   The Site Development Plan Review Committee shall not
approve such development plans unless it finds that such plan conforms to all
applicable provisions of the chapter, that the safety and convenience of the
public are properly provided for, and that adequate protection and separation
are provided for contiguous and nearby residential property. The Site Plan
Committee may attach to its approval of a development plan any reasonable
conditions, limitations, or requirements, which are found necessary in its
judgment to effectuate the purpose of this section and to carry out the
spirit and purpose of this chapter.



   (E)   Public notification of public hearing.



      (1)   Following action by the Site Development Plan Review
Committee and at least ten calendar days before the regularly scheduled Plan
Commission public hearing, the Plan Commission staff shall ensure legal
notice of the public hearing on the site plan application is published in the
local newspaper with the widest circulation in the jurisdiction where the
subject property is located.



      (2)   The Plan Commission staff shall provide the applicant
with letters of Plan Commission public hearing notification of abutting
property owners, and the applicant shall ensure the abutting property owners
are notified by certified mail at least ten calendar days before the Plan
Commission public hearing. The applicant shall provide verification of the
notification of abutting property owners at least two business days prior to
the Plan Commission public hearing.



      (3)   The Plan Commission staff shall provide the applicant
with a sign advertising subject of the public hearing and the date of the
Plan Commission public hearing. At least ten calendar days prior to the Plan
Commission public hearing, the applicant shall have the sign posted on the
front property line of the subject property so that the sign is visible from
the public way.



   (F)   Public hearing and action.



      (1)   The Area Plan Commission will hold a public hearing on
the development plan at its regularly scheduled meeting following action of
the Site Development Plan Review Committee as follows.



         (a)   Beginning with a description of the site plan and
comments received from public agencies or departments reviewing the site plan
to determine whether or not the site plan is in order.



         (b)   Then, the applicant may present the site plan and
respond to any concerns raised by public agencies or departments.



         (c)   Proponents and opponents to the site plan are then
given an opportunity to provide public testimony on the site plan.



         (d)   The applicant has an opportunity to response to
any public comment.



      (2)   In passing upon and approving development plans, the
Area Plan Commission shall consider the following:



         (a)   Compatibility of the development with surrounding
land uses;



         (b)   Availability and coordination of water, sanitary
sewers, storm water draining and other utilities;



         (c)   Management of traffic in a manner that creates
conditions favorable to health, safety, convenience, and the harmonious
development of the community. This includes but is not limited to
consideration that the design and location of the proposed street and highway
access points minimize safety hazards and congestion, that the capacity of
adjacent streets and highways is sufficient to safely and efficiently accept
traffic that will be generated by the new development and that the entrances,
streets, and internal traffic circulation facilities in the development plan
are compatible with existing and planned streets and adjacent developments;



         (d)   Building setback lines;



         (e)   Building coverage;



         (f)   Building separation;



         (g)   Vehicle and pedestrian circulation;



         (h)   Parking;



         (i)   Landscaping;



         (j)   Height, scale, materials and style of improvements;



         (k)   Signage;



         (l)   Recreation space;



         (m)   Outdoor lighting; and



         (n)   Conformance with the zoning ordinance and the
applicable Comprehensive Plan.



      (3)   Upon review and consideration of the public agency
responses to the site plan and public testimony, the Plan Commission may:



         (a)   Approve the site plan as presented;



         (b)   Approve the site plan subject to stated specific
corrections to which the applicant concurs. The corrected site plan will be
submitted for approval by the President and Executive Director; or



         (c)   Deny the site plan stating specific corrections
that must be made by the applicant for the Plan Commission to approve the
site plan. The applicant may resubmit the site plan with corrections at any
time for a new public hearing consistent with the filing deadline and new
public notification of the new public hearing.



      (4)   The Area Plan Commission may impose conditions on the
approval of a development plan if the conditions are reasonably necessary to
satisfy the development requirements specified in the zoning ordinance for
approval of the development plan. In addition the Area Plan Commission may
also provide that approval of a development plan is conditioned on the
furnishing to the Area Plan Commission of a bond or written assurance that is
satisfactory to the Area Plan commission and that guarantees the timely
completion of a proposed public improvement in the proposed development.



      (5)   The President of the Area Plan Commission shall be
responsible for signing the written Findings of Fact adopted by the Area Plan
Commission. The decision of the Area Plan Commission shall be final and is
appealable to the Court of Record pursuant to Indiana statute.



      (6)   Upon approval of the site plan by the Plan Commission
President and Executive Director, the applicant may then apply for permit to
begin construction.



   (F)   Compliance with the approved site development plan. Any
building, structure and/or use shall be erected, altered, installed, and
maintained in full conformity with the provisions of this chapter and with
the development plan(s), which have been approved by the Area Plan Commission.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12; Am. Ord. 13-1, passed 1-24-13)



§ 153.224  LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS.



   (A)   General. In accordance with I.C. 36-7-4-1015, as a condition
to the adoption of a rezoning proposal (zoning map amendment) or the approval
of a variance or special exception, the owner of a parcel of real property
may be required or allowed to make a commitment the Area Plan Commission or
the Area Board of Zoning Appeals, as applicable, concerning the use and
development of that parcel.



   (B)   Provisions. Commitments are subject to the following
provisions.



      (1)   A commitment must be in writing.



      (2)   Unless the written commitment is modified or terminated
in accordance with this subsection, a written commitment is binding on the
owner of the parcel and all subsequent owners.



      (3)   A commitment shall be recorded in the Office of the
County Recorder. After a commitment is recorded, it is binding on a
subsequent owner or other person who acquires an interest in the parcel.
However, a commitment is binding on the owner who makes the commitment even
if the commitment is unrecorded. An unrecorded commitment is binding on a
subsequent owner or other person acquiring an interest in the parcel only if
that subsequent owner or other person has actual notice of the commitment.



      (4)   A commitment may contain terms providing for its own
expiration. A commitment may also contain terms providing that the commitment
automatically terminates:



         (a)   If the zoning district or classification
applicable to the parcel is changed;



         (b)   If the land use to which the commitment relatives
is changed; or



         (c)   Otherwise in accordance with the rules of the Area
Plan Commission to which the commitment is made.



      (5)   Except for a commitment that expires or automatically
terminates under division (B)(4) of this section, a commitment may be
modified or terminated only by a decision of the Area Board of Zoning
Adjustment or the Area Plan Commission, as appropriate, to which the
commitment is made. The decision must be made at a public hearing after
notice of the public hearing has been provided under § 153.241 for variances
and special exceptions and § 153.252(C) for rezoning.



      (6)   During the time a rezoning proposal (zoning text
amendment) is being considered by the applicable local legislative body, the
owner may make a new commitment to the Area Plan Commission or modify the
terms of the commitment that was made when the proposal was being considered
by the Area Plan Commission.



      (7)   No further action of the Area Plan Commission is
required for a new commitment made under division (B)(6) of this section to
be effective.



      (8)   If a commitment is modified under division (B)(6) of
this section:



         (a)   No further action is required of the Area Plan
Commission for the commitment to be effective if the effect of the
modification is to make the commitment more stringent; or



         (b)   The modified commitment must be ratified by the
Area Plan Commission if the effect of the modification is to make the
commitment less stringent.



      (9)   Requiring or allowing a commitment to be made does not
obligate the Area Plan Commission or applicable local legislative body to
adopt, approve, or favorably recommend the proposal or application to which
the commitment relates.



   (C)   The Area Plan Commission and the Area Board of Zoning Appeals
may adopt rules:



         (1)   Governing the creation, form, recording,
effectiveness, modification and termination of commitments; and



         (2)   Designating which specially affected persons and
classes of specially affected persons are entitled to enforce commitments.



   (D)   Enforcement. An action to enforce a commitment may be brought
in the circuit or superior court of the county by:



      (1)   The Area Plan Commission or the Area Board of Zoning
Appeals to which the commitment was made;



      (2)   Any person who is entitled to enforce the commitment
under the rules of the Area Plan Commission in force at the time the
commitment was made; or



      (3)   Any other specially affected person who was designated
in the commitment.



   (E)   Injunctive relief. A person bringing an action to enforce a
commitment may request mandatory or prohibitory injunctive relief through the
granting of a temporary restraining order, preliminary injunction, or
permanent injunction. If an action to enforce a commitment is successful, the
respondent shall bear the costs of the action. A change of venue from the
county may not be granted in such an action.



   (F)   Indefensible arguments. In an action to enforce a commitment,
it is not a defense that:



      (1)   No consideration was given for the commitment;



      (2)   The commitment does not benefit any designated parcel of
property;



      (3)   The document setting forth the commitment lacks a seal;



      (4)   There is no privity of estate;



      (5)   There is not privity of contract; or



      (6)   There is no proof of damages.



   (G)   Conditions not considered commitments. The following types of
conditions are not considered commitments and are not subject to division (B)
of this section.



      (1)   A condition imposed upon primary approval of a plat that
must be met before secondary approval of the plat may be granted.



      (2)   A condition imposed upon the approval of an exception, a
use, a variance, or a development plan that must be met before an improvement
location permit may be granted.



      (3)   A condition imposed upon an approval relative to any
other development requirement that must be met before any other secondary
approval may be granted or building permit issued.



      (4)   A condition that was imposed before July 1, 2011, on an
approval relative to any development requirement. However, this subdivision
applies only if a copy of the condition has been filed and permanently
maintained as a public record in the office of the plan commission that
imposed the condition.



   (H)   Other agreements not considered commitments. Covenants,
easements, equitable, servitudes, and other land use restrictions created in
accordance with law are not considered commitments, and are not subject to
division (B) of this section.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12)



BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS



§ 153.241  ESTABLISHMENT OF THE POSEY COUNTY AREA BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS.



   It is hereby recognized that the Posey County Area Board of Zoning
Appeals shall serve as the Board of Zoning Appeals for the City of Mt.
Vernon, Town of Cynthiana, Town of Poseyville and Posey County with the
powers and duties set forth in this chapter. The Board of Zoning Appeals
shall adopt “rules of procedure” in accordance with the requirements of
I.C. 36-7-4-916.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12)



§ 153.242  POWERS OF THE BOARD.



   As set forth in I.C. 36-7-4-900 et seq., the Area Board of Zoning
Appeals shall have the power to:



   (A)   Administrative appeals. Pursuant to I.C. 36-7-4-918.1, hear
and determine appeals from and review any order, requirement, decision or
determination made by:



      (1)   An administrative official, hearing officer, or staff
member under this zoning chapter;



      (2)   An administrative board or other body except the Area
Plan Commission in relation to enforcement of this zoning chapter; or



      (3)   An administrative board or other body except the Area
Plan Commission in relation to enforcement of procedures requiring the
procurement of an improvement location permit or an occupancy permit.



   (B)   Variance of development standards. Pursuant to I.C.
36-7-4-918.5, approve or deny, after application, public notice and a public
hearing, variances from the development standards (such as height, bulk and
area) of this zoning chapter.



      (1)   The variance granted:



         (a)   Shall not be contrary to the public health,
safety, morals and general welfare of the community and to the use and value
of the adjacent area; and



         (b)   Shall be due to special conditions of the subject
property such that a literal enforcement of these provisions would result in
undue hardship as further defined in § 153.245(D) below.



      (2)   The Area Board of Zoning Appeals is expressly prohibited
from granting a variance from a use district or classification under I.C.
36-7-4-918.3.



   (C)   Special exception. Pursuant to I.C. 3 6-7-4-918.2, approve or
deny, after application, public notice and public hearing, a special
exception use, for a use which is not permitted by right in a district
because of potential adverse effects. However, if the use is controlled as to
its relationship to the neighborhood and the general welfare said use may be
permitted by the Board of Zoning Appeals, where specifically authorized by
this chapter. Further, the Board of Zoning Appeals may impose reasonable
conditions as part of its approval.



   (D)   Interpretations. Make interpretations of the zoning map
(including questions concerning zoning district boundaries) and text.



   (E)   New uses. Determine the appropriate use district or use unit
for uses not elsewhere classified. However, in no instance shall the Board of
Zoning Appeals determine, nor the regulations be so interpreted, that a use
shall be permitted in a district or use unit when such use is specifically
listed as first permissible in a less restrictive use district or in another
use unit.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12)



§ 153.243  PROCEEDINGS OF THE AREA BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS.



   Meetings shall be held at the call of the Chairman and at such times as
the Area Board of Zoning Appeals may determine. The Chairman, or in his or
her absence, the acting Chairman, may administer oaths and compel attendance
or witnesses. All meeting, deliberations, and voting of the Board shall be
open to the public. The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing
the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote,
indicating such fact. Additionally, records shall be kept of all findings of
fact, examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be
immediately filed in the office of the Board and shall be a public record.
The notice, filing and substantive requirements of the Board shall be set
forth in the following sections concerning the Board’s exercise of that
particular power.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12)



§ 153.244  NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARING OF THE AREA BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS.



   (A)   The Board of Zoning Appeals shall give notice and conduct a
public hearing before acting on any appeal from a determination of an
administrative official, hearing officer, staff member, administrative board
or other body (except the Area Plan Commission) or before granting any
special exception or variance.



   (B)   For an administrative appeal.



      (1)   At least ten calendar days prior to the date of the
public hearing, notice of the subject, date, time, place shall be placed in
the newspaper of general circulation in the geographic of the subject
property. There is no requirement to provide public hearing notice to
abutting property owners or to post public hearing notice on the subject
property in the case of an administrative appeal.



      (2)   For a “variance of development standards” or a
“special exception”. Notice shall be given as set forth:



         (a)   At least ten calendar days before the regularly
scheduled Board of Zoning Appeals public hearing, the Plan Commission staff
shall ensure legal notice of the public hearing on the “Variance of
development standards” or a “special exception” is published in the
local newspaper with the widest circulation in the jurisdiction where the
subject property is located.



         (b)   The Plan Commission staff shall provide the
applicant with letters of Board of Zoning Appeals public hearing notification
of abutting property owners; and the applicant shall ensure the abutting
property owners are notified by certified mail at least ten calendar days
before the Plan Commission public hearing. The applicant shall provide
verification of the notification of abutting property owners at least two
business days prior to the Plan Commission public hearing.



         (c)   The Plan Commission staff shall provide the
applicant with a sign advertising subject of the public hearing and the date
of the Board of Zoning Appeals public hearing. At least ten calendar days
prior to the Board of Zoning Appeals public hearing, the applicant shall have
the sign posted on the front property line of the subject property so that
the sign is visible from the public way.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12)



§ 153.245   VARIANCES.



   (A)   General. The Area Board of Zoning Appeals upon application,
after hearing, and subject to the procedural and substantive standards set
forth herein, may grant a variance from the development standards of this
chapter. (Such as bulk height and/or area). Variances for uses on unimproved
lands, buildings, and buildings and lands in combination are expressly
prohibited under I.C. 36-7-918.3. A variance may not cause substantial
detriment to the public good, or impair the spirit, purposes and intent of
this chapter or the comprehensive plan. Further, in granting the variance,
Board of Zoning Appeals must also make a finding of fact that the literal
enforcement for the ordinance will result in unnecessary hardship by reason
of exceptional narrowness, shallowness, shape, topography or other
extraordinary or exceptional situation, condition or circumstance peculiar to
the particular property.



   (B)   Application. A request for a variance shall be initiated by
the filing of an application with the Area Board of Zoning Appeals and shall
be set for public hearing by its Secretary in accordance with the rules
established by the Board.



      (1)   The application shall include such information as
necessary to evaluate such request and such additional information as the
Board of Zoning Appeals may require. The minimum requirements for a site plan
in accordance with § 153.221(B) will be provided; further, the applicant
shall define the nature of the variance being requested and address the
criteria for granting a variance as set forth in § 153.245(D)(1).



      (2)   The applicant for a variance shall be the owner(s) of
record or designee with an affidavit of designee by power-of-attorney.



      (3)   The filing deadline for applications is the second
Thursday of the month.



   (C)   Authorized variations. Variations from the terms of this
chapter shall be granted by the Area Board of Zoning Appeals in accordance
with the standards set forth in this chapter and may be granted in the
following instances.



      (1)   To permit any building or structure to exceed the height
limitations imposed by the applicable regulations, not to exceed a 10%
increase, except in the CBD District where the Board of Zoning Appeals may
grant through Special Exception any structure height above 75 feet and
greater than four stories.



      (2)   To permit the use of a lot smaller in width or area than
the lot width or area required by this chapter.



      (3)   To reduce the applicable off-street parking or loading
facilities.



      (4)   To permit the same off-street parking facilities to
qualify as a required facility for two or more uses provided the substantial
use of such facility by each uses does not take place at approximately the
same hours of the same days of the week.



      (5)   To permit the variance from the terms set forth in §
153.207.



      (6)   The modification a screening requirement as provided in
§ 153.026.



      (7)   To permit the variance from the terms set forth in §
153.024(B)(3) permitted yard obstructions.



      (8)   The modification of the parking and loading requirements
as provided in §§ 153.183(J)(2) and 153.185.



   (D)   Board of Zoning Appeal action.



      (1)   After public notification of the public hearing in
accordance with § 153.243(B), the Board shall hold the public hearing and
upon the concurring votes of a majority of the entire membership may approve
a variance. A variance may be approved only upon a determination in writing
that:



         (a)   The approval will not be injurious to the public
health, safety, morals and general welfare the community;



         (b)   The use and value of the area adjacent to the
property included in the variance will not be affected in a substantially
adverse manner;



         (c)   The need application of the variance arose from
some condition peculiar the property involved;



         (d)   The strict application of the terms of the zoning
ordinance will constitute an unnecessary hardship if applied to the property
for which the variance is sought;



         (e)   The approval does not interfere substantially with
the comprehensive plan.



      (2)   Provided that the Board in granting a variance may
prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards and may require such evidence
and guarantee or bonds as it may deem necessary to enforce compliance with
the conditions attached.



   (E)   Time limitation. A Variance which has not been utilized within
one year from date of the Board of Zoning Appeals order granting the variance
shall thereafter be void, provided that the Board of Zoning Appeals has not
extended the time for utilization. For the purpose of this provision,
utilization shall mean actual use or the issuance of a building permit, when
applicable, provided construction is diligently carried to completion. The
exception is the event of litigation concerning such variance. In such case
the period of one year shall not begin to run until the complete and final
cessation of litigation. The Plan Commission staff is to provide written
notice of the pending expiration to the applicant at least 30 days prior to
the expiration date. The applicant shall file the request for extension of
the variance order within 15 days of the next public hearing.



   (F)   Time limitation on re-filing. A rehearing of a variance which
has been denied, or a new filing or re-filing for a variance which has been
denied, shall not be permitted for one year following the denial.



   (G)   Application withdrawal or amendment. The application for a
variance must be withdrawn before the public hearing is opened to avoid the
one year penalty per § 153.245(F). Any amendment to the original application
by the applicant should be stated at the time of the public, and the Board of
Zoning Appeals may propose and the applicant may accept any amendments to the
application during the public hearing or during deliberations of the Board of
Zoning Appeals before the vote on action. It is within the authority of the
Board of Zoning Appeals to determine that an amendment is not substantive in
nature or reduces the potential adverse impacts on abutting property owners,
and the public hearing may be continued to the next public hearing without
re-notification of the abutting property owners if the Board of Zoning
Appeals so desires. On the other hand, if the Board of Zoning Appeals
determines that an amendment is substantive in nature and does have the
potential to increase adverse impacts on abutting property owners, the Board
of Zoning Appeals may request that the public hearing be continued to the
next public meeting and that the applicant re-notify abutting property owners
of the new or supplemental hearing date.



   (H)   Land use and development agreements for variance. See §
153.224.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12; Am. Ord. 2015-2, passed 1-22-15; Am. Ord.
2016-2A, passed 1-21-16)



§ 153.246  SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   General. The Board of Zoning Appeals upon application and
after hearing subject to the procedural and substantive standards hereinafter
set forth, may grant the following special exceptions.



      (1)   Special exception uses as designated and regulated
within the permitted use provisions of the zoning district.



      (2)   Special exception uses as designated with §§ 153.111
through 153.117, Flood Hazard Zoning District.



      (3)   Special exception use for off-street parking use of
property located within a residential district, when the property is abutting
an office, commercial, or industrial district.



      (4)   Allow satellite antennas which do not meet all of the
standards as set forth in § 153.024(D)(4), of this chapter.



      (5)   Special exception to allow a sexually oriented business
to establish itself in the city.



   (B)   Application. A request for a special exception shall be
initiated by the filing of an application with the Area Board of Zoning
Appeals and shall be set for public hearing by its Secretary in accordance
with the rules established by the Board.



      (1)   The application shall include such information as
necessary to evaluate such request and such additional information as the
Board of Zoning Appeals may require. The minimum requirements for a site plan
in accordance with § 153.221(B) will be provided; further, the applicant
shall define the nature of the special exception being requested and address
the criteria for granting a special exception as set forth in §
153.246(C)(1).



      (2)   The applicant for a special exception shall be the
owner(s) of record or designee with an affidavit of designee by
power-of-attorney.



      (3)   The filing deadline for applications is the second
Thursday of the month.



   (C)   Board of Zoning Appeals action.



      (1)   After public notification of the public hearing in
accordance with § 153.244(B), the Board of Zoning Appeals shall hold the
public hearing on each request. A concurring vote of a majority of the entire
membership will approve the special exception request. The special exception
may be granted upon a determination in writing that:



         (a)   Will be in harmony with the spirit and intent of
this chapter;



         (b)   Will not be injurious to the neighborhood or
otherwise detrimental to the public welfare;



         (c)   The proposed use at that particular location
requested is necessary or desirable to provide a service or a facility which
is in the interest of public convenience and will contribute to the general
welfare or the neighborhood or community; and



         (d)   The proposed use will comply with the regulation
and condition specified in this chapter for such use and with the conditions
and safeguards proscribed by the Board in authorization of the use.



      (2)   The Board in granting the special exception may attach
conditions and safeguards and may require such evidence and guarantee or bond
as it may deem necessary to enforce the compliance with the attached
conditions.



      (3)   A record of pertinent information presented at the
public hearing shall be made and maintained by the Board, as part of the
permanent record relative to the application.



      (4)   Board of Zoning Appeals guidelines for consideration of
sexually oriented business. The special exception may be granted upon a
written determination that:



         (a)   The provisions of § 153.246(C)(1) are met;



         (b)   The perimeter of the subject lot is not:



            1.   Located within 300 feet of any residential or
office district: or that



            2.   The perimeter of the subject lot is not
located within 300 feet of the perimeter of a lot which is the location of a:



               (i)   Church;



               (ii)   Public library or private library
opens to the public;



               (iii)   Public park;



               (iv)   Public playground; or



               (v)   Public and/or private school of
primary, secondary or higher education.



   (D)   Time limitation on special exception. A special exception
which has not been utilized within one year from the date or the order
granting the exception shall thereafter be void. This provided that the Board
has not extended the time for utilization. For the purpose of this provision,
utilization shall mean actual use or the issuance of a building permit, when
applicable, provided construction is diligently carried to completion. The
exception to this provision is the event of litigation concerning such
Special Exception. In such cases the period of one year shall not begin to
run until the complete and final cessation of litigation. The Plan Commission
staff is to provide written notice of the pending expiration to the applicant
at least 30 days prior to the expiration date. The applicant shall file the
request for extension of the special exception order within 15 days of the
public hearing.



   (E)   Time limitation on re-filing. A rehearing of a special
exception which has been denied, or a new filing or re-filing for a special
exception which has been denied shall not be permitted for one year following
the denial.



   (F)   Application withdrawal or amendment. The application for a
special exception must be withdrawn before the public hearing is opened to
avoid the one year penalty per § 153.246(F). Any amendment of the original
application by the applicant should be stated at the time of the public, and
the Board of Zoning Appeals may propose and the applicant may accept any
amendments to the application during the public hearing or during
deliberations of the Board of Zoning Appeals before the vote on action. It is
within the authority of the Board of Zoning Appeals to determine that an
amendment is not substantive in nature or reduces the potential adverse
impacts on abutting property owners, and the public hearing may be continued
to the next public hearing without re-notification of the abutting property
owners if the Board of Zoning Appeals so desires. On the other hand, if the
Board of Zoning Appeals determines that an amendment is substantive in nature
and does have the potential to increase adverse impacts on abutting property
owners, the Board of Zoning Appeals may request that the public hearing be
continued to the next public meeting and that the applicant re-notify
abutting property owners of the new or supplemental hearing date.



   (G)   Land use and development agreements for special exception. See
§ 153.224.



   (H)   Who may use. A special exception for a mobile home must be
used by the owner of the real estate or by a member of the owner’s family.
If the mobile home for which the special exception is issued remains
unoccupied for a continuous period of 12 months or if it is not used as a
residence by the owner or by a member of the owner’s family for a
continuous period of 12 months then the special exception is void.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12; Am. Ord. 2016-2A, passed 1-21-16)



§ 153.247  APPEALS FROM THE ENFORCEMENT OF THE CHAPTER.



   An appeal may be made to the Board of Zoning Appeals when it is alleged
there is an error in any order, requirement or determination made by an
Administrative Official, Board staff member in the enforcement of this
chapter.



   (A)   Notice of appeal. An appeal shall be taken within ten days
from the determination which is the subject of the complaint. This by filing
with the Secretary of the Board, a notice of appeal specifying the grounds
thereof. The body from the appeal is taken shall, upon receipt of notice,
forthwith transmit to the Secretary of the Board, certified copies of all the
papers constituting the record of the matter. Upon receipt of the record the
Secretary shall set the matter for public hearing.



   (B)   Board of Zoning Appeals action. After public notice of the
public hearing in accordance with § 153.244(A), the Board shall hold the
public hearing. The Board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may
modify the order, requirement decision or determination appealed.
Additionally, the Board may make such order, requirement decision or
determination as needed. In doing so the Board shall have all the powers of
the officer from whom the appeal is taken. The concurring vote of a majority
of the entire membership of the Board shall be necessary to reverse any
order, requirement, decision or determination.



   (C)   Stay of proceedings. An appeal stays all proceeding in
furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the enforcing officer, from
whom the appeal is taken, certifies to the Board of Zoning Appeals, after
notice of appeal has been filed, that by reason of facts stated in the
certificate, a stay would in his or her opinion cause imminent peril to life
or property. In such case, proceeding shall hot be stayed other than by a
restraining order which may be granted upon consideration and sufficient
cause by the County Circuit Court.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12)



§ 153.248  REVIEW BY CERTIORARI OF DECISIONS.



   (A)   Review by court. Each decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals
is subject to review by certiorari. Each person aggrieved by a decision of
the Board of Zoning Appeals may present to the court of record a verified
petition, setting forth that the decision is illegal, in whole or in part and
specifying the grounds of illegality.



   (B)   Time limit on filing petition. The person shall present the
petition to the court within 30 days after the entry of that decision of the
Board of Zoning Appeals.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12)



ZONING TEXT AND MAP AMENDMENTS



§ 153.251  GENERAL.



   The regulations, restrictions, prohibitions and limitations imposed,
and the districts created may from time to time be amended, supplemented,
changed modified or repealed by ordinance. Change shall not be made until the
Plan Commission, after notice and public hearing, files with the affected
local legislative body a report and recommendation on the proposed change.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12)



§ 153.252  ZONING TEXT AND MAP AMENDMENTS.



   (A)   Amendment initiated by Area Plan Commission or participating
local legislative body. The Plan Commission upon its own motion may, or at
the direction of a participating local legislative body shall, hold a public
hearing, giving notice thereof, on a proposed text or map amendment. After
holding the public hearing, the Plan Commission shall within ten days
transmit its report and recommendation to the affected local legislative body
(or bodies).



   (B)   Amendment initiated by applicant.



      (1)   Any person, corporation, partnership, association, or
combination there of, having a legal or equitable interest in or to real
property or an affidavit of designee by power-of-attorney, may file an
application for an amendment of the text of the zoning ordinance or a change
in the zoning classification of such property by amendment of the zoning map.
An application shall be filed with the Plan Commission, and shall be in such
form and content as the Plan Commission may establish. The application shall
be accompanied by payment of a fee, in accordance with the schedule of fees
established by the Area Plan Commission.



      (2)   An application shall be filed before the second Thursday
of each month in order to be heard at the Area Plan Commission public hearing
in the following month.



   (C)   Public notice of area plan commission public hearing required.



      (1)   For an amendment to the zoning ordinance text or an
amendment to the zoning map (changing the zoning classification of the
subject property), the Plan Commission staff shall have notice of the public
hearing published in the newspaper of general circulation in the jurisdiction
of the subject amendment.



         (a)   The notice shall be published at least ten
calendar days prior to the date of the Area Plan Commission public hearing.



         (b)   The notice shall state:



            1.   The date, time and place of the public
hearing;



            2.   Who will conduct the public hearing;



            3.   The name of the applicant and the section of
the zoning ordinance being proposed for amendment or the address of the
subject property being proposed for the change in zoning;



            4.   The present and desired zoning
classifications if a zoning map amendment; and



            5.   Other information as may be necessary to
provide adequate and timely public notice.



      (2)   In addition to the publication of the notice of the
public hearing, the following additional public notifications are required
for a zoning map amendment.



         (a)   Posting of sign; required for map amendment. Upon
the filing of an application the applicant, petitioner or their attorney
shall procure of the Plan Commission Office a sign which shall be posted in a
conspicuous place and visible at all times to all persons passing the
property subject to the proposed zoning map amendment. The sign shall be
posted continuously for at least ten calendar days prior to the date of the
public hearing. The notice shall state:



            1.   The date, time and place of public hearing;



            2.   Who will conduct the public hearing; and



            3.   The present and desired zoning
classifications; and



            4.   Other information as may be necessary to
provide adequate and timely public notice.



         (b)   Notification of abutting property owners. The Plan
Commission staff shall provide the applicant with letters of Area Plan
Commission public hearing notification of abutting property owners; and the
applicant shall ensure the abutting property owners are notified by certified
mail at least ten calendar days before the Plan Commission public hearing.
The applicant shall provide verification of the notification of abutting
property owners at least two business days prior to the Plan Commission
public hearing.



      (3)   The applicant shall be responsible for all notification
and any re-notification costs including the cost of the publication of notice
in newspaper, the cost of the sign and it’s posting on the subject
property, and the cost of the mailing of the notification of abutting
property owners.



      (4)   For a proposed zoning text amendment, only the notice of
the public hearing in the local newspaper shall be met at least ten calendar
days prior to the Area Plan Commission public hearing. If the notification
requirement is not met, the public hearing on the subject amendment shall be
deferred, and the applicant shall be responsible for the re-notification cost.



      (5)   For a proposed zoning map amendment, all three
notification requirements (notice of the public hearing in the local
newspaper, posting of the sign on the subject property and notification of
abutting property owners) shall be met at least ten calendar days prior to
the date of the Area Plan Commission public hearing. If any of the three
notification requirements is not fulfilled, the public hearing on the subject
amendment shall be deferred, and the applicant shall be responsible for the
re-notification cost.



      (6)   In the event that the abutting property for a zoning map
amendment is in an adjacent county or state, two tiers of abutting property
owners in the adjacent county or state within 1/8-mile of the subject
property shall be notified by certified mail at least ten calendar days prior
to the date of the public hearing.



      (7)   An abutting property owner is the owner of property
contiguous to the subject property of the proposed zoning map amendment, and
is the owner(s) of record in the County Recorder’s office. In the event the
abutting property is a public right-of-way or in public ownership, the next
tier of adjacent property in private ownership shall also be notified. In the
event the contiguous property is under the same ownership as the subject
property of the proposed zoning map amendment, the next tier of adjacent
property in private ownership other than the applicant shall also be notified.



   (D)   Time limitation on re-filing for zoning map amendment. A new
application and/or rehearing of a proposed zoning map amendment which has
been denied shall not be permitted for one year following the denial by the
affected local legislative body.



   (E)   Zoning map amendment application withdrawal or revision. The
application for a zoning map amendment must be withdrawn before the public
hearing is opened to avoid the one year penalty per § 153.252(D). Any
revision of the original application by the applicant should be stated at the
time of the public, and the Area Plan Commission Board may propose and the
applicant may accept any revisions to the application during the public
hearing or during deliberations of the Area Plan Commission Board before the
vote on action. It is within the authority of the Area Plan Commission Board
to determine that a revision is not substantive in nature or reduces the
potential adverse impacts on abutting property owners, and the public hearing
may be continued to the next public hearing without re-notification of the
abutting property owners if the Area Plan Commission Board so desires. On the
other hand, if the Area Plan Commission Board determines that a revision is
substantive in nature and does have the potential to increase adverse impacts
on abutting property owners, the Area Plan Commission Board may request that
the public hearing be continued to the next public meeting and that the
applicant re-notify abutting property owners of the new or supplemental
hearing date.



   (F)   Planning Commission action on zoning text and map amendments.



      (1)   After notice and public hearing, the Planning Commission
shall vote, by a majority vote of the total Area Plan Commission Board
membership, to:



         (a)   Recommend to the applicable local legislative body
that the application be approved as submitted or as amended or be approved
subject to modification;



         (b)   Recommend to the applicable local legislative body
that application be denied; or



         (c)   Shall vote to make no recommendation.



      (2)   If a majority vote of the total Area Plan Commission
Board membership is not attained, the application shall be forwarded to the
applicable local legislative body without recommendation.



      (3)   An application recommended for approval, approval
subject to modification or unfavorable recommendation shall be transmitted,
with the report and recommendation of the Plan Commission, to the applicable
local legislative body within ten calendar days from the date of the Area
Plan Commission action. In the event that the Area Plan Commission is unable
to take action due to the lack of a majority vote of the total membership,
the application shall be transmitted without recommendation to the applicable
local legislative body with ten calendar days of the public hearing.



   (G)   Land use and development agreements. See § 153.224.



   (H)   Local legislative body action on zoning text and map
amendments. The local legislative body shall hold a hearing on each
application transmitted from the Area Plan Commission and on any proposed
zoning text or map amendment. The local legislative body shall approve the
application as submitted, or as amended, or approve the application subject
to modification, or deny the application. This is to take place 90 days from
transmittal from Plan Commission. A vote of at least a majority of all the
elected members of the applicable local legislative body is needed for action
on a zoning text or map amendment.



   (I)   Further consideration of denied request. Upon the denial, by
the local legislative body, of an application for a zoning text or map
amendment, the application may be resubmitted to the Area Planning Commission
one year to date after its initial denial for reconsideration.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12; Am. Ord. 2016-2A, passed 1-21-16)



DEFINITIONS



§ 153.270  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ABUTTING.  In the context of a screening or enclosure requirement,
abutting shall mean continuous or separated there from only by a non-arterial
street. In other instances, ABUTTING shall mean contiguous.



   ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE.  A use or structure on the same lot with,
and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal use
or structure. Any ACCESSORY STRUCTURE must be separated a minimum of ten feet
from the principal structure to be considered and ACCESSORY STRUCTURE.



   AGRIBUSINESS.  Agribusiness means facilities directed at meeting the
needs of those engaged in local farming, such as the warehousing, sales,
repair, and service of agricultural equipment, vehicles, feed or supplies. It
also means facilities such as grain elevators and agricultural product
processing plants as well as the wholesaling of agricultural products and
livestock sales.



   ALL-WEATHER MATERIAL.  In the context of unenclosed off-street parking
and loading areas this shall be defined as an area improved with a compacted
macadam base with surface treatment (seal coat), or asphaltic concrete
surface, concrete, or some comparable all weather material.



   ALLEY.  A permanent public way providing a secondary means of access
for service and emergency vehicles and not intended for general traffic
circulation.



   AREA PLAN COMMISSION.  also referred to as PLAN COMMISSION.



   ARTERIAL.  A street designated on the Thoroughfare Plan as a primary
arterial or secondary arterial.



   BUILDING.  A structure which is permanently affixed to the land and
has one or more floors, a roof and is bounded by either another building with
a common party wall, open air or the lot lines of a lot.



   BUILDING HEIGHT.  The vertical distance measured from the average
ground elevation at the building wall to the highest horizontal point of the
structure, provided that height exceptions listed under § 153.207 shall
apply.



   BUILDING SETBACK.  The horizontal distance, from the point of
measurement, such as the centerline of an abutting street or the boundary
line of an abutting zoning district to the nearest building wall.



   BUSINESS SIGN.  Advertises activities on the site. A BUSINESS SIGN is
also known as an ON-PREMISES SIGN. A BUSINESS SIGN attached to the facade of
a building or awning is termed a “facade” or “flat” sign (See
Attachment C: Zoning Sign Standards.). A BUSINESS SIGN attached to the ground
is termed a “ground” sign (See Attachment C: Zoning Sign Standards.). A
“ground” sign may be on a pole (i.e., pole sign) or may be touching the
ground (i.e., monument sign). An outdoor advertising sign, billboard or
off-premises sign is not a BUSINESS SIGN. Bulletin, identification, real
estate and construction signs appropriate to agriculture, residential and
office zoning districts are not BUSINESS SIGNS.



   CAMP TRAILER.  See TRAVEL TRAILER.



   CATTLE.  Cattle shall include, but not be limited to, cows (whether
milked or dry), veal, calves, heifers, steers, bulls, and cow/calf pairs.



   CBD.  See CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT.



   CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT.  This district designation defined the
central business district of Mt. Vernon and is delineated as: The Ohio River
to the South, Fifth Street to the North, College Avenue to the West, and
Walnut Street to the East. This District is that area of Mt. Vernon
characterized by a retail core and intensive office employment. This
designation shall be applied to one continuous and contiguous area. The CBD
allows the most intense use of land, without regard to the regulation of
building height, floor area, land coverage or parking space requirements.



   CERTIORARI.  A writ from a circuit court to call up for review the
records of an inferior court or body acting in a quasi-judicial capacity,
i.e. Board of Zoning Appeals.



   CHILD CARE, IN HOME.  Dwelling unit used to house and provide
supervision and care for four or less children, other than those children
residing in the dwelling, on a daily basis. Five to ten children may be cared
for in the home if the resident obtains a special exception and maintains
continuous state licensing.



   CHILDREN’S NURSERY.  Facility other than a dwelling unit used to
provide supervision and care for children on a daily basis.



   CHURCH.  An edifice for public worship.



   COMMERCIAL VEHICLE.  A vehicle used in a commercial enterprise and not
intended as private passenger vehicle.



   CONCENTRATED OR CONFINED FEEDING.  The raising of animals for food,
fur or recreation in lots, pens, ponds, sheds or buildings, where they are
confined, fed and maintained for at least 45 days during any year, and where
there is no ground cover or vegetation present over at least half of the
animals’ confinement area. Livestock markets and sale barns are excluded.
There are three thresholds:



      (1)   ANIMAL FEEDING OPERATION (AFO).  A lot or facility
where 50 or more cattle, 100 or more hogs, sheep or goats, or 5000 or more
fowl have been, are, or will be stabled or confined and fed or maintained for
a total of 45 days or more in any 12-month period, and crops, vegetation
forage growth, or postharvest residues are not sustained in the normal
growing season over any portion of the lot or facility. Animal feeding
operation includes animal confinement buildings and animal waste storage
facilities. Two or more animal feeding operations under common ownership are
considered, for the purposes of these regulations, to be a single animal
feeding operation if they adjoin each other. Livestock markets and sale barns
are excluded.



      (2)   CONCENTRATED FEEDING OPERATION (CFO).  Any animal
feeding operation (AFO) that has at least 300 cattle, 600 swine, sheep or
goats, or 30,000 fowl or any operation that is included within the definition
in I.C. 13-11-2 or the definition in § 502(14) of the federal Glean Water
Act. Two or more concentrated animal feeding operations under common
ownership are considered, for purposes of these regulations, to be a single
concentrated feeding operation if they adjoin each other. Livestock markets
and sale barns are excluded.



      (3)   CONFINED ANIMAL FEEDING OPERATION (CAFO).  A livestock
operation where livestock have been, are, or will be confined and
concentrated for 30 or more days in any 12 month period, and such operation
consists of at least 700 mature cows (whether milked or dry), 1,000 veal
calves; 1,000 cattle other than mature dairy cows or veal calves; 2,500 swine
(each weighing 55 pounds 161 or more); 10,000 swine (each weighing less than
55 pounds); 500 horses; 10,000 sheep, lambs or goats; 55,000 turkeys; 30,000
laying hens or broilers (if the operation uses a liquid manure handling
system); 125,000 chickens, other than laying hens (if the operation uses
anything other than a liquid manure handling system); 82,000 laying hens;
30,000 ducks, or 5,000 ducks (if the operation uses a liquid manure handling
system). Adjoining operations under common ownership are considered to be one
animal feeding operation if they use common areas, buildings, equipment or
manure handling systems.



   CONVENIENCE STORE.  Store so located near a residential or office
district offering a limited line of household convenience items.



   CURB LEVEL.  The mean level of the established curb at the frontage of
a lot. Where no curb has been established, the city engineer shall establish
such curb level or its equivalent for the purposes of this chapter.



   DAYCARE.  See CHILDREN’S NURSERY or CHILD CARE.



   DETENTION/CORRECTIONAL FACILITY.  A facility for the detention,
confinement, treatment and/or rehabilitation or persons arrested or convicted
for the violation of civil or criminal law. Such facilities include an adult
detention center, juvenile delinquency center, pre-release center,
correctional community treatment center, jail and prison.



   DEVELOPMENT.  Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations. (See
DEVELOPMENT in § 153.112 when in the context of flood hazard areas.)



   DISPLAY SURFACE.  The surface of a sign upon, against, or through
which the message is displayed or illustrated.



   DISPLAY SURFACE AREA.  The net geometric area enclosed by the display
surface of the sign including the outer extremities of all letters, figures,
characters and delineations, but excluding structural supports of
free-standing signs when the structural supports are not arranged to become a
part of the attention attracting aspects of the sign. For wall or canopy
signs, the net geometric area enclosed includes the outer extremities of all
letters, figures, characters and delineations, with or without an illuminated
background.



   DOMESTIC ANIMALS.  Animals normally part of home life such as dogs,
cats and other small animals that are commonly sold in pet stores.



   DUPLEX.  A single-family attached dwelling that shares the same
structure with another dwelling on the same lot. However, the lot may be
split in the subdivision process so that each dwelling has its own lot.



   DWELLING.  A building or structure used in whole or in part for human
inhabitation.



   DWELLING, DUPLEX.  Building containing two dwelling units, designed
for occupancy by not more than two families.



   DWELLING, MOBILE HOME.  A vehicle designed to serve whenever parked as
a dwelling, or as a place of business as manufactured, and containing a
minimum of six-hundred-fifty (650) square feet of living area and designed to
be used year-round.



   DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY.  A building containing three or more dwelling
units.



   DWELLING, SINGLE FAMILY ATTACHED.  A building (other than a mobile
home) containing one dwelling unit designed for occupancy by not more than
one family, containing a minimum of 650 square feet of living area, designed
to be used year-round, and having one or two walls in common with other
dwelling units. This type of dwelling unit includes duplexes, zero lot-line
homes, patio homes, townhouse, row houses and quadruplexes.



   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED.  A building (other than a mobile
home) containing one dwelling unit designed for occupancy by not more than
one family, and containing a minimum of 950 square feet of living area,
designed to be used year-round, and separated by ten feet from any other
dwelling unit.



   DWELLING UNIT.  A room or group of rooms arranged, intended or
designed as a habitable unit, containing kitchen, bath and sleeping
facilities, for not more than one family living independently of any other
family.



   ELDERLY/RETIREMENT HOUSING.  A residential complex containing
multifamily dwelling designed for and principally occupied by senior
citizens. Such facilities may include a congregate meals program in a common
dining area, but exclude institutional care such as medical or nursing care
and are distinguished from retirement centers and extended-care facilities.



   EMERGENCY AND PROTECTIVE SHELTER.  A residential facility which
provides room and board for a temporary period [30 days or less] of
protection, counseling and pre-placement screening for abused, displaced or
transient children or adults.



   EXTENDED CARE FACILITY.  A facility for extended medical care for the
purposes of physical rehabilitation.



   FACADE SIGN.  See BUSINESS SIGN.



   FARM-BASED BUSINESS.  Business customarily associated with the
agriculture practice in Posey County.



   FARM WORKER.  A person other than the owner of the farm, who for pay
performs labor either seasonally or year round in the production, planting,
cultivation or harvesting of farm products or the care of livestock.



   FARM WORKER HOUSING.  Housing constructed in compliance with
applicable building and health codes that is occupied seasonally only by farm
workers employed on the farm where the housing is located.



   FENCE.  An upright, freestanding structure made of wood, masonry,
vinyl, metal or similar material and designed to enclose, screen, or separate
areas. FENCES may not be made from trash, inoperable or junk vehicles,
barrels, or any other material not designed to be used as fencing.



   FIRM FLOOD INSURANCE.  See § 153.112 for definition.



   FLAT SIGN.  See BUSINESS SIGN.



   FLOOD.  See § 153.112 for definition.



   FLOOD HAZARD AREA.  See § 153.112 for definition.



   FLOOD PROTECTION GRADE.  See § 153.112 for definition.



   FLOOR AREA.  The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several
floors, including the basements, of a building measured from the exterior
faces of the exterior walls or from the centering of walls separating two
buildings. Provided that for the purpose of determining compliance with the
permitted floor area ratio, the FLOOR AREA of enclosed off-street parking
areas shall not be included.



   FLOOR AREA RATIO.  The floor area of a building or buildings on a lot
divided by the lot area.



   FOUNDATION, PERMANENT.  Any structural system for transporting loads
from a structure to the earth at a depth below the established frost line
without exceeding the safe bearing capacity of supporting soils.



   FRONT YARD.  The horizontal distance from the front lot line to the
nearest building wall.



   FRONTAGE.  The lineal measurement of a lot boundary which abuts a
public street or the lineal measurement of the building setback line when the
boundary of the lot abuts a curved no arterial or cul-de-sac.



   GROUND SIGN.  A stand alone sign not attached to any building facade,
canopy or roof. The GROUND SIGN may be on a pole (i.e., pole sign) or may be
touching the ground (i.e., monument sign).



   GROUP HOME.  A facility that provided room and board, personal care
and habitation services for mentally retarded and/or physically limited
persons with a resident staff. Personal care and habitation services excludes
on-site institutional type educational training, medical or nursing care.



   HABITABLE FLOOR.  Any floor usable for living purposes, which includes
working, sleeping, eating, cooking or recreation or a combination thereof. A
floor used for storage purposes only is not a HABITABLE FLOOR.



   HEIGHT, BUILDING.  The vertical distance measured from the average
ground elevation at the building wall to the highest horizontal point of the
structure.



   HEIGHT, SIGN.  The vertical distance measured from the curb level to
the highest point of the sign.



   HOME OCCUPATION.  Any occupation or activity conducted within a
dwelling unit or accessory building which is clearly incidental and
subordinate to the use of the premises for dwelling purposes.



   IMPROVEMENT LOCATION PERMIT.  A permit which must be applied for and
received before any structure may be occupied, or use commenced certifying
that the structure and or the proposed use comply with the provisions of this
chapter.



   KENNEL.  The use of land or buildings for the purpose of selling,
breeding, boarding or training cats, dogs or both.



   LIBRARY.  A public building which contains books and other literary
materials for reading, study or reference.



   LIVABLE FLOOR AREA.  The portion of the dwelling unit used as living
space and specifically excluding space used for the storage of vehicles
(e.g., garage) or for the permanent storage of goods and materials (e.g.,
storage shed).



   LIVABILITY SPACE.  The open spaces of a lot which is not allocated to
or used for off-street parking or loading areas or for paved access to the
off-street or loading area.



   LIVESTOCK.  Livestock means animals other than customary domestic pets
commonly associated with agriculture. These include but are not limited to
chickens, cows, cattle, sheep, ducks, goats, hogs, horses, mules, llamas,
ostriches, and poultry.



   LIVESTOCK FACILITIES.  Shall include all permanent or temporary
buildings (or containment structures) used for housing and handling
livestock, manure storage structures, feed storage, processing and
mortalities.



   LIVESTOCK PASTURING OPERATION.  Any livestock operation that uses
pasture, as defined under this chapter, as the primary source of feed for the
animals.



   LOADING BERTH, OFF-STREET.  A space of at least ten feet in width and
30 feet in length and having a vertical clearance of at least 14 feet,
designed and located on a lot for the temporary parking of commercial
vehicles while loading or unloading merchandise or materials.



   LODGE.  See PRIVATE CLUB.



   LOT.  A lot of record.



   LOT AREA.  The total horizontal area within the lot lines of a lot.



   LOT COVERAGE.  Defined as that area of the lot covered by structures.
When determining LOT COVERAGE, only those structures which are enclosed space
are to be considered. An enclosed space must have a roof and walls.
Structures such as swimming pools, sidewalks, parking areas, fences, signs
and walls are not included in the calculation of LOT COVERAGE because they
are not enclosed space and are open to the sky. An unenclosed porch is not
included in LOT COVERAGE; however, a screened-in porch would be considered
enclosed space.



   LOT LINE.  Any boundary of a lot.



   LOT LINE, FRONT.  The boundary of a lot which abuts a public street.
Where the lot abuts more than one street, the shorter of the two lot lines
shall be designated, front.



   LOT LINE, REAR.  The boundary of a lot which is most distant from and
most nearly parallel to the front lot line.



   LOT LINE, SIDE.  Any boundary of lot which is not a front lot line or
a rear lot line.



   LOT OF RECORD.  A lot which is part of a subdivision, the plat of
which has been recorded as defined below or a parcel of land defined by meets
and bounds and recorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of Posey
County, Indiana.



   LOT WIDTH.  The average horizontal distance between the side lot lines.



   MANUFACTURED HOME.  A dwelling constructed in an offsite manufacturing
facility for installation at the building site and having a minimum width of
23 feet. This to be placed on a completely enclosed permanent foundation.
Dwelling to bear a seal, certifying that it is built in compliance with the
Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Code or
Indiana Public Law 360, Acts of 1971, as promulgated by the Indiana
Administrative Building Council and constructed after January 1981. Also
termed MODULAR HOME.



   MANURE.  Fecal material and urine from livestock, as well as
animal-housing wash water, bedding material, rainwater or snow melt that
comes in contact with fecal material or urine. Further LIQUID MANURE shall
mean; manure handled as a liquid or slurry.



   MOBILE HOME.  See DWELLING MOBILE HOME.



   MOBILE OFFICE TRAILER.  A vehicle designed to serve whenever parked as
a temporary office for a construction project and not for dwelling, living,
or sleeping quarters.



   MODULAR HOME.  See MANUFACTURED HOME.



   NA.  Not applicable.



   NAMEPLATE.  A sign, attached flush against a building identifying the
name of the building or the name of an occupant thereof.



   NATURAL RESOURCES.  The Indiana Natural Resources Commission or the
Indiana Department of Natural Resources.



   NEC.  Not elsewhere classified.



   NPDES PERMIT.  A National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
permit.



   NURSING HOME.  A residential health care facility licensed and
regulated by the State of Indiana which provides lodging, personal care and
supervision for aged, chronically ill, physically infirm or convalescent
patients.



   OBSTRUCTION.  Any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile,
abutment, projection, excavation, channel rectification, bridge, conduit,
culvert, building, wire fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill, structure or
matter in, along, across or projecting into any channel, watercourse or
regulatory flood hazard area which may impede, retard, or change the
direction or the flow of water, either in itself or by catching or collecting
debris carried by such water, or that is placed where the flow of water might
carry the same downstream to the damage of life or property.



   OPERATOR.  An individual or group of individuals, a partnership, a
corporation, a joint venture, or any other entity owning or controlling one
or more animal feeding operations or animal wintering operations.



   OUTDOOR ADVERTISING SIGN.  A sign advertising products not being sold
on the property where the sign is located. This sign is also known as a
BILLBOARD or OFF-PREMISES sign.



   OWNER.  A person owning, of record, a fee simple interest in real
estate or the contract purchaser Of real estate provided the contract is duly
recorded.



   OWNER’S FAMILY.  Owner’s spouse, children, step-children,
grandchildren, parents and/or step-parents of owner or owner’s spouse,
grandparents and/or step-grandparents of owner or owner’s spouse and a
spouse of any of the above.



   PARK.  A tract of land set apart, by the local legislative body, for
benefit of the public. The tract may be used for passive recreation (such as
picnicking) or for active recreation (such as children’s playground, sports
field or ball court).



   PARKING SPACE, OFF-STREET.  A space on a lot intended and reserved for
the parking of an automobile. Such space is to be of at least nine feet in
width by 20 feet in length. This shall be combined with a driveway connecting
the space with a street or alley and permitting ingress or egress of an
automobile.



   PASTURE.  An area where crops, vegetative forage growth, or
post-harvest residues are sustained for the purpose of grazing animals in
that area.



   PASTURING.  A livestock operation in which animals graze in a pasture.



   PATIO HOME.  A single-family attached dwelling of one story (in
contrast to a townhouse that has at least two stories) on an individual lot
that shares at least one side wall with another dwelling unit and that has a
back patio (but not necessarily a backyard). PATIO HOME structures contain
two to four units instead of a continuous row of houses common with
townhouses. Yard requirements are observed for the structure (building)
rather than individual dwellings.



   PLAN COMMISSION.  The Posey County Area Plan Commission.



   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT.  A discretionary type of development for a
tract of land under single ownership or control, based upon an approved
development plan permitting flexibility of principal land use, lot sizes and
accessory uses not otherwise available under conventional development
standards.



   PLAYGROUND.  See PARK.



   PRIVATE CLUB OR LODGE FACILITY.  Where the chief activity is a service
and is not operated as a business for profit and which holds and maintains an
income tax exempt status.



   PUD. See PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT.



   QUADRUPLEX.  A single-family attached dwelling unit located on an
individual lot that has two common walls with other units, and four dwelling
units in each structure. All dwelling units are on the same level and no
dwelling units are constructed above or below the other. Yard requirements
are observed for the structure (building) rather than individual dwellings.



   RECREATION VEHICLE.  A vehicular structure portable or self propelled
designed as a temporary dwelling for travel use or recreational use not
exceeding 35 feet in length.



   REGULATORY FLOOD PROFILE 100 YEAR.  A longitudinal profile along the
tread of a stream showing the maximum water surface attained by the
regulatory flood.



   RESIDENTIAL STORAGE STRUCTURE.  A structure used for personal storage
purposes only and which storage does not involve the conduct of any business,
trade, occupation or profession. This does not include mobile home dwellings.



   RESIDENTIAL TREATMENT CENTER.  A community-based residential facility
providing diagnostic or therapeutic services and long-term room and board in
a highly structured environment for its residents for alcoholism and drug
abuse, mental illness or behavioral disorders.



   RETIREMENT CENTER.  A residential facility containing a dwelling
designed for and principally occupied by senior citizens in a planned
retirement community which includes a residential complex, an activity or
community center, and a medical or nursing facility which is licensed by the
State of Indiana as an intermediate care facility or a skilled nursing center.



   RIVER OR STREAM.  All open channels (whether natural or modified)
which carry or discharge water.



   ROADSIDE STAND.  A structure or portion thereof for the shelter,
display and sale of agricultural products produced on the premises with no
space for customers within the structure itself.



   ROOMING AND BOARDING HOUSE.  A facility wherein congregate meals and
lodging are provided for its residents exclusive of a supervised living or
residential care facility as elsewhere defined, and exclusive of a hotel or
motel.



   SETBACK.  A horizontal distance determining the location of a building
with respect to the property line, a street, use district boundary line, or
another use. Where the term SETBACK is used in conjunction with a modifying
word or words such a “parking area”, the setback shall in its application
include, but not be limited to, buildings.



   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS.



      (1)   Defined by this chapter are:



         (a)   ADULT AMUSEMENT or ENTERTAINMENT.  Amusement or
entertainment which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on acts
or material depicting, describing or relating to sexual conduct or specified
anatomical areas, as defined herein, including but not limited to topless,
exotic dancers, strippers, male, or female or similar entertainment.



         (b)   ADULT BOOKSTORE.  An establishment having as a
significant portion of its stock in trade books, film, magazines and other
periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
depicting or describing sexual conduct or specified anatomical areas.



         (c)   ADULT MOTION PICTURE ARCADE.  Any place to which
the public is permitted or invited wherein coin or slug-operated or
electronically or mechanically controlled, still or motion picture machines,
projectors, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to
five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so
displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or
describing sexual conduct or specified anatomical areas.



         (d)   MASSAGE PARLOR.  Any place where for any form of
consideration or gratuity massage, alcohol rub, administration or
fomentations, electric or magnetic treatments, or any other treatment or
manipulation of the human body occurs, without medical purpose, as part of or
in connection with sexual conduct or where any person providing such
treatment, manipulation or service related thereto exposes specified
anatomical areas.



      (2)   SEXUAL CONDUCT.  Includes the following:



         (a)   The fondling or other touching of human genitals,
pubic region, buttocks, or female breast;



         (b)   Ultimate sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or
simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, sodomy;



         (c)   Masturbation; and



         (d)   Excretory functions as part of or in connection
with any of the activities set forth in one through three above.



      (3)   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.  Includes the following:



         (a)   Human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, and female
breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and



         (b)   Human male genitals in a discernible turgid state,
even if completely and opaquely covered.



   SHOOTING RANGE.  A permanently located and improved area designed and
operated for the use of rifles, shotguns, pistols, silhouettes, skeet, trap,
black powder and other similar sport shooting in an indoor or outdoor
environment. The area may be publicly or privately owned and operated for
profit or not for profit. SHOOTING RANGE does not include any area for the
exclusive use of archery or air guns.



   SIGNS, BUSINESS.  A sign which directs attention to a business,
commodity, service, or entertainment conducted on the premises.



   SIGN, CANOPY.  A sign wholly supported by a canopy projecting from a
building or an extended roof or pitched roof and which does not extend above
the mean height level of the building.



   SIGN, CONSTRUCTION.  A temporary sign erected during the period of
construction advertising the construction of improvements on the property.



   SIGN, HEIGHT.  The vertical distance measured from the curb level to
the highest point of the sign.



   SIGN, OFF-PREMISES.  A sign, including a billboard, which directs
attention to a business, commodity, service, or entertainment not exclusively
related to the premises where such sign is located or to which it is
affixed.  See also SIGN, OUTDOOR ADVERTISING.



   SIGN, ON PREMISES.  Same as a BUSINESS SIGN. A sign which directs
attention to a business, building, product, activity, or service,
manufactured, sold, or offered upon the premised as the primary use(s) where
such sign is located.



   SIGN, OUTDOOR ADVERTISING.  A sign which directs attention to a
business, commodity, service or entertainment, sold or offered elsewhere than
the premises and only incidentally on the premises if at all. This is also
known as a BILLBOARD or OFF-PREMISES SIGN.



   SIGN, PORTABLE.  A sign which is not permanently affixed to the ground
or a building.



   SIGN, PROJECTING.  A sign affixed to a building and which extends
horizontally more than 12 feet from the supporting portion of the building.



   SIGN, PROMOTIONAL BUSINESS.  Items such as tinsel, advertising flags,
searchlights, balloons and banners.



   SIGN, REAL ESTATE.  A temporary sign advertising the sale, rental or
lease of the premises.



   SIGN, ROOF.  A sign other than a promotional business sign which is
affixed to a roof extended roof, pitched roof, or canopy and which extends
above the building wall or parapet wall.



   SIGN, WALL.  A sign affixed to a building wall or parapet which does
not extend horizontally more than 15 inches from the wall no extend above the
height of the wall or parapet.



   SPECIAL EXCEPTION.  A use or a design element of a use which is not
permitted by right in a particular district because of potential adverse
effect, but which if controlled in the particular instance as to its
relationship to the neighborhood and of the general welfare, may be permitted
by the Board of Zoning Appeals, where specifically authorized by the
ordinance, and in accordance with the substantive and procedural standards of
the ordinance.



   STABLE.  Stable means a building in which domestic animals are
sheltered and fed.



   STORY.  A room or set of rooms on one floor level of a building.



   STREET.  Any named or numbered street along its full length,
irrespective of any intervening street.



   STREET SIDE YARD.  When a lot abuts two streets, the yard on the
secondary street is termed the “street side yard”.



   STREET WALL.  The wall or part of the building nearest to the street
line.



   STRUCTURE.  Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on
the ground, or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground,
and includes buildings, walks, fences and signs. Provided that, for the
purposes of §§ 153.111 through 153.117, Floodway District STRUCTURE means a
walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, as well as a
mobile home. Provided that, for the calculation of lot area coverage,
STRUCTURE means an enclosed space with a roof and walls.



   SUPPLEMENTAL DISTRICT.  A zoning district to be mapped as an overlay
to a use district and which modifies or supplements the regulations of the
general district in recognition of distinguishing circumstances such as unit
development or flooding propensity while maintaining the character and
purposes of the general use district area over which it is superimposed.



   SUPPORT SYSTEM (FOUNDATION).  A combination of footings, piers, caps,
plates, and shims, which, when properly installed, support the manufactured
modular home; footings being the part of the support system which transmit
loads to the soil as or below the surface and frost line; piers and caps
being the part of the support system between the footing and the home,
exclusive of plates and shims; plates and shims being the cushion of wood or
other approved material, which are used to fill the gap between the top of
the pier caps and the frame of the home.



   SWIMMING POOLS.  Swimming pools shall include, but not necessarily
limited to, pools over three feet in depth at any point, and shall exclude
lakes.



   TOP PLATE.  The horizontal timber directly carrying the trusses of a
roof or the rafters.



   TOWNHOUSE DEVELOPMENT.  A row of at least three attached dwelling
units each separated by a party wall on individual lots and designed for
separate ownership of the individual dwelling units with no separate dwelling
unit constructed above another dwelling unit; provided that in a development
of six or more units, a row of two attached dwelling units may be constructed
thereon.



   TRANSITIONAL LIVING CENTER.  A community-based residential facility
that provides short-term (120 days or less) room and board in a supervised
living environment utilizing counseling and rehabilitation services for
persons with a history of juvenile delinquency, behavioral disorders, mental
illness, alcoholism or drug abuse.



   TRAVEL TRAILER.  See RECREATION VEHICLE.



   VARIANCE.  A relaxation of restriction of the zoning code, granted by
the Board of Zoning Appeals, where by reason of exceptional narrowness,
shallowness, shape, topography, or other extraordinary or exceptional
situation, condition or circumstance of the ordinance, restriction, would
result in unnecessary hardship.



   VETERINARIAN CLINIC.  A building used exclusively for the care and
treatment of animals, including incidental overnight boarding of animals
within the enclosed building, but excluding outside animal runs or boarding
services.



   YARD.  A open unoccupied space on a lot between a building and a lot
line.







   YARD, FRONT.  A yard extending along the full length of the front lot
lines between the side lot lines.



   YARD, REAR.  A yard extendi ng along the full length of the rear lot
line between the side lot lines.



   YARD, REQUIRED.  The minimum permitted distance of open unoccupied
space between a building and a lot line.



   YARD, SIDE.  A yard extending along a side lot line between the front
yard and the rear yard.



   YARD, STREET SIDE.  A yard fronting on the secondary street abutting
lot.



   ZERO LOT-LINE HOME.  A single-family attached dwelling unit on an
individual lot that shares a single common wall with another dwelling unit or
that is structurally attached to another dwelling, and that has only one side
year. Only two dwelling units may be attached in the structure.



   ZONING DISTRICT.  A zone designating permitted uses by right and
special exception, with associated bulk and area standards.



   ZONING MAP, OFFICIAL.  The officially adopted map by the applicable
local legislative body that shows the geographic location of zoning district
designations in conjunction with the text of the zoning ordinance.



   ZONING TEXT.  The narrative portion of the zoning ordinance.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12; Am. Ord. 13-9, passed 5-16-13; Am. Ord. 14-22,
passed 10-16-14)



APPENDIX A:  USE UNIT BY ZONING DISTRICT



(X = use by Right, E = use by Special Exception)



 

Use Unit
 
A
 
RS or R-1
 
RT
 
R-2
 
RM or R-3
 
RMH
 
PUD
 
R-O or O
 
B-1
 
B-1A or CS
 
B-2 or CG
 
B-3 or CH
 
CBD
 
M-1
 
M-2




0 Active Agriculture1
 

X

 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 





1 Areawide uses by right
 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X



2 Areawide special exception uses
 

E

 

E W

 

E

 

E

 

E

 

E W

 

E W

 

E W

 

E

 

E W

 

E W

 

E W

 

E W

 

E W

 

E W



3 Public protection & utility facilities
 

E

 

E

 

E

 

E

 

E

 

E

 

E

 

E

 

E

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X



4 Community services2
 

Eab

 

Eab

 

Eb

 

Eb

 

Eb

 

Eab

 

Eab

 

Eb

 

Eb

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

Ea

 





5 Single-family detached dwelling
 

Xm

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 



 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

E

 



 





6 Single-family attached dwelling3
 



 



 

X

 

X

 

X

 



 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 



 





7 Multiple family dwelling4
 



 



 



 



 

X

 



 

X

 

Xn

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 



 





8 Manufactured or modular dwelling
 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 



 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 



 





9 Mobile home dwelling
 

E

 



 



 



 



 

X

 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 





10 Off-street parking areas
 



 



 



 



 

E

 



 



 

X

 

E

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X



11 Offices and studios
 



 



 



 



 

E

 



 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X



12 Entertainment & eating

    establishments (w/o drive-in)
 



 



 



 



 



 



 

X

 

Xf

 



 

Xf

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

E

 

E



13 Convenience goods & services
 



 



 



 



 



 



 

X

 

E

 

Xo

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

E

 

E



14 Shopping goods & services
 



 



 



 



 



 



 

X

 

E

 

Xo

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

E

 

E



15 Other trades & services
 

Ei

 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

Xo

 



 

X

 

X

 

E

 

X

 

X



16 Gasoline service stations
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

E

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

E

 

X

 

X



17 Automotive & allied activities
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

X

 

X

 

E

 

X

 

X



18 Drive-in restaurants
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

X

 

X

 

E

 

E

 

E



19 Hotel, motel & recreation facilities
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

X

 

X

 

X

 

E

 

E



20 Commercial recreation: intensive
 

E

 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

E

 

E

 

E

 

E



21 Business signs & outdoor advertising
 

Ev

 



 



 



 



 



 

Xv

 



 

Xv

 

Xv

 

X

 

X

 

Ev

 

X

 

X



22 Research & development
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

E

 



 

X

 

X



23 Warehousing & wholesaling
 

Ek

 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

X

 

E

 

X

 

X



24 Mining & mineral processing
 

E

 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

E



25 Light manufacturing
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

E

 



 

X

 

X



26 Medium manufacturing & industry
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

X



27 Heavy manufacturing & industry
 

El

 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

E



28 Home occupations
 
E
 
E
 
E
 
E
 
E
 
E
 
E
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 

 



29 Mobile office trailer
 

X/E

 

E

 

E

 

E

 

E

 

E

 

E

 

E

 

X/E

 

X/E

 

X/E

 

X/E

 

X/E

 

X/E

 

X/E





 



Notes:



1)   Allow roadside stands for agricultural and other products in
agricultural, commercial and industrial districts, but prohibit in
residential districts. Allow yard sales in all districts not to exceed 3
consecutive days per month. Permit confined feeding in agricultural district
beyond 2 miles of incorporated areas.



2)   This Use Unit includes churches, nonprofit educational and
philanthropic institutions and colleges.



3)   This Use Unit to be expanded to include other single-family attached
dwelling unit types.



4)   This Use Unit includes “group quarters” uses, but excludes
funeral homes, hotels and motels.



a)   Excluding protective shelters, residential treatment centers,
transitional living centers.



b)   Mt. Vernon allows day care in home with 4 or less by right in
residential.



d)   Nursing home, group home, convent, monastery, and novitiate permitted
by right; other Use Unit 7 uses by special exception.



e)   Only if located in whole or part in the RMH District.



f)   Excluding entertainment and drinking establishments.



g)   Excluding drug store (only pharmacy permitted) and supermarket (only
food special shop).



h)   Only book store, dairy store, food specialty shop, gift store,
grocery (not supermarket), health food store, liquor store, newsstand, shoe
repair shop, tailor shop and tobacco store permitted in Use Unit 14.



i)   Limited to veterinary office, animal hospital or kennel (including
outside runs); greenhouses.



k)   Limited to wholesale greenhouses and growers.



l)   Limited to livestock sales and auctions + commercial breeding;
landfills prohibited.



m)   Accessory living quarters clearly complementary to the principal use
and not for rental purposes. Not permitted in other districts.



n)   County allows single-family, two-family and multi-family uses by
right. Both Mt. Vernon and County require special exception for “group
quarters” uses. Special exception required for “group quarters” uses.



o)   Restrictive list of uses in Use Units 13 and 14.



v)   Outdoor advertising (off-premises) signs are prohibited.



w)   Excludes Use Unit 2(B)(14).



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12; Am. Ord. 12-22, passed 11-1-12; Am. Ord. 13-9,
passed 5-16-13; Am. Ord. 14-22, passed 10-16-14)



APPENDIX B:  ZONING BULK AND AREA STANDARDS



 


Bulk and Area Requirements

 

A

 

RS or R-1

 

RT

 

R-2

 

RM or R-3

 

RMH

 

PUD

 

R-O or O





Tract width (minimum feet)
 



 



 



 



 



 

100

 



 





Lot width (minimum feet)a
 



 



 



 



 



 

56

 



 





   one family (single-family detached)
 

150

 

70

 

70

 

70

 

70

 



 



 

70



   two family (single-family attached)b
 



 



 

70

 

70

 

70

 



 

-

 

70



   multiple family
 



 



 



 



 

100/

 



 



 

100



   non-residential/special exception
 

150

 

100

 

100

 



 

100

 



 



 

70z



Minimum tract area (acres)
 

1.0o

 



 



 



 



 

5

 

10

 





Lot area (minimum square feet)
 



 



 



 



 



 

6440

 



 

7000l



   one family (single-family detached)
 

1.0o

 

7000l

 

7000l

 

7000l

 

7000l

 



 



 

7000l



   two family (single-family attached)
 



 



 

7000l

 

7000l

 

7000l

 



 



 

7000l



   multiple family
 



 



 



 



 

10000l

 



 



 

10000l



   non-residential/special exception
 

1.0o

 

10000l

 

10000l

 

10000l

 

10000l

 

10000

 



 

7000l



Structure height
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 





   maximum feet
 

35k

 

35/35

 

35

 

35

 

50

 

35

 



 

35



   maximum number of stories
 

2.5

 

2.5

 

2.5

 

2.5

 

4

 

1

 



 

2.5



Yard
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 





   front yard (ft.)
 

25u

 

25u ft

 

25u

 

25u

 

25u

 

20

 



 

25u



   street side yard (ft.)
 

25v

 

25v

 

25v

 

25v

 

25v

 

10

 



 

25v



   side yard (ft.)
 

15j

 

5

 

5

 

5

 

5

 

5

 



 

5



   rear yard (ft.)
 

25j

 

25

 

20

 

25

 

20

 

10

 



 

20



Perimeter (ft.)
 

10g

 

10g

 

10g

 

10g

 

10g

 

25

 



 

10g



Lot coverage
 

30%

 

30%

 

30%

 

30%

 

50%

 

30%

 



 

50%



Floor area ratio
 



 

0.4

 

0.5

 

0.5

 

0.5

 



 

0.5

 

0.5



Lot area per dwelling unit (sq.ft.)
 



 



 



 



 

1500

 



 



 

1500



Density (dwelling unit/acre)
 



 

6.223

 

12.446

 

12.446

 

29.04

 



 

6-29y

 

6-29y



Livability space (du ft.)
 



 



 



 



 



 

300

 



 





Minimum floor area per du (sq. ft.)
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 





Mobile home
 

650

 



 



 



 



 

650

 



 





   single-family
 

950

 

950

 



 

950

 

950

 



 

950

 

950



   two family
 



 



 

650

 

650

 

650

 



 

650

 

650



   multiple family
 



 



 



 



 

400- 700x

 



 

400- 700x

 

400- 700x



Minimum residential structure width (feet)
 

23w

 

23

 

20

 

23

 

23

 



 

20

 

23





 



Notes:



a)   At the building line.



b)   A minimum of three townhouses per structure with 70-foot width and
minimum lot width of 20 feet.



c)   Larger tract or lot area may be required by the Posey County Health
Department for liquid waste disposal.



d)   Limited to one-story within 50 feet of an adjoining district.



g)   When a nonresidential structure by right or special exception in the
Agricultural District or O-R District abuts an R District or when a
nonresidential structure by right or special exception is established in the
RS/R-1, RT, R-2, RM/R-3 or R-O/O District, the minimum side yard requirement
(and minimum rear yard requirement in the A District) of 10 feet is increased
by one foot for each foot of building height exceeding 18 feet, but the
resulting side yard (and rear yard for the A District) should not exceed a
maximum of 25 feet. When the O or R-O District abuts an R District, the side
yard requirement is at least 10 feet. When the O or R-O District abuts a
single-family district, the 10-foot side yard is increased 1-foot for each
foot of building height exceeding 18 feet and the rear year of 20 feet is
increased 1-foot for each foot of building height exceeding 28 feet.



h)   When a B or C District (except CBD) abuts an R-3, RM, O or R-O
District, the side yard requirement is 20 feet, but may be reduced to 10 feet
if landscaped. When a B or C District (except the CBD) abuts an R-1, RS, RT
or R-2 District, the minimum side and rear yard requirement is 20 feet and is
to be increased one additional foot for each foot of building height
exceeding 28 feet and cannot be reduced by landscaping.



i)   When a nonresidential structure by right or special exception in an
agricultural district abuts another property in the Agricultural District,
the side yard and rear yard setbacks are reduced to a minimum of 10 feet, and
may be reduced to 5 feet upon receipt of notarized signature of abutting
property owners within 1,000 feet not objecting to the reduced side and/or
rear yard.



j)   10-foot minimum side and rear yard setback for non-residential uses.



k)   45 feet height for non-residential uses.



l)   One-acre if no public sewers.



p)   Overall densities of RS, RT and RM apply to the area developed for
the particular dwelling unit type.



r)   When a B or C District abuts an O or R District, the front yard
requirements of the O or R District should be observed for 200 feet into the
B or C District (except the CBD). When a B or C District abuts an O or R
District, off-street parking is prohibited in the front and street side
yards; however, off-street parking would be permitted in front and street
side yards greater than 10 feet provided the side yards are landscaped to
hide the parking area and the parking area does not extend into the first 10
feet of the front or street side yard. The front yard and street side yard
requirements of the B and C District may be reduced to none if adjacent lots
or the majority of the lots on the blockface have no front yard or street
side yard setback.



s)   The front yard and street side yard requirements of the M District
may be reduced to none if adjacent lots or the majority of the lots on the
blockface have no front yard or street side yard setback.



t)   When a M District abuts a R or O District, the side yard and rear
yard requirement is increased to 20 feet, is further increased an additional
foot for each additional foot of building height exceeding 28 feet, and
cannot be reduced by landscaping. A fence is required between industrial
lots, and an opaque feet and evergreen screen is required in the side and
rear yard adjacent to non-industrial zones. Further, when a M District abuts
a R or O District, a combination of opaque fence, evergreen screen and
earthen berm is required.



u)   The front yard set back may be more or less than the 25-foot minimum
depending on the predominant front yard setback of existing structures along
the blockface. If only one lot on the blockface is developed, the front yard
setback for the new structure should be the average of the 25-foot setback
and the existing structure. When the proposed structure falls between two
developed lots, the front yard setback should be the average of the two
abutting structures.



v)   The street side yard requirement may be more or less if the
predominant front yard setback along the blockface of the side street is more
or less.



w)   The minimum structure width does not apply to a mobile home in the
Agricultural District.



x)   The minimum livable floor area is 400 sq. ft. for an efficiency, 500
sq. ft. for one-bedroom, 600 sq. ft. for two-bedroom and 700 sq. ft. for
three-bedroom.



y)   The maximum average density of a subarea for a particular housing
type corresponds to the maximum density of the traditional residential zoning
district containing that housing type (i.e., single-family detached = 6.223
du/ac, single-family attached = 12.446 du/ac, multiple family = 29.04 du/ac).



z)   In the case of a townhouse row or retail/office structure with
several stores/offices, the minimum lot width for a townhouse/store/office
may be 20 feet with no side yard requirement provided the structure or
retail/office building observes the minimum tract width and side yard
requirements.



(page 2)



 


Bulk and Area Requirements

 

A

 

B-1A



or CS

 

B-2



or CG

 

B-3



or CH

 

CBD

 

M-1

 

M-2





Tract width (minimum feet)
 



 

100Z

 

100Z

 

100Z

 



 



 





Lot width (minimum feet)a
 



 



 



 



 



 

150Z

 

200Z



   one family (single-family detached)
 

70

 

100

 

100

 

100

 



 



 





   two family (single-family attached)b
 

70Z

 

100

 

100

 

100

 



 



 





   multiple family
 

100

 

100

 

100

 

100

 



 



 





   non-residential/special exception
 

100Z

 

100Z

 

100Z

 

100Z

 



 



 





Minimum tract area (acres)
 



 



 



 



 



 



 





Lot area (minimum square feet)
 

none

 



 

none

 



 



 



 





   one family (single-family detached)
 

7000

 

10000

 

10000

 

10000

 



 



 





   two family (single-family attached)
 

7000

 

10000

 

10000

 

10000

 



 



 





   multiple family
 

10000

 

10000

 

10000

 

10000

 



 



 





   non-residential/special exception
 

10000

 

10000

 

10000

 

10000

 



 



 





Structure height
 



 



 



 



 



 



 





   maximum feet
 

35

 

50

 

75

 

75 ?

 

75

 

none

 

none



   maximum number of stories
 

2.56

 

4

 

4

 

4

 

4

 

none

 

none



Yard
 



 



 



 



 



 



 





   front yard (ft.)
 

10r

 

10r

 

10r

 

10r

 

none

 

25s

 

25s



   street side yard (ft.)
 

10r

 

10r

 

10r

 

10r

 

none

 

25s

 

25s



   side yard (ft.)
 

10

 

10

 

/ 10

 

10/

 

none

 

None/1 0t

 

None/1 0t



   rear yard (ft.)
 

20

 

20

 

20

 

20

 

none

 

None/2 0t

 

None/2 0t



Perimeter (ft.)
 

10h

 

10h

 

10h

 

10h

 

none

 



 





Lot coverage
 



 



 



 



 

100%

 

65%

 

65%



Floor area ratio
 

0.5

 

0.5

 

0.75

 

1.0

 

6.0

 

N/A

 

N/A



Lot area per dwelling (sq. ft.)
 

1500

 

1500

 

1500

 

1500

 

1500

 



 





Density (dwelling unit/acre)
 

6-29y

 

6-29y

 

6-29y

 

6-29y

 

6-29y

 



 





Livability space/du ft.)
 



 



 



 



 



 



 





Minimum floor area per du (sq. ft.)
 



 



 



 



 



 



 





   single-family
 

950

 

950

 

950

 

950

 

950

 



 





   two family
 

650

 

650

 

650

 

650

 

650

 



 





   multiple family
 

400-700 X

 

400-70 0X

 

400-70 0X

 

400-70 0X

 

400-70 0X

 



 





Minimum structure width (feet)
 

20

 

20

 

20

 

20

 

20

 

20

 

20





 



Notes:



a)   At the building line.



b)   A minimum of three townhouses per structure with 70-foot width and
minimum lot width of 20 feet. Larger tract or lot area may be required by the
Posey County Health Department for liquid waste disposal.



d)   Limited to one-story within 50 feet of an adjoining district.



e)   Special exception uses.



f)   50 feet from expressway or primary thoroughfare.



g)   When a nonresidential structure by right or special exception in the
Agricultural District or O-R District abuts an R District or when a
nonresidential structure by right or special exception is established in the
RS/R-1, RT, R-2, RM/R-3 or O-R/O District, the minimum side yard requirement
(and minimum rear yard requirement in the A District) of 10 feet is increased
by one foot for each foot of building height exceeding 18 feet, but the
resulting side yard (and rear yard for the A District) should not exceed a
maximum of 25 feet. When the O or R-O District abuts an R District, the side
yard requirement is at least 10 feet. When the O or R-O District abuts a
single-family district, the 10-foot side yard is increased 1-foot for each
foot of building height exceeding 18 feet and the rear year of 20 feet is
increased 1-foot for each foot of building height exceeding 28 feet.



h)   When a B or C District (except CBD) abuts an R-3, RM, O or R-O
District, the side yard requirement is 20 feet, but may be reduced to 10 feet
if landscaped. When a B or C District (except the CBD) abuts an R-l, RS, RT
or R-2 District, the minimum side and rear yard requirement is 20 feet and is
to be increased one additional foot for each foot of building height
exceeding 28 feet and cannot be reduced by landscaping.



i)   When a nonresidential structure by right or special exception in an
agricultural district abuts another property in the Agricultural District,
the side yard and rear yard setbacks are reduced to a minimum of 10 feet, and
may be reduced to 5 feet upon receipt of notarized signature of abutting
property owners within 1000 feet not objecting to the reduced side and/or
rear yard.



j)   10-foot minimum side and rear yard setback for non-residential uses.



k)   45 feet height for non-residential uses.



l)   One-acre if no public sewers.



p)   Overall densities of RS, RT and RM apply to the area developed for
the particular dwelling unit type.



r)   When a B or C District abuts an O or R District, the front yard
requirements of the O or R District should be observed for 200 feet into the
B or C District (except the CBD). When a B or C District abuts an O or R
District, off-street parking is prohibited in the front and street side
yards; however, off-street parking would be permitted in front and street
side yards greater than 10 feet provided the side yards are landscaped to
hide the parking area and the parking area does not extend into the first 10
feet of the front or street side yard. The front yard and street side yard
requirements of the B and C District may be reduced to none if adjacent lots
or the majority of the lots on the blockface have no front yard or street
side yard setback.



s)   The front yard and street side yard requirements of the M District
may be reduced to none if adjacent lots or the majority of the lots on the
blockface have no front yard or street side yard setback.



t)   When a M District abuts a R or O District, the side yard and rear
yard requirement is increased to 20 feet, is further increased an additional
foot for each additional foot of building height exceeding 28 feet, and
cannot be reduced by landscaping. A fence is required between industrial
lots, and an opaque feet and evergreen screen is required in the side and
rear yard adjacent to non-industrial zones. Further, when a M District abuts
a R or O District, a combination of opaque fence, evergreen screen and
earthen berm is required.



u)   The front yard set back may be more or less than the 25-foot minimum
depending on the predominant front yard setback of existing structures along
the blockface. If only one lot on the blockface is developed, the front yard
setback for the new structure should be the average of the 25-foot setback
and the existing structure. When the proposed structure falls between two
developed lots, the front yard setback should be the average of the two
abutting structures.



v)   The street side yard requirement may be more or less if the
predominant front yard setback along the blockface of the side street is more
or less.



x)   The minimum livable floor area is 400 sq. ft. for an efficiency, 500
sq. ft. for one-bedroom, 600 sq. ft. for two-bedroom and 700 sq. ft. for
three-bedroom.



y)   The maximum average density of a subarea for a particular housing
type corresponds to the maximum density of the traditional residential zoning
district containing that housing type (i.e., single-family detached = 6.223
du/ac, single-family attached = 12.446 du/ac, multiple family = 29.04 du/ac).



z)   In the case of a townhouse row or retail/office/industrial structure
with several stores/offices/warehouses, the minimum lot width for a
townhouse/store/office/industrial may be 20 feet with no side yard
requirement provided the structure or retail/office/industrial building
observes the minimum tract width and side yard requirements.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12)



APPENDIX C:  ZONING SIGN STANDARDS



 


Sign Standards

 

A

 

RS , RT, RM R-1, R-2, R-3

 

RMH
RMH

 

PUD

 

O 
R-O





On Premises Signs
 

 

 

 



type
 
B = bulletin        I = identification (a)

R = real estate    C = construction


# per street frontage
 

One

 

One

 

One at entry

 

One

 

One



spacing (ft.)
 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A



setback (ft.)
 
1-foot, from property line
 
1-foot, from property line
 
1-foot, from property line
 
1-foot, from property line
 
1-foot, from property line


Maximum height (ft.)
 
B = 15

I=12

R = 6

C= 15
 
B = 15

I=12

R = 6 in RS/R-1 and RT/R-2

R= 15 in RM/R-3 C= 15
 
B= 15

I = 12

R = 6

C= 15
 
B = 15

I=12

R= 15

C= 15
 
B= 15

I =12

R= 15

C= 15


Maximum sides
 

2

 

2

 

2

 

2

 

2



Total area per face (sq. ft.)
 
B= 12

I = 48

R = 4

C = 40
 
B=12

I = 48

R = 4 in RS/R-1 and RT/R-2

R = 8 in RM/R-3

C = 40
 
B=12

I = 48

R=12

C = 40
 
B=12

I = 48

R = 8

C = 40
 
B=12

I = 48

R=8

C = 40


illumination
 

constant

 

constant

 

constant

 

constant

 

constant





Notes:



a)   An identification sign displays the name of a multi-family
development, mobile home park, single-family subdivision or permitted
non-residential use.



b)   A “flat” sign includes wall, facade or canopy signs.



c)   A “ground” sign includes signs on poles or posts as well as
“monument” signs without elevating poles or posts.



(page 2)



 


Sign Standards

 

B-1

 

CS B-1A

 

CG B-2

 

CBD

 

CH B-3

 

M-1

 

M-2





On Premises Signs
 



type
 
*flat (b)    *ground (c)


# per street frontage
 

1

 

1

 

1

 

1

 

1

 

1



Spacing (ft.)
 

One per 100'

 

One per 100'

 

One per 100'

 

N/A

 

One per 100'

 

One per 150'

 

One per 200'



Setback (ft.)
 
1-foot, from property line, not within 30-foot radius of another flat or
ground sign, not with 50-foot radius of an R district


Maximum height (ft.)
 
flat = 6' above canopy

ground = 25'
 
flat = 6' above canopy

ground = 30'
 
flat = 6' above canopy

ground = 35'
 
flat = 6' above canopy

ground = 35'
 
flat = 6' above canopy

ground = 50'


Maximum sides
 

2

 

2

 

2

 

2

 

2

 

2

 

2



Total area per face (sq. ft.)
 
flat = 3 sq. ft. per linear foot of building; all other signs = 2 sq. ft. per
linear foot of street frontage; maximum of 200 sq. ft. flat or other
 
flat = 3 sq. ft. per linear foot of building; other signs = 2 sq. ft. per
linear foot of street frontage; maximum of 300 sq. ft. flat or other
 
flat = 3 sq. ft. per linear foot of building all other sign = 3 sq. ft. per
linear foot of street frontage; maximum of 500 sq. ft. flat or other
 
flat = 3 sq. ft. per linear foot of building; other signs = 3 sq. ft. per
linear foot of street frontage; maximum of 150 sq. ft. flat or other
 
flat = 3 sq. ft. per linear foot of building; other signs = 3 sq. ft. per
linear foot of street frontage;

maximum of 700 sq. ft. flat or other


Illuminatio n
 
constant, flashing or electronic message
 
constant, flashing or electronic message
 
constant, flashing or electronic message
 
constant, flashing or electronic message
 
constant, flashing or electronic message




 



Notes:



a)   An identification sign displays the name of a multi-family
development, mobile home park, single-family subdivision or permitted
non-residential use.



b)   A “flat” sign includes wall, facade or canopy signs.



c)   A “ground” sign includes signs on poles or posts as well as
“monument” signs without elevating poles or posts.



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12)



APPENDIX D:  USES REFERENCED TO USE UNIT



 

LAND USE
 
USE UNIT




(A)


Abstract company
 
11


Accounting services
 
11


Acetylene gas manufacturing
 
27


Acid manufacturing
 
27


Adult amusement center
 
15


Adult bookstore
 
15


Adult detention center
 
2


Advertising agency
 
11


Advertising signs
 
21


Agriculture implement sales
 
17


Agricultural products
 
0


Air conditioning service
 
15


Aircraft sales
 
17


Airport
 
2


Aluminum works/foundry/manufacture
 
27


Ambulance service
 
3


Ammonia manufacturing
 
27


Amusement activities, nec
 
20


Animal feeding operations
 
0


Animal rendering & slaughter
 
27


Antique shop
 
14


Apartment hotel
 
7


Apartments
 
7


Appliance repair
 
15


Appliance store
 
14


Aquarium
 
4


Arboretum
 
1


Arcade
 
15


Architectural services
 
11


Area-wide use by exception
 
2


Area-wide use by right
 
1


Arena
 
20


Armature rewinding repair
 
15


Armored car service
 
15


Art gallery, museum
 
4


Art gallery, commercial
 
14


Art school
 
15


Artist’s studio
 
11


Artist’s supply store
 
14


Asphalt refining, manufacturing
 
27


Auctioneer
 
15


Automated teller machine
 
13


Automobile rental
 
17


Automobile sales, new, used
 
17


Automobile salvage yard
 
27


Automobile wash
 
17


Automobile and allied activities
 
17


Automobile painting/body work
 
17


Automobile parts and accessories store
 
14


Automobile repair and service
 
17


(B)


Bait shop
 
15


Bakery
 
13


Bakery, wholesale
 
15


Ballet school
 
15


Bank with drive-through service
 
13


Bank without drive-through service
 
11


Bar
 
12


Barber school
 
13


Barber shop
 
13


Beauty school
 
15


Beauty shop
 
13


Bicycle shop
 
14


Billboard
 
21


Billiard parlor
 
19


Bindery
 
15


Bio-fuel manufacturing
 
27


Blast furnace
 
27


Bleaching powder manufacturing
 
26


Boarding house
 
7


Boat sales
 
17


Boiler works
 
27


Book store
 
14


Book store, adult
 
15


Bottled gas
 
15


Bottling plant
 
25


Bowling alley
 
19


Brass manufacturing
 
26


Brick manufacturing, tile manufacturing
 
27


Broadcasting studio
 
11


Building contract construction
 
25


Building materials store
 
14


Bus station
 
17


Business machine repair
 
15


Business machine sales
 
14


Business school
 
15


Business sign
 
21


Butcher shop
 
14


(C)


Cabinet maker
 
15


Café
 
12


Cafeteria
 
12


Camera & photography supply
 
14


Camper sales
 
17


Camp, day
 
4


Campground
 
20


Candy store
 
13


Carnival
 
2


Carpentry
 
15


Carpet installation & repair
 
15


Carpet store
 
14


Caterer
 
14


Cellophane manufacturing
 
27


Celluloid manufacturing
 
27


Cement, Portland
 
24


Cemetery
 
2


Cesspool cleaning service
 
15


Children’s nursery
 
4


China, glassware & metal ware store
 
14


Chiropractor
 
11


Chlorine manufacturing or processing
 
27


Church
 
4


Circus
 
2


Clothing and accessories store
 
14


Club, night
 
12


Coal mining, extracting and processing
 
24


Coffee shop
 
12


Coke manufacturing
 
27


College, university
 
4


Commercial, convenience
 
13


Commercial, recreation, enclosed
 
19


Commercial, recreation intensive (unenclosed)
 
20


Community center
 
4


Computer store
 
14


Computer repair
 
15


Computing service
 
11


Concentrated feeding operations
 
0


Concrete construction service
 
25


Concrete ready-mix plant
 
26


Confectionery store
 
13


Confined animal feeding operations
 
0


Construction facility
 
2


Construction heavy-yard
 
25


Convalescent home
 
7


Convenience goods and services
 
13


Convenience store
 
13


Convent
 
7


Convict pre-release center
 
2


Copper manufacture
 
26


Copy service
 
11


Correction facility
 
2


Cosmetic shop
 
14


Costume rental service
 
14


Credit union with drive-through window
 
13


Credit union without drive-through window
 
11


Crematory
 
2


Creosote manufacturing, or treatment
 
27


Cultivation
 
1


Cultural facilities nec
 
4


Cultural and recreation facility
 
4


(D)


Dairy
 
0


Dairy store
 
14


Dance hall
 
12


Dance school
 
15


Data processing service
 
11


Data processing machine repair
 
15


Day camp
 
4


Day care
 
4


Decorating, interior (without retail sales)
 
15


Delicatessen
 
12


Dental clinic, lab
 
11


Dentist office
 
11


Department store
 
14


Detention facility
 
2


Dextrin manufacture
 
27


Disinfectant or insecticide manufacture
 
27


Disinfectant or exterminating service
 
15


Distillation of bones, coal, tar or wood
 
27


Doctors office
 
11


Drafting service
 
11


Drag strip
 
20


Drama school
 
15


Drapery, curtain, upholstery store
 
14


Drapery service
 
15


Dressmaking shop
 
14


Drilling of oil and gas wells
 
24


Drive-in restaurant
 
18


Drive-in theater
 
20


Driving range, golf
 
20


Drug store
 
13


Dry cleaning
 
15


Dry cleaning pick-up
 
13


Dry goods store
 
14


Duplex
 
6


Dyestuff manufacture
 
26


(E)
 



Eating establishment other than drive-in
 
12


Elderly housing
 
7


Electric regulating station
 
3


Electrical repair service
 
15


Electric substation
 
3


Electrical supply store
 
14


Electronics store
 
14


Emergency shelter/protective shelter
 
4


Employment agency
 
11


Enclosed commercial recreation/NEC
 
19


Engineering and surveying services
 
11


Explosive manufacture or storage
 
27


Extended care facility
 
7


Exterminating service
 
15


Extraction, mining
 
24


(F)


Fairgrounds
 
20


Fat rendering
 
27


Feed lot
 
0


Feed milling and processing
 
25


Fence sales / installation
 
15


Fertilizer manufacture
 
27


Filing station
 
16


Financial services
 
11


Fine arts school
 
15


Fire alarm
 
1


Fire protection facility
 
3


Fire station
 
3


Flea market / permanent
 
15


Flood management project
 
1


Floor coverings store
 
14


Florist
 
14


Food (convenience)
 
13


Food specialty
 
14


Forestry
 
1


Foster home
 
5


Foundry, metal
 
27


Fraternity house
 
7


Frozen food locker
 
15


Fuel oil storage and distribution
 
25


Funeral home
 
15


Furnace cleaning
 
15


Furniture repair
 
15


Furniture store
 
14


Furrier & fur shop
 
14


Fur storage
 
14


(G)


Garbage and refuse
 
27


Garbage contract pickup
 
26


Garbage dump
 
27


Garden supply store
 
14


Gas extraction
 
24


Gas manufacture or storage
 
27


Gasoline service station
 
16


Gelatin, glue or size manufacture
 
27


General business office
 
11


General merchandising, NEC
 
15


Gift shop
 
14


Glass store
 
15


Glass manufacturing and blowing
 
25


Glue, gelatin or size manufacture
 
27


Glucose manufacture
 
27


Go-cart track
 
20


Golf course
 
4


Golf driving range
 
20


Golf, miniature
 
19


Governmental services NEC
 
2


Grain elevator
 
25


Graphite manufacture
 
25


Gravel, sand and stone operation
 
24


Greenhouse, retail sales
 
15


Grocery store
 
14


Group home
 
7


Gun club
 
20


Gun store
 
14


Gun smith
 
14


Gymnasium
 
19


Gypsum manufacture
 
27


(H)


Hardware store
 
14


Health club
 
19


Health food store
 
14


Heating construction contract service
 
26


Heating equipment
 
15


Heavy construction contracting service
 
25


Heliport
 
2


Historical marker
 
1


Hobby shop
 
14


Home furnishing store
 
14


Home occupation
 
28


Horticulture
 
0


Horticultural nursery / retail sales
 
14


Hospital
 
4


Hotel
 
19


Household appliance repair
 
15


Hydroelectric generation plant
 
2


(I)


Ice cream store
 
13


Ice plant
 
15


Ice skating rink
 
19


Incineration, reduction of dead animals
 
27


Ink manufacture
 
27


Insecticide manufacture
 
27


Insurance services
 
11


Interior decorating with retail sales
 
14


Interior design consultant with no retail sales
 
11


Instant bank machine
 
13


Iron smelting
 
27


(J)


Jail
 
2


Janitorial service
 
15


Jewelry repair
 
14


Jewelry store
 
14


Junk yard
 
27


Juvenile delinquency, center
 
2


(K)


Kennel
 
15


(L)


Laboratory, medical and dental
 
11


Lamp black manufacture
 
26


Landscape contractor
 
15


Language school
 
15


Laundromat, self-service
 
14


Laundry, industrial
 
25


Laundry, pick-up
 
13


Laundry, service
 
15


Leather goods store
 
14


Library
 
4


Lime, cement, Plaster or Paris manufacture
 
27


Linen supply
 
15


Linoleum manufacture
 
26


Liquor store
 
14


Livestock pasturing operation
 
0


Loan office
 
11


Locksmith
 
14


Lodge
 
4


Lubrication and oil service
 
16


Luggage store
 
14


Lumber yard
 
15


(M)


Machine shop
 
25


Manufactured home
 
8


Marina
 
4


Masonry construction service
 
25


Massage parlor
 
15


Match manufacturing
 
27


Mattress and pillow repair
 
15


Mausoleum
 
2


Meat market
 
14


Meat / fish processing plant
 
26


Medical clinic, lab
 
11


Medical, dental supply
 
14


Metal foundry
 
27


Metal and / or silver plating and polishing
 
26


Mineral extraction
 
24


Mineral products processing
 
24


Miniature auto track
 
20


Miniature golf course
 
19


Mining (coal, gas, gravel, oil, ores, stone, sand and other minerals)
 
24


Mini-storage
 
11


Mobile home
 
9


Mobile home sales
 
17


Modular home
 
8


Model home for display only
 
15


Modeling school
 
15


Monastery
 
7


Monument sales / excluding shaping
 
15


Monument sales and shaping
 
26


Motel
 
19


Motion picture, theater, enclosed
 
12


Motorcycle sales
 
17


Moving and storage facility
 
23


Multifamily dwelling
 
7


Museum
 
4


Musical instrument sales
 
14


Musical instrument manufacture
 
25


Music school
 
15


(N)


Newspaper publishing
 
15


Newsstand
 
14


Night club
 
12


Novelty
 
14


Novitiate
 
7


Nursery, horticulture / retail sales
 
15


Nursery, school
 
4


Nursing home
 
7


Nut store
 
13


(O)


Office building
 
11


Office furnishing sales
 
14


Office machine sales
 
14


Office and studio
 
11


Office supplies
 
14


Off premises
 
21


Off-street parking
 
10


Oil cloth or linoleum manufacture
 
26


Oil and gas well drilling
 
24


Oil and lubrication service
 
16


Oil refinery
 
27


Oil well cleaning contract service
 
25


On premises sign
 
21


Optician or optical lab
 
11


Orthopedic appliance supply
 
14


Other trades and services
 
15


Outdoor advertising
 
21


Outdoor recreation, NEC
 
20


Overnight campground, recreational vehicles
 
20


(P)


Packing and crating of goods
 
15


Painting contractor
 
15


Painting contractor / storage / industrial
 
26


Paint store
 
14


Paint, oil varnish, turpentine manufacture
 
27


Paper hanging
 
15


Paper or pulp manufacture by sulfide process
 
27


Parking
 
10


Parking garage
 
10


Parking lot
 
10


Patio home
 
6


Pawn shop
 
14


Pet shop
 
14


Petroleum refining
 
27


Petroleum and gas extraction
 
24


Pharmacy
 
13


Pharmacy (provide no sundry or other merchandise sold)
 
11


Phonograph and record sales
 
14


Photocopying
 
11


Photo finishing
 
14


Photography studio
 
11


Photography supply store
 
14


Pickle, sausage, sauerkraut, vinegar manufacture
 
26


Picture framing
 
14


Planetarium
 
4


Planting
 
1


Plastering contractor
 
15


Plaster of Paris manufacture
 
27


Plastic products manufacture
 
25


Plastic materials sales
 
15


Plastic raw material, powder and resin manufacture
 
27


Plumbing fixture sales
 
14


Plumbing shop
 
14


Plumbing contractor
 
15


Political campaign sign
 
1


Pool hall
 
19


Porcelain products manufacture
 
25


Portable storage building sales
 
15


Post office
 
2


Poultry farming
 
0


Pressure control station
 
3


Printing and publishing
 
15


Printing ink manufacture
 
26


Prison
 
2


Private club or lodge
 
4


Processing of mineral products
 
24


Protective shelter
 
4


Public park
 
4


Public tennis court
 
4


(Q)


Quarrying (coal, gravel, ores, sands, stone and other minerals)
 
24


Quadruplex (dwellings)
 
6


(R)


Race track, auto, dog, horse
 
20


Racquetball club
 
19


Radio repair & television repair
 
14


Radio station
 
11


Radio & television sales
 
14


Rayon or cellophane manufacture
 
27


Record shop
 
14


Recording studio
 
11


Recreation, indoor commercial
 
19


Recreation, vehicle sales
 
17


Recycling center / collection point (aluminum, glass, paper, plastic)
 
15


Recycling center / collection / processing (NEC)
 
27


Reducing salon
 
14


Refining, bio-fuel, petroleum and other crude materials
 
27


Refuse dump
 
27


Rendering plant
 
27


Reproduction services
 
15


Research, scientific
 
22


Reservoir
 
1


Resident hotel
 
7


Residential:


Single-family (detached)
 
5


Single-family (attached)
 
6


Duplex
 
6


Manufactured home
 
8


Modular home
 
8


Mobile home
 
9


Multifamily
 
7


Patio home
 
6


Quadruplex
 
6


Townhouse
 
6


Zero lot-line home
 
6


Residential treatment center
 
4


Restaurant
 
12


Restaurant, drive-in
 
18


Retirement housing, retirement center
 
7


Re-upholstering
 
15


Rifle and skeet range / gun club
 
20


Rifle range enclosed
 
19


Roadside stand
 
0


Rodeo grounds
 
20


Rolling mill
 
27


Roofing construction service
 
25


Roofing manufacture
 
27


Rooming house
 
7


Rubber manufacture
 
27


Rug cleaners
 
15


Rug repair
 
15


(S)


Salvage yards, NEC
 
27


Sand operation
 
24


Sanitarium
 
7


Sanitary landfill
 
27


Sausage manufacturer
 
26


Savings and loan with drive-through window
 
13


Savings and loan without drive-through window
 
11


Satellite communication antennas (private)
 
153.024(D)


Schools:


Art
 
15


Ballet
 
15


Barber
 
15


Beauty
 
15


Business
 
15


Dance
 
15


Drama
 
15


Fine arts
 
15


Language
 
15


Nursery
 
4


Modeling
 
15


Music
 
15


Public
 
4


Trade
 
15


Other schools offering a compulsory education curriculum
 
4


Scientific research, testing, development
 
22


Self-service laundromat
 
14


Services and protection
 
3


Service station
 
16


Sewage disposal facility
 
2


Sheet metal construction
 
26


Shelter, civil defense, storm
 
3


Shoddy manufacturing (yam, fabric, woolen)
 
27


Shoe store
 
14


Shoe repair
 
14


Shopping goods and services
 
14


Sign advertising
 
21


Sign painting
 
15


Single-family attached dwelling
 
6


Single-family detached dwelling
 
5


Size manufacturer
 
27


Skateboard track
 
20


Skating rink, enclosed
 
19


Slaughtering of animals, NEC
 
27


Slot car track
 
19


Smelting
 
27


Soap manufacturing
 
26


Soda ash, caustic soda & washing compound manufacture
 
27


Sorority house
 
7


Souvenir shop
 
14


Soy bean refining
 
27


Sporting goods store
 
14


Stadium
 
20


Stationery shop
 
14


Stereo shop
 
14


Stock yard
 
27


Stock, live
 
0


Stonework contracting service
 
25


Storage, general, NEC
 
23


Storage of dismantled autos or any form of junk
 
27


Street sign
 
1


Studio and office
 
11


Sugar refining
 
27


Supermarket
 
14


Swimming pool enclosed
 
19


(T)


Tailor shop
 
14


Tallow, grease, lard manufacture or refining
 
27


Tank farm, petroleum
 
27


Tanning salon
 
14


Tanning or leather or hide
 
27


Tar distillation or manufacture
 
27


Tar roofing manufacture
 
27


Tavern
 
12


Tax service
 
11


Taxi service
 
17


Taxidermist
 
15


Television repair
 
14


Television sales
 
14


Television station
 
11


Tennis club or commercial courts
 
19


Tennis court public
 
4


Tent revival
 
2


Textile manufacture
 
26


Theater, enclosed
 
12


Theater, motion picture, enclosed
 
12


Thoroughfare
 
1


Ticket office
 
11


Tile or terra cotta manufacture
 
27


Tile setting service
 
15


Tobacco shop
 
14


Townhouse
 
6


Toy shop
 
4


Trade school
 
15


Trades emitting objectionable odor, heat, smoke noise
 
27


Trailer sales / rental
 
17


Transitional living center
 
4


Transmitting tower
 
3


Transportation ticket office
 
11


Travel agency
 
11


Tree farming
 
0


Truck rentals
 
17


Truck sales
 
17


Trucking establishments
 
23


Turpentine manufacture
 
27


Tune-up service
 
16


(U)


University
 
4


Upholstery repair / re-upholstery
 
15


(V)


Variety store
 
14


Varnish manufacture
 
27


Vehicle repair and service
 
17


Vending machine sales
 
15


Veterinarian clinic (small animals, all activities in building,


  no exterior runs)
 
11


Veterinarian clinic/hospital (excluding outside animal runs)
 
14


Veterinarian (outside cages and outside animal runs)
 
15


Vinegar manufacture
 
27


Video games arcade (not an adult amusement center)
 
19


(W)


Wall paper store
 
14


Warehouses, NEC
 
23


Washing compound manufacture
 
26


Waste paper salvage and reclamation
 
27


Waste water treatment plant
 
2


Watch repair
 
14


Water slide / water park (outdoor)
 
20


Water storage facility
 
3


Water treatment plant
 
2


Water well drilling and cleaning service
 
26


Welding shop
 
26


Wholesale establishments, NEC
 
23


Wig shop
 
14


Window cleaning
 
15


Wildlife preserve
 
1


Woodworking shop
 
15


Wool scouring, hair manufacture
 
26


(Y)


Yeast manufacturing
 
27


(Z)


Zero lot-line home
 
6




 



(Ord. 12-16, passed 8-8-12)


Disclaimer:
This Code of Ordinances and/or any other documents that appear on this site
may not reflect the most current legislation adopted by the Municipality.
American Legal Publishing Corporation provides these documents for
informational purposes only. These documents should not be relied upon as the
definitive authority for local legislation. Additionally, the formatting and
pagination of the posted documents varies from the formatting and pagination
of the official copy. The official printed copy of a Code of Ordinances
should be consulted prior to any action being taken.

For further information regarding the official version of any of this Code of
Ordinances or other documents posted on this site, please contact the
Municipality directly or contact American Legal Publishing toll-free at
800-445-5588.


                 © 2019 American Legal Publishing Corporation
                            techsupport@amlegal.com
                                1.800.445.5588.




CHAPTER 154:  ECONOMIC REVITALIZATION AREAS



Section



   154.01   Fee collected



§ 154.01  FEE COLLECTED.



   (A)   The Clerk-Treasurer shall collect a fee for each application
requesting the designation of a particular area as an economic revitalization
area.



   (B)   The fee shall be collected from the person requesting the
economic revitalization area designation.



   (C)   The fee shall be sufficient to defray actual processing and
administrative costs and shall be in the amount equal to:



      (1)   The cost of publishing the required notice; and



      (2)   Twenty five cents for each page reproduced of every
document in the regular course of business for the presentation, discussion,
and vote, of the tax abatement application. However, the application fee
charged for filing a designation application for a parcel that contains one
or more owner-occupied, single-family dwellings shall not exceed the cost of
publishing the required notice.



   (D)   The fee must be paid and the Clerk-Treasurer shall collect the
fee prior to the City Council's confirmation.



(Ord. 89-37, passed 11-27-89)



CHAPTER 155:  COMPREHENSIVE PLAN



Section



   155.01   Comprehensive Plan; adopted by reference



§ 155.01  COMPREHENSIVE PLAN; ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   The City of Mount Vernon’s Comprehensive Plan is hereby adopted by
reference and incorporated herein as if set out in full.



(Res. 08-34, passed 11-24-08; Am. Res. 08-35, passed 11-24-08)


