/
\
(
CITY OF NAPPANEE, INDIANA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
Local legislation current through Ord. 1490 passed 8-8-14
State legislation current through 2014 A.L.S. Pamphlet #5
AMERICAN LEGAL PUBLISIDNG CORPORATION
432 Walnut Street Cincinnati, Ohio 45202-3909 (800) 445-5588
COPYRIGHT "'2015
AMERICAN LEGAL PUBLISHING CORPORATION
Chapter
NAPPANEE, INDIANA
TABLE OF CONTENTS
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
10. General Provisions
11. City Standards
Appendix: City Seal
TITLE ID: ADMINISTRATION
30. General Governmental Organization
31. City Council
Appendix: Amending Ordinance Form
32. City Officials
33. City Court
34. City Policies
35. Boards, Cbmmissions, and Departments
36. Ordinance Violations Bureau
37. Funds
38. Fees
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
50. Water
51. Sewers
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
70. General Provisions
71. Traffic Rules
72. _ Pedestrians and Non-Motorized Vehicles
73. Parking Regulatiom
74. Traffic Schedules
75. Parkillg Schedules
1
2
Table
2016 S-1
Nappanee ~ Table of Contents
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
90. Alarm SystemB
91. Fair Housing
92. Fire Prevention
93. Health and Sanitation; Nuisances
94. Abandoned or Junk Vehicles
95. Streets and Sidewalks
96. Street Tree Regulations
97. Parks and Recreation
98.. Animals
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
110. General Licensing Procedwes
111. Business Licensing
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
130. General Offenses
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
150. Building Regulations; Construction
151. Electrical Installation Regulations
152. Unsafe Buildings and Structures
153. Historic Preservation
154. Flood Hazard Areas
155. Zoning and Subdivision Control
156. Minimum Housing Code
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
I. Annexations
II. Vacations of Streets and Alleys
ill. Franchise Agreements
IV. Zoning Map Changes
Table of Contents
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Indiana Code
References to 1983 Code
References to Ordinances
INDEX
3
4 Nappanee - Table of Contents
' '
Chapter
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
10. GENERAL PROVISIONS
11. CITY ST AND ARDS
APPENDIX: CITY SEAL
1
2 Nappanee - General Provisions
)
~,
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
10.01 Title of code
10.02
10.03
10.04
10.05
10.06
10.07
10.08
10.09
10.10
10.11
10.12
10.13
10.14
10.15
10.16
Interpretation
Application to future ordinances
Construction of code
Rules of interpretation; definitions
Severability
Reference to other sections
Reference to offices; name designations
Errors and omissions
Reasonable time
Repeal or modification of code section
Limitation periods
Ordinances unaffected
Ordinances which amend or supplement code
Section histories; statutory references
Preservation of penalties, offenses, rights, and liabilities
10.99 General penalty
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the city, as revised, codified, rearranged,
renillllbered, and consolidated into component codes, titles, chapters, and sections, shall be known and
designated as the "City Code," for which designation "code of ordinances," "codified ordinances," or
"code" may be substituted. Code title, chapter, and section headings do not constitute any part of the
law as contained in the code.
§ 10.02 INTERPRETATION.
Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the same rules of construction,
definition, and application shall govern the interpretation of this code as those governing the
interpretation of state law.
3
4 Nappanee - General Provisions
§ 10.03 APPLICATION TO FUfURE ORDINANCES.
All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall apply to ordinances hereafter
adopted amending or supplementing this code, unless otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.04 CONSTRUCTION OF CODE.
(A) This code is a codification of previously existing laws, amendments thereto, and newly enacted
laws. Any previously existing law or amendment thereto reenacted by this code shall continue in
operation and effect, as if it had not been repealed by this code. All rules and regulations adopted under
laws reenacted in this code shall remain in full force and effect unless repealed or amended subsequent
to the enactment of this code.
(B) Any appropriation repealed and reenacted by this code is continued only for the period
designated in the original enactment of that appropriation.
(C) The numerical order and position of sections in this code does not resolve a conflict between
two or more sections.
(D) Any irreconcilable conflict between sections shall be resolved by reference to the dates that the
sections were originally enacted. The section most recently enacted supersedes any conflicting section
or division.
(E) All references within a section of this code to any section of previously existing laws refer to
the numbers iu the original enactment.
(F) (1) The numerical designations and descriptive headings assigned to the various titles, chapters,
subchapters. or sections of this code, as originally eriacted, or as added by amendment, are not law, and
may be altered by the compilers of this or any subsequent codification, in any official publication, to
more clearly indicate its con.tent. These descriptive headings are for organizational purposes only, and
do not affect the meaning, application, or construction of the law they precede.
(2) Each note following a section of this code is for reference purposes only, and is not a part
of the section.
(G) All references to any section of this code refer to all subsequent amendments to that section,
unless otherwise provided.
(l.C, 1-1-1-5)
' .
' ' '
General Provisions 5
§ 10.05 RULES OF INTERPRETATION; DEFINITIONS.
(A) Rules uf interpretation. This code shall be construed by the following rules unless that
construction is plainly repugnant to the legislative intent or context of the provision.
(1) Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain, ordinary, and usual sense. Technical
words and phrases having a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to
their technical import.
(2) Words imputing joint authority to three or more persons shall be construed as imputing
authority to a majority of these persons, unless otherwise declared in the section giving the authority.
(3) Where a section requires an act to be done which, by law, an agent or deputy may perform
in addition to the principal, the performance of the act by an authorized deputy or agent is valid.
(4) Words denoting the masculine gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter
genders; words in the singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall include the singular;
the use of a verb in the present tense shall include the future, if applicable.
(B) Definitions. For the purpose of this code of ordinances, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
CITY. The City of Nappanee, Indiana.
CLERK-TREASURER. The Clerk-Treasurer of the city.
COUNCIL. The City Council.
COUNTY. Elkhart and Kosciusko Counties, in which the city is located.
HIGHWAY. Includes bridges, roads, and streets, unless otherwise expressly provided.
MONTH. One calendar month.
PERSON. Extends to and includes: an individual or other entity, including but not limited to,
a firm, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, trustee, lessee, or receiver. Whenever used
in any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER as applied to any
unincorporated entity shall mean the partners or members thereof, and as applied to corporations, the
officers or agents thereof.
PRECEDING and FOUOWING. When referring to sections or divisions in this code, refer
to the sections or divisions next following or next preceding that in which the words occur, unless some
.~_./ ; other section is designated.
6 Nappanee - General Provisions
TOWNSHIP. The township or townships in which the city is located.
WRITTEN and IN WRITING. Include printing, lithographing, or other modes of representing
words and letters. Where the written signature of a person is required, the terms mean the proper
handwriting of the person, or the person's mark.
YEAR. One calendar year, unless otherwise expressly provided.
(J.C. 1·1-4·5)
§ 10.06 SEVERABILITY.
(A) If any section of this code now enacted or subsequently amended or its application to any person
or circumstances is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect other sections that can be given effect
without the invalid section or application.
(B) Except in the case of a section or amendment to this code containing a nonseverability
provision, each division or part of every section is severable. If any portion or application of a section
is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect the remainder of the section unless:
(1) The remainder is so essentially and inseparably connected with and so dependent upon the
invalid provision or application that it cannot be presumed that the remainder would have been enacted
without the invalid provision or application; or
(2) The remainder is incomplete and incapable of being executed in accordance with the
legislative intent without the invalid provision or application.
(C) This section applies to every section of this code regardless of whether a section was enacted
before or after the passage of this code.
(I.C. 1-1-1-8)
§ 10.07 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
Whenever, in one section, reference is made to another section hereof, that reference shall extend
and apply to the section referred to as subsequently amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered, unless
the subject matter is changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.08 REFERENCE TO OFFICES; NAME DESIGNATIONS.
(A) Reference to offices. Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer, or employee of this municipality exercising the powers, duties, or functions contemplated
in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
'
General Provisions 7
(B) Name designations. Whenever any ordinance or resolution of the Council refers to any board,
bureau, commission, division, department, officer, agency, authority, or instrumentality of any
govermnent, and that name designation is incorrectly stated; or at the time of the effective date of that
ordinance or subsequent thereto, the rights, powers, duties, or liabilities placed with that entity are or
were transferred to a different entity; then the named board, bureau, commission, department, division,
officer, agency, authority, or instrumentality, whether correctly named in the ordinance at its effective
date or not, means that correctly named entity, or the entity to which the relevant duties, liabilities,
powers, and rights were transferred.
(J.C. 1-1-6-1)
§ 10.09 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any words; the omission of any
word or words necessary to express the intention of the provisions affected; the use of a word or words
to which no meaning can be attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was
clearly intended to express that intent, the spelling shall be corrected and a word or words supplied,
omitted, or substituted as will conform with the manifest intention, and the provisions shall have the
same effect as though the correct words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration
shall be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of such an error.
§ 10.10 REASONABLE TIME.
(A) In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a reasonable time or requires
reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time or notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is
necessary for a prompt performance of the act or the giving of notice.
(B) The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall be computed by excluding
the first day and including the last. If the last day be a Saturday, Sunday, or a state holiday, it shall be
excluded, or other day on which the public office, in which the act is to be done, is closed shall be
excluded, however, if the act to be performed need not take place in a public office such last day shall
be included.
§ 10.11 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF CODE SECTION.
When a section of this code is repealed which repealed a former section or law adopted prior to the
enactment of this code, the former section or law is not revived unless it so expressly provides. The
repeal of any section shall not extinguish or release any penalty, forfeiture, or liability incurred under
that section, unless the repealing section so expressly provides. The section shall be treated as still
remaining in force for the purposes of sustaining any proper action or prosecution for the enforcement
of a penalty, forfeiture, or liability.
(I.e. 1-1-5-1)
8 Nappanee ~ General Provisions
§ 10.12 LIMITATION PERIODS.
The running of any period of limitations or any requirement of notice contained in any law, whether
applicable to civil causes or proceedings, or to the prosecution of offenses, or for the recovery of
penalties and forfeitures, contained in a law repealed and reenacted by this code, shall not be affected
by the repeal and reenactment; but all suits, proceedings, and prosecutions for causes arising or acts
committed prior to the effective date of this code may be commenced and prosecuted with the same effect
as if this code had not been enacted.
Statutory reference:
Periods of limitation, see !. C. 1-1-1-7
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances pertaining to subjects not
embraced in this code shall remain in full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by
necessary implication,
§ 10.14 ORDINANCES WlilCH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
(A) If the legislative body shall desire to amend any existing chapter or section of this code, the
chapter or section shall be specifically repealed and a new chapter or section, containing the desired
amendment, substituted in its place.
(B) Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a new chapter or section shall
indicate, with reference to the arrangement of this code, the proper number of that chapter or section.
In addition to any indication thereof as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a caption or
title shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.
§ 10.15 SECTION IDSTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.
(A) As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage date of the original
ordinance, and the most recent three amending ordinances, if any, are listed following the text of the
code section. Example: (Ord. 10, passed 5-13-60; Am. Ord. 15, passed 1-1-70; Am. Ord. 20, passed
1-1-80; Am. Ord. 25, passed 1-1-85)
(B) (1) If a statutory cite is included in the history, this indicates that the text of the section reads
substantially 1he same as 1he statute. Example: (J.C. 36-5-2-2) (Ord. 10, passed 1-17-80; Am. Ord .
. 20, passed 1-1-85)
(2) If a statutory cite is set forth as a "statutory reference" following the text of the section,
this indicates that the reader should refer to that statute for further information. Example:
,,
General Provisions 9
§ 39.01 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
This municipality shall make available to any person for inspection or copying all public records, unless
otherwise exempted by state law.
Statutory rejerencu:
Inspection of public records, see I. C. 5-14-3-1 et seq.
§ 10.16 PRESERVATION OF PENALTIES, OFFENSES, RIGHTS, AND LIABILITIES.
All offenses committed under laws in force prior to the effective date of this code shall be prosecuted
and remain punishable as provided by those laws. This code does not affect any rights or liabilities
accrued, penalties incurred, or proceedings begun prior to the effective date of this code. The liabilities,
proceedings, and rights are continued; punishments, penalties, or forfeitures shall be enforced and
imposed as if this code had not been enacted. In particular, any agreement granting permission to utilize
highway rights-of-way, contracts entered into or franchises granted, the acceptance, establishment, or
vacation of any highway, and the election of corporate officers shall remain valid in all respects, as if
this code had not been enacted.
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
Any person, fum, or corporation who violates any provision of this code for which another penalty
is not specifically provided shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine not exceeding $2,500. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during which a violation occurs or continues.
Statutory reference:
Power to prescribe fines up to $2,500 granted, see J.C. 36-1-3-B(a)(JO)
JO Nappanee - General Provisions
CHAPTER 11: CITY STANDARDS
Section
11.01 City Seal
Appendix: City Seal
§ 11.01 CITY SEAL.
(A) The City Seal is described as "wheels of industry in an agricultural area" and is depicted as
shown in the appendix to this chapter.
(B) The Clerk-Treasurer shall be the custodian of the City Seal and affix it to documents and
instruments as required.
(' 83 Code. § 1-5)
11
12 Nappanee~ General Provisions
13
City Standards
APPENDIX: CITY SEAL
C 83 Code,§ 1-5)
___ / ' }
14 Nappanee ~ General Provisions
' '
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
Chapter
30. GENERAL GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATION
31. CITY COUNCIL
APPENDIX: AMENDING ORDINANCE FORM
32. CITY OFFICIALS
' 33. CITY COURT
i '
'
34. CITY POLICIES
35. BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, AND DEPARTMENTS
36. ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS BUREAU
37. FUNDS
38. FEES
1
2 Nappanee - Administration
CHAPTER 30: GENERAL GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATION
Section
30.01 Government branches established
§ 30.01 GOVERNMENT BRANCHES ESTABLISHED.
The government of the city shall consist of the following branches:
(A) Executive branch;
o:.c. 36-4-5)
(B) Legislative branch;
(I.C. 36-4-6)
(C) Fiscal branch;
(I.C. 36-4-10)
(D) Judicial branch; and
(E) Statutory boards and commissions.
('83 Code,§ 2-1)
3
4 Nappanee ~ Administration
1\
, I
, : I
,_,/ ,
Section
3LOI
31.02
31.03
31.04
31.05
31.06
31.07
3L08
3L09
3LIO
3Lll
31.12
CHAPTER 31: CITY COUNCIL
General Provisions
City Council; composition and authority
Clerk of the Council
Presiding officer
Meetings; date and time
Order of business
Meetings; behavior
Questions of order
Appeal from decision of presiding officer
Suspension of order of business
Robert's Rules of Order
Special meetings
Four Councilmanic Districts; member at large
Ordinances and Resolutions
31.25 Ordinances and resolutions; introduction and adoption.
31.26 Amendments to code; form
Standing Committees of the City Council
31.40 Establishment; committee member appointment
31.41 Committee on Finance
31.42 Committee on By-Laws, Ordinances, and Resolutions
Appendix: Amending Ordinance Form
Statutory reference:
Common Councils of third class cities, see I. C. 36-4-6-1, 36-4-6-2, and 36-4-6-5
First meeting of the year, see I. C. 36-4-6-7
Special meetings, see I. C. 36-4-6-7
5
6 Nappanee - Administration
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 31.01 CITY COUNCIL; COMPOSITION AND AUTHORITY.
(A) The legislative branch of the city is the City Council.
(B) The City Council shall be composed of five members, all of whom shall be elected by all the
voters at large; four of whom shall be residents of Districts, and one of whom shall be elected from the
Councilmanic Districts at large. The Districts are described in§ 31.12 of this code. Redistricting of
Councilmanic Districts shall be done at least every ten years hereafter in accordance with I.C. 36-4-6-4
and 36-4-6-5.
(C) The Council shall have exclusive authority to adopt ordinances and appropriate tax monies
received by the city and to perform other necessary and desirable legislative functions.
(' 83 Code, § 3-1)
§ 31.02 CLERK OF THE COUNCIL.
The Clerk-Treasurer shall be the Clerk of the Council and shall perform the duties prescribed by
l.C. 36-4-6-9, and others as the Council may direct.
('83 Code,§ 3-3)
§ 31.03 PRESIDING OFFICER.
The Mayor, or, in his or her absence, the Deputy Mayor, stia.ll be the presiding officer of the
Council pursuant to I.C. 36-4-6-8, and meetings shall be conducted pursuant to the applicable statutes
J.C. 36-4-6-10 through 36-4-6-17.
(' 83 Code, § 3-4)
§ 31.04 MEETINGS; DATE AND TIME.
The regular meetings of the City Council shall be on the first and third Mondays of each month at
7p.m. EST.
(' 83 Code, § 3-2)
§ 31.05 ORDER OF BUSINESS.
The following order of business shall be followed at a meeting of the City Council:
' '
City Council 7
(A) Calling to order;
(B) Roll call by Clerk-Treasurer;
(C) Reading minutes and approval;
(D) Petitions or comments of citizens;
(E) Reports of committees, boards, and commissions;
(F) Unfinished business, including ordinances or resolutions already introduced;
(G) New business, including introduction of ordinances and resolutions;
(H) Approval of claims against the city;
(I) Miscellaneous business, including matters not already considered; and
(J) Adjournment.
C 83 Code, § 3-5)
§ 31.06 MEETINGS; BEHAVIOR.
No person shall use violent or contemptuous language, behave in a disorderly manner, or refuse to
obey the orders of the Mayor or presiding officer in the council room while the City Council is in
session. The Mayor or presiding officer may order the removal from the council room of anyone who
intentionally disturbs the decorum of a Council meeting. The Police Chief or his or her nominee from
the Police Department shall serve as Sergeant-at-Arms and maintain the appropriate decorum of a
Council meeting.
C 83 Code, § 3-6)
§ 31.07 QUESTIONS OF ORDER.
The Mayor or presiding officer shall decide all questions of order. He or she shall decide whether
any question submitted to the Council for adoption or rejection is decided in the affirmative or negative.
C 83 Code, § 3-8)
8 Nappanee - Administration
§ 31.08 APPEAL FROM DECISION OF PRESIDING OFFICER.
From any decision of the presiding officer, any member may appeal to the Council. The appeal
shall be by motion duly made and seconded. A majority vote as defined in I.C. 36-4-6-11 is necessary
to overrule the chair.
C 83 Code, § 3-9)
§ 31.09 SUSPENSION OF ORDER OF BUSINESS.
The order of business may be suspended by a two-thirds vote of the members of the Council.
C 83 Code, § 3-10)
§ 31.10 ROBERT'S RULES OF ORDER.
Any matter not addressed by this chapter shall be governed by Robert's Rules of Order.
C 83 Code, § 3-11)
§ 31.11 SPECIAL MEETINGS.
Special meetings shall be held on the call of the Mayor or upon written request of any three members
of the Council to be filed with the Clerk-Treasurer and notice thereof to be served by the Clerk-Treasurer
by mail or hand delivery. Notice shall be served upon the Mayor and each mei:iiber of the City Council
who shall then be in the city or by order of adjournment at any meeting, without other noti9e.
(' 83 Code, § 3-12) ·
§ 31.12 FOUR COUNCIIMANIC DISTRICTS; MEMBER AT LARGE.
(A) The city shall be and the same is divided into four Councilmanic Districts, the same to be
Imown as District 1, District 2, District 3, and District 4.
(B) Councilmanic District 1 shall include all that part of the city bounded as follows: Commencing
at the center of North Main Street at its intersection with the centerline of Marion Street in the city, east
195. 75 feet to the ce~terlil).e of the north·south alley, which is the beginning point of this description and
running thence east in the center of Marion Street to the east line of the Northwest Quarter of Section
31 which is the east line of Stauffer's Sixth Addition; thence north on the east line of the Northwest
Quarter of Section 31 to a point 200 feet north of the south line of the Southwest Quarter of Section 30;
thence running east to centerline of County Road 7; thence running north on the centerline of County
Road 7 to the south boundary line of the subdivision known as Heritage Farms; thence east 403.50 feet
thence south 539.98 feet thence east 1243.38 feet along the south boundary line of Heritage Farms
Subdivision; thence north 961.48 feet along the east boundary of Heritage Farms subdivision; thence
west 373. 14 feet thence north 252 feet thence west 918.04 feet along the north boundary line of Heritage
I '
· .. '\
I
City Council 9
Farms Subdivision thence north 100 feet thence west approximately 357 .25 feet to the centerline of
North Oakland Avenue (County Road 7); thence running north on the centerline of North Oakland
Avenue (County Road 7) to the east boundary of the property known as 1570 East Woodview Drive;
thence north on the east boundary line of 1570 East Woodview Drive approximately 380 feet to the north
boundary line of 1570 East Woodview Drive; thence running in a westerly and northerly direction along
the city's northern boundary line to the east boundary line of properties owned and occupied by WaNee
Community Schools (Panther Drive); thence northwardly and eastwardly along the perimeter of those
school lands to the center of Elkhart County Road 150; thence west along the centerline of that County
Road to the centerline of the intersection of State Highway 19; thence south along North Main Street in
the City, to the intersection of North Main Street and the northwest corner of Northwood Lot 17 (1407
North Main Street); thence east along the north property line of Northwood Lot 17 approximately 250.00
feet to the northeast corner of said Northwood Lot 17; thence south along the east property lines of
Northwood Lots 17 through Northwood Lots 23; thence continuing approximately 40 feet to the
centerline of Heritage Parkway; thence east approximately 135 feet to the intersection of Heritage
Parkway and Northwood Drive; thence southeasterly along the centerline_ of Northwood Drive
approximately 500 feet; thence southwardly along the property line of the First Presbyterian Church of
Nappanee, Inc. (North Main Street) 351.12 feet; thence south 278.83 feet to the northeast corner of
property owned by Northwood Professional Associates, Inc. (1001 North Main Street); thence continuing
south along the aforesaid property line 412.76 feet to the southeast comer of said property; thence east
approximately 170.00 feet to a point being approximately the centerline of the south property line of
Northwood Professional Associates, Inc. (1001 North Main Street); thence south approximately 198.00
feet along the north-south alley (extended) to the centerline of Berlin Court Ditch; thence continuing
south along the centerline of the north-south alley to the centerline of Marion Street; which is the
beginning point of this description.
(C) District 2 shall consist of all of that part of the city bounded as follows: Commencing at the
center of the intersection of North Main Street and West Centennial Street and running west along the
centerline of West Centennial Street to the centerline of North Guiss Street; thence south to the centerline
of West Market Street (US Highway 6); thence west along the center of West Market Street to the west
boundary line of the City of Nappanee; thence north along the west boundary of the city a distance of
2132.56 feet to the northwest boundary of the City of Nappanee; thence east to the southwest corner of
the property known as 700 No. Tomahawk Trail (Borkholder Dutch Village); thence north a distance
of 656.8 feet to the northwest corner of 700 North Tomahawk Trail (Borkholder Dutch Village); thence
east approximately 330 feet to the southwest corner of the property known as 968 Tomahawk Trail;
thence north 250 .00 feet; thence east 522. 71863 feet to the centerline of North Tomahawk Trail; thence
south along the centerline of North Tomahawk Trail a distance of 906.80 feet; thence easterly and
northwardly following the northerly city limits of the city to a point 430 feet north of the centerline of
County Road 52; thence east 280 feet to the centerline of State Highway 19; thence north along the
centerline of State Highway 19 to the southeast property line of the property located at 2450 North Main
Street; thence west approximately 525 feet; thence north on the boundary line of the city to the northwest
corner of the property known as 1001 North Main Street; thence east along the boundary line of the city
to the centerline of State Road 19 approximately 525 feet; thence south along the centerline of State
Highway 19 and North Main Street in the city to the northwest corner of the property known as
Northwood Lot 17 (1407 North Main Street); thence east along the north property line of Northwood.
Lot 17 approximately 250.00 feet to the northeast corner of said Northwood Lot 17; thence south along
10 Nappanee - Administration
the east property lines of Northwood Lots 17 through Northwood Lots 23; thence continuing
approximately 40 feet to the centerline of Heritage Parkway; thence east approximately 135 feet to the
intersection of Heritage Parkway and Northwood Drive; thence southeasterly along the centerline of
Northwood D.rive approximately 500 feet; thence southwardly along the property line of the First
Presbyterian Church of Nappanee, Inc. (North Main Street) 351.12 feet; thence south 278.83 feet to the
northeast corner of property owned by Northwood Professional Associates, Inc. (1001 North Main
Street); thence continuing south along the aforesaid property line 432. 76 feet to the southeast corner of
said property; thence east approximately 170. 00 feet to a point being approximately the centerline of the
south property line of Northwood Professional Associates, Inc. (3001 North Main Street); thence south
approximately 198.00 feet along the north-south alley (extended) to the centerline of Berlin Court Ditch;
thence continuing south along the centerline of the north·south alley to the centerline of Marion Street;
thence west to the centerline of North Main Street in the city; thence south on the centerline of North
Main Street to the intersection of North Main Street and Centennial Street being the place of beginning
of this description.
(D) District 3 shall consist of all of that part of the city bounded as follows: Commencing at the
center of the intersection of North Main Street and West Centennial Street and running west along the
centerline of West Centennial Street to the centerline of North Guiss Street; thence south to the centerline
of West Market Street (US Highway 6); thence west along the center of West Market Street to the west
city boundary line; thence south to the north line of lands owned by the Baltimore & Ohio Railroad
Company; thence running eastwardly along the north line of these lands of the Baltimore & Ohio
Railroad Company to the west line of the southeast quarter of Section 36; thence south along the west
line of the southeast quarter of Section 36 to the southwest corner of the southeast quarter of Section 36,
this corner being at the junction of Elkhart and Kosciusko Counties; thence east along the County Line
to the center of South Main Street; thence south along the centerline of South Main Street (State Highway
19) 493 feet to the south line of Haney Street; thence east along the south line of Haney Street
approximately 714.15 feet to the east line of South Madison Street extended; thence north on the east
line of South Madison Street extended to the County Line; thence east along the County Line to the
centerline of South Jackson Street; thence north to the centerline of East Walnut Street; thence west along
the centerline of East Walnut Street to the center of the intersection of East Walnut Street and North
Madison Street; thence north to the center of the intersection of North Madison Street and East
Centennial Street; thence west to the point of beginning.
(E) District 4 shall consist of all of that part of the city bounded as follows: Commencing at the
center of the intersection of North Main Street (State Highway 19) and East Centennial Street and
running thence north along the centerline of North Main Street (State Highway 19) to the intersection
with the centerline of East Marion Street; thence running east in the center of Marion Street to the east
line of the northwest quarter of Section 31, which is the east line of Stauffer's Sixth Addition; thence
north on this east line of the northwest quarter of Section 31 to a point 200 feet north of the south line
of the Southwest Quarter of Section 30; thence running east to the centerline of North Oakland A venue;
thence east on County Road 54 approximately 466.66 feet; thence south on the east property line of the
property known as 72306 County Road 7 approximately 466. 66 feet; thence west on the south property
line of the property known as 72306 County Road 7 approximately 466.66 feet to the centerline of North
Oakland A venue; thence running south approximately 1057 .44 feet along the centerline of North Oakland
A venue to a point where the city boundary goes due east; thence ruani:ng east along the city boundary
•
,. \ :
City Council 11
250 feet; thence 11Ullllng north 165 feet along the city boundary; thence easterly and southerly along the
city boundary to the centerline of the Berlin Court ditch, which is also the city boundary; running thence
eastwardly along the centerline of the Berlin Court Ditch to the southwest comer of the property
commonly known as the Blackstone Subdivision; thence north on the west boundary line of the
Blackstone Subdivision; thence east on the north boundary line of the Blackstone Subdivision; thence
south on the east boundary line of the Blackstone Subdivision and the property commonly known as the
ISIS property; thence west on the south boundary line of the property commonly lmown as the ISIS
property to the centerline of the Berlin Court Ditch; thence south along the city bOWidary line to a point
where the city boundary line turns easterly to the centerline of County Road 9; thence following the city
boundary line south to the north line of lands owned by the Baltimore & Ohio Railroad Company;
running thence south and westwardly along the city boundary (tWs boundary line running through
Elkhart and Kosciusko Counties) to the northeast corner of the property line of the property known as
M-Dee Acres, which is located on the EJkha.rt County/Kosciusko County line; thence running south
along the east property line of the property known as M-Dee Acres 1926.60 feet; thence continuing south
along the east property line of the property known as Paddle Brook Pond East to a point 200 feet north
of the south line of the Northwest Quarter of Section 6; thence running west 647.03 feet: thence south
a distance of 200 feet to a point on the south line of said Northwest Quarter; thence west along the south
line a distance of 49.92 feet; thence north a distance of200 feet; thence west 116.30 feet; thence north
along the east line of Paddle Brook Pond East 560.64 feet; thence east 101.87 feet; thence north330 feet;
thence west 1375 feet; thence north and parallel with the west line of said Northwest Quarter of Section
6 a distance of 405 feet; thence west 330 feet to a point on the said west line of said Northwest Quarter;
thence north along said west line a distance of 50 feet thence east 323.5 feet; thence north 590.44 feet;
thence easterly 26 feet; thence northerly 50 feet; thence east 175 feet; thence north 303 feet to the
centerline of Haney Street; thence east to the centerline of South Madison Street extended; thence north
along the east line of South Madison Street extended to the Elkhart/Kosciusko County line; thence east
along the Elkhart/Kosciusko County line to the centerline of South Jackson Street; thence north to the
centerline of East Walnut Street; thence west along the centerline of East Walnut Street to the centerline
of North Madison Street; thence north along the centerline of North Madison Street to the centerline of
East Centennial Street; thence west along the centerline of East Centennial Street to the point of
beginning.
(F) The Councilperson-At-Large shall, as a continuing qualification for such office, be a resident
of the city, which said residence may be in any of such Councilmanic Districts. Each of the four District
Council persons, respectively, shall, as a continuing qualification to serve as such District Council
person, be a resident of the Councilmanic District for which he was elected.
(' 83 Code, § 3-21) (Ord. 1467, passed - -12)
12 Nappanee - Administration
ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS
§ 31.25 ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS; INTRODUCTION AND ADOPTION.
(A) All ordinances shall be regularly filed with the Clerk-Treasurer at least five days before a
regular meeting, unless approved by the majority of Council members present.
(B) All ordinances shall be read three times before being passed, and no ordinance shall pass on the
same day in which it is introduced unless there is compliance with the provisions of I.C. 36-4-6-13.
(C) Resolutions shall be subject to the same rule in met.hod of introduction, but may be adopted
upon receiving a majority vote of the Council and approval by the Mayor.
(D) On the passage or adoption of any ordinance or resolution, the yeas and nays shall be taken and
entered in the record, and the ordinances shall be processed in accordance with I.C. 36-4-6-14 through
36-4-6-17.
(' 83 Code, § 3-7)
§ 31.26 AMENDMENTS TO CODE; FORM.
All ordinances which are of a general and permanent narure and which would amend the City Code,
shall be in the form shown in the appendix to this chapter.
(' 83 Code, § 3-20)
STANDING COMMITTEES OF THE CITY COUNCIL
§ 31.40 ESTABLISHMENT; COMMITTEE MEMBER APPOINTMENT.
(A) There shall be five standing committees of the City Council.
(B) Members of each committee shall be appointed by the Mayor annually.
(C) The five standing committees shall be:
(1) Finance Committee, by state statute;
(2) Insurance Committee;
(3) Salary Committee;
•
___ ,/ -
City Council 13
(4) Committee on By-Laws, Ordinances, and Resolutions;
(5) Council Liaisons to Departments: means of providing an informal basis for
communications.
('83 Code,§ 3-13)
§ 31.41 COMMITTEE ON FINANCE.
(A) It shall be the duty of the Committee on Finance to consider all matters relative to the fmances
of the city and audit the reports of the Clerk-Treasurer and other city officers who are in any way
responsible to the city on account of public funds or property. This shall be done at least every six
months and at all other times upon demand of the Mayor or vote of the City Council.
(B) This Committee shall examine all claims against the city before the same are presented to be
acted upon by the Council and carefully audit these claims and recommend to the Council what
disposition shall be made of the same.
('83 Code,§ 3-14)
§ 31.42 COMMITTEE ON BY-LAWS, ORDINANCES, AND RESOLUTIONS.
(A) It shall be the duty of the Committee on By-Laws, Ordinances, and Resolutions to consider all
by-laws, ordinances, and resolutions referred to them by the City Council and to report their
recommendations upon the same.
(B) They shall direct the City Attorney in drafting all by-laws, ordinances, and resolutions.
C 83 Code, § 3-15)
14 Nappanee ~Administration
APPENDIX: AMENDING ORDINANCE FORM
Ord. No.
(Short Title)
AN ORDINANCE OF THE COMMON COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF NAPPANEE, INDIANA,
AMENDING CHAPTER __ , ARTICLE __ , SECTION(S) __ ,OF THE NAPPANEE CITY
CODE BY THE INCLUSION/DELETION OF SECTION(S) __ , ENTITLED
Whereas, (background statements setting forth the purpose or background of the ordinance where
appropriate)
Whereas,
Whereas,
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE COMMON COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF NAPPANEE, INDIANA, AS
FOLLOWS:
Section I. Chapter __ , Article __ , Section(s) ___ , of the Nappanee City Code, is/are hereby
amended to read as follows:
(set forth specific amendatory language)
Section II. All prior ordinances or parts thereof inconsistent with any provisions of this ordinance are
hereby repealed.
Section III. This ordinance is hereby passed and adopted at a regular meeting of the Common Council
of the City of Nappanee, Indiana, this day of , 20 _
Clerk~ Treasurer
Submitted to me and approved by me this ____ day of _______ _
Mayor
C 83 Code, § 3-20)
•
CHAPTER 32: CITY OFF1CIALS
Section
32.01 Public officials; surety bonds
32.02 Mayor; Deputy Mayor
32.03 Clerk-Treasurer; Deputy
Statutory re.f erence:
Individual surety bonds and blanket bonds, see I. C. 5-4-1-18
Mayor's authority to appoint officers, employees, boards, and commissions, see I. C. 36-4-9-8
Parks and Recreation public official bonds, see I. C. 36-10-3-16
Powers of the Clerk-Treasurer, see I. C. 36-4-10-1 through 36-4-10-5
Powers of the Mayor, see J.C. 36-4-5-1through36-4-5-7
§ 32.01 PUBLIC OFFICIALS; SURETY BONDS.
(A) All city public officials required to file individual surety bonds shall do so pursuant to I.C.
5-4-1-18, as it may be amended from time to time.
(B) The fiscal body has the authority to authorize a blanket bond to cover the faithful performance
of all employees, commission members, and persons acting on behalf of the city who are not covered
in division (A) of this section.
(C) The bonds prescribed herein shall be conditioned on the faithful performance of duties of the
officer and employee to properly account for all monies and property received by virtue of bis or her
position or employment.
('83 Code, § 2-5)
Cross-reference:
Department of Parks and Recreation; organization, see § 35.16
§ 32.02 MAYOR; DEPUTY MAYOR.
(A) The Mayor is the city executive and head of the executive branch. He or she shall faithfully
perform all the duties and responsibilities contained in l.C. 36-4-5 and other statutes of the state.
15
16 Nappanee - Administration
(B) At the beginning of each calendar year, the Mayor shall appoint a Deputy Mayor who shall
assume the duties and responsibilities of the Mayor in the event of his or her disability, or in his or her
absence from the city. The Deputy Mayor shall be one of the five members of the City Council.
(' 83 Code, § 2-2)
§ 32.03 CLERK-TREASURER; DEPUTY.
(A) The Clerk-Treasurer is Clerk of the Council and Clerk of the Board of Poblic Works and Safety.
He or she shall perform the duties assigned by I. C. 36-4-10, and other duties as the City Council may,
by ordinance, require.
(B) The Clerk-Treasurer is authorized, pursuant to I. C. 36-4-1 l-4, to appoint one Chief Deputy aarl
other deputies as required and authorized by the Common Council. All deputies shall work under the
exclusive direction of the Clerk-Treasurer and serve at his or her pleasure.
(C) The Clerk-Treasurer shall :furnjsh space within his or her office for the administration and
records of the city's utilities. The various utility clerks shall be the employees of the Clerk-Treasurer
and serve at his or her pleasure. The Clerk-Treasurer shall be compensated for services he or she
renders to the city's utilities and shall have the power to supervise the utility personnel in his or her
office subject to the approval of the governing boards of the various utilities.
(D) The Clerk-Treasurer shall be the Clerk of the Court and shall assign a deputy to act as Court
Clerk.
(' 83 Code, § 2-3)
CHAPTER 33: CITY COURT
Section
33.01 City Court established
33.02 City Judge; election
33 .03 City Judge; powers and authority
Statutory reference:
City Courts, see J.C. 33-35-1and33-35-2
§ 33.01 CITY COURT ESTABLISHED.
The judicial branch of the city shall be vested in the City Court of the city.
(' 83 Code, § 3-26)
§ 33.02 CITY JUDGE: ELECTION.
The City Clerk-Treasurer shall be the Clerk of the Court and shall assign a deputy to act as Court
Clerk. The City Court shall be headed and operated by a City Judge elected and seated pursuant to
J.C. 33-35-1.
(' 83 Code, § 3-26)
§ 33.03 CITY JUDGE; POWERS AND AUTHORITY.
(A) The City Judge shall have full power and authority to make and adopt rules and regulations for
conducting the business of the City Court not repugnant to the laws of the state.
(B) He or she shall have all powers incident to a court of record in relation to the appearance of
witnesses, the punishment of contempts, the enforcement of its orders, and issuing of commissions for
taking depositions in cases pending in the court.
(C) He or she shall have full authority to administer oaths and give all necessary certificates for the
authentication of the records and proceedings of the court and shall have all of the powers and
jurisdiction now or hereafter created an:d conferred upon city judges and city courts and in respect
17
18 Nappanee - Administration
thereto, including, but not limited to, the laws of the state respecting appeals, changes of venue,
appointment of special judges, taxing of docket and other fees, and all other acts and things as may be
provided by state law.
(' 83 Code, § 3-27)
"
CHAPTER 34: CITY POLICIES
Section
General Provisions
34.01 Personnel Policy and Procedure Manual adopted by reference
34.02 Organization memberships; funds authorized
34.03 Enhanced emergency telephone system
34.04 Handgun policy; permit and fue; Firearms Training Fund
34.05 Copies of code; city property
34.06 Copies of code on file
Purchasing Procedure
34.20 Purchasing agency; powers and duties
34.21 Purchase of supplies manufactured in the United States
34.22 Protection of offers; public record status
34.23 Discussions with offerers; response to request for proposals
34.24 Delay of opening offers
34.25 Evidence of financial responsibility
34.26 Modification and termination of contracts
34.27 Purchase of services
Procedure for Contracting Public Works Projects
34.40 Purchasing agency; powers and duties
34.41 Process for obtaining quotes
34.42 Competitive bidding
34. 4 3 Special purchases
34.44 Use of municipality's own work force
Cross-rejere1ice:
Fees, see Chapter 38
19
20 Nappanee ~ Administration
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 34.01 PERSONNEL POLICY AND PROCEDURE MANUAL ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
(A) The city's Personnel Policy and Procedure Manual, with any amendments thereto, is hereby
adopted by reference and incorporated into this code as if set out in full herein.
(B) The original copy of the city's Personnel Policy and Procedure Manual, as amended from time
to time, shall be retained in the office of the Clerk-Treasurer, as a permanent record.
(C) The Mayor and Clerk-Treasurer are hereby authorized to administer these policies and
procedures.
(Ord. 1256, passed 7-20-98)
§ 34.02 ORGANIZATION MEMBERSIIlPS; FUNDS AUTHORIZED.
(A) The City Council is authorized to budget and appropriate funds from the General Fund or from
other funds to provide membership for the city and the elected and appointed officials and members of
the municipality's boards, councils, departments, or agencies in local, regional, state, and national
associations of a civic, educational, or governmental nature, which have as their purpose the betterment
and improvement of municipal operations.
(B) The City Council is further authorized to budget and appropriate funds to pay the expenses of
duly authorized representatives for organizational memberships to attend or participate in activities of
organizations to which the municipality belongs.
C 83 Code, § 2-26)
§ 34.03 ENHANCED EMERGENCY TELEPHONE SYSTEM.
(A) Under the authority of and subject to I.C. 36-8-16, an emergency telephone system fee is
established to provide for the funding of an enhanced emergency telephone system to serve the city. This
fee shall be collected from the telephone service users of the city and administered in accordance with
the following terms.
(B) A monthly fee as specified in§ 38.15 per telephone access line or other exchange access facility
will be collected by the service suppliers to pay the lease, purchase, or maintenance of enhanced
emergency telephone equipment, including necessary computer hardware, software, database
provisioning, and other costs; and the rates associated with the service suppliers' enhanced emergency
telephone system network services.
(C) The service suppliers shall be entitled to retain ari administrative fee of 3 % of the monthly fees
collected as compensation for collecting the fees.
City Policies 21
(D) All monthly fees collected except for the 3 % administration fee shall be remitted to the ClerkTreasurer
of the city within ten days after the last day of the calendar year quarter. With the fee
remittal, the service supplier shall provide a fee collection report on a form provided by the ClerkTreasurer.
{E) The Clerk-Treasurer shall deposit the remitted fees in a separate fund named the Emergency
Telephone System Fund. The Clerk-Treasurer may invest monies in the Fund in the same manner that
other monies of the city are invested with the interest earned from this investment to be deposited in that
Fund.
(F) During January of each year, each service supplier that collects the enhanced emergency
telephone system fee for the county shall provide a delinquent fee report to the Clerk-Treasurer. The
report shall list the name, address, and amount due for each service user who is two or more months
delinquent in paying the fee.
('83 Code, § 4-9) (Ord. 1139, passed 7-1-91)
§ 34.04 HANDGUN POLlCY; PERMIT AND FEE; FIREARMS TRAINING F1JND.
Pursuant to Public Law 190 -House Enrolled Act 1176 - effective July 1, 2006 - Handgun Licenses
- Requires the law enforcement agency, which accepts as application for handgun license to collect the
following application fees:
(A) From a person applying for a four year handgun license, a $10 application fee, $5 of which shall
be refunded if the license is not issued.
(B) From a person applying for a lifetime handgun license who does not currently posses a valid
Indiana handgun license, a $50 application fee, $30 of which shall be refunded if the license is not
issued.
(C) From a person applying for a lifetime handgun license who currently possesses a valid Indiana
handgun license, a $40 application fee, $30 of which shall be refunded if the license is not issued.
('83 Code,§ 4-8) (Ord. 940, passed 11-7-83; Am. Ord. 1404, passed 10-2-06)
§ 34.05 COPIES OF CODE; CITY PROPERTY.
All copies of the City Code except those sold by the city to private individuals or given or sold to
the public library shall be the property of the city. Any City Code copies delivered to elected or
appointed officials shall not be retained by those individuals after the expiration of their term(s) of office
or appointment.
('83 Code,§ 1-13)
22 Nappanee - Administration
§ 34.06 COPIES OF CODE ON FILE.
Two copies of the City Code shall be kept on file in the office of the Clerk-Treasurer, preserved in
loose-leaf form. It shall be the express duty of the Clerk-Treasurer, or someone authorized by him or
her, to insert in their designated places all amendments or ordinances which indicate the intention of the
City Council to make the same a part of this code when the same shall have been printed or reprinted
in page form, and to extract from the code all provisions which may be from time to time repealed by
the City Council. The two copies of the code shall be available to all persons desiring to examine the
same and shall be considered the official code of the city.
('83 Code, § 1-11) (Ord. 937, passed 11-7-83)
PURCHASING PROCEDURE
§ 34.20 PURCHASING AGENCY; POWERS AND DUTIES.
(A) The Board of Public Works and Safety (the "purchasing agency") is established as the
purchasing agency for the city.
(B) The purchasing agency shall have all the powers and duties authorized under I.C. 5-22, as may
be supplemented from time to time by ordinances adopted by the Council and policies adopted by the
purchasing agency.
(C) The purchasing agency shall act as the purchasing agency for every agency, board, office,
branch, bureau, commission, council, department, or other establishment of the city.
(D) The purchasing agency may designate in writing any employee or elected official of the city as
a purchasing agent.
(E) The purchasing agency is hereby authorized to prepare and/or direct the preparation of any
specification for a purchase made by the purchasing agency. The purchasing agency shall be responsible
for the maintenance of any and all records relating to such specifications. A city purchase order shall
be issued for every purchase and shall contain the specifications for each such purchase, the agency
making the purchase and the solicitation type. This purchase order shall serve as an index of
specifications. Alternatively, the purchasing agency may utilize specifications prepare.d by others as
specifications to be utilized by the city. Specifications prepared by others shall include, but shall not be
limited to, descriptions of property contained in catalogs or other publications. A specification shall be
appropriate and acceptable as long as the item can be readily identified from a review of the description
or any material or document referenced in such description.
(F) Additional considerations for purchasing supplies shall be:
(1) Purchasing at a fair market value;
i)
City Policies 23
(2) Furnished in a timely manner;
(3) Minimum standards of quality; and
(4) Reasonably available quantities.
(Ord. 1254, passed 6-15-98; Am. Ord. 1481, passed 6-2-14)
§ 34.21 PURCHASE OF SUPPLIES MANUFACTURED IN THE UNITED STATES.
Supplies manufactured in the United States shall be specified for all city purchases, and shall be
purchased unless the city determines that:
(A) The supplies are not manufactured in the United States in reasonably available quantities;
(B) The price of the supplies manufactured in the United States exceeds by an unreasonable amount
the price of available and comparable supplies manufactured elsewhere;
(C) The quality of the supplies manufactured in the United States is substantially less than the
quality of comparably priced available supplies manufactured elsewhere; or
(D) The purchase of supplies manufactured in the United States is not in the public interest.
(Ord. 1254, passed 6-15-98)
§ 34.22 PROTECTION OF OFFERS; PUBLIC RECORD STATUS.
(A) Protection of offers prior to opening. The purchasing agent shall retain all offers received in
a secure location prior to the date and time at which offers will be opened in order to prevent disclosure
of the contents prior to the opening of the offers.
(B) Unobstructed evaluation of offers. After offers have been opened, the purchasing agent shall
be responsible for maintaining the offers in a manner which will permit evaluation of the offers by the
persons responsible for evaluating the offers.
(C) Public records status of bids. Bids submitted in response to an invitation for bids must be
available for public inspection and copying after the time of the bid opening.
(D) Register of proposals. The purchasing agent shall prepare a register of proposals for each
request for proposals issued which shall contain information concerning the proposals available for public
inspection and copying. Proposals may not be disclosed.
(Ord. 1254, passed 6-15-98)
24 Nappanee ~ Administration
§ 34.23 DISCUSSIONS WITH OFFERERS; RESPONSE TO REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS.
The purchasing agent may conduct discussions with, and best and final offers may be obtained from
responsible offerers who submit proposals determined to be reasonably susceptible of being selected for
a contract award.
(Ord. 1254, passed 6-15-98)
§ 34.24 DELAY OF OPENING OFFERS.
When the purchasing agency makes a written determination that it is in the city's best interests,
offers may be opened after the time stated in the solicitation. The date, time, and place of the
rescheduled opening must be announced at the time and place of the originally scheduled opening.
(Ord. 1254, passed 6-15-98)
§ 34.25 EVIDENCE OF FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY.
(A) Purchases less than $25, 000. The purchasing agent may not require evidence of financial
responsibility when the estimated cost of a purchase is less than $25,000.
(B) Purchases between $25, 000 and $100, 000. The solicitation may include a requirement that an
offerer provide evidence of financial responsibility. If evidence of financial responsibility is required,
the solicitation must indicate the kind of evidence that will be acceptable. If a bond or certified check
is required, it may not exceed 10% of the estimated cost of the purchase.
(C) Purchases over $100, 000. The solicitation shall include a requirement that an offerer provide
evidence of financial responsibility and must indicate the kind of evidence that will be acceptable. If a
bond or certified check is required, it may not exceed 10 % of the estimated cost of the purchase.
(Ord. 1254, passed 6-15-98; Am. Ord. 1481, passed 6-2-14)
§ 34.26 MODIFICATION AND TERMINATION OF CONTRACTS.
(A) Price adjustments. The purchasing agent may include provisions to permit price adjustments
in a purchase contract. The following provisions for price adjustments may be included:
(1) Price adjustments must be computed by agreement on a fixed price adjustment before the
beginning of the pertinent performance or as soon after the beginning of performance as possible;
(2) Price adjustments must be computed by unit prices specified in the contract or subsequently
agreed upon;
' \,
! 'I
City Policies 25
(3) Price adjustments must be computed by costs attributable to the events or situations under
such clauses with adjustments of profit or fee, all as specified in the contract or subsequently agreed
upon;
(4) Price adjustments must be computed in some other manner as the contracting parties may
mutually agree upon; or
(5) In the absence of agreement by the parties, price adjustments must be computed by a
unilateral determination by the governmental body of the costs attributable to the events or situations
under such clauses with adjustment of profit or fee, all as computed by the governmental body in
accordance with applicable rules adopted by the governmental body.
(B) Adjustnients in time of perjonnance. The purchasing agent may include provisions in a purchase
contract concerning adjustments for time of performance under the contract.
(C) Unilateral right of purchasing agency. The purchasing agent may include in a purchase contract
provisions dealing with the unilateral right of the purchasing agency to order changes in the work within
the scope of the contract or to order temporary work stoppage or delays in time of performance.
(D) Quantity variations. The purchas.ing agent may include in a purchase contract provisions
dealing with variations between the estimated quantities of work in a contract and the actual quantity
delivered.
(Ord. 1254, passed 6-15-98)
§ 34.27 PURCHASE OF SERVICES.
The Common Council determines that the purchasing agency may purchase services in whatever
inanner the purchasing agency determines to be reasonable.
(Ord. 1254, passed 6-15-98; Am. Ord. 1481, passed 6-2-14)
PROCEDURE FOR CONTRACTING PUBUC WORKS PROJECTS
§ 34.40 PURCHASING AGENCY; POWERS AND DUTIES.
The Board of Public Works and Safety shall serve as the purchasing agency for the city, including
but not limited to, every agency, board, office, branch, bureau, conunission, council, department or
other establishment.
(A) In the performance of its duties as purchasing agency, the Board of Public Works and Safety
is hereby granted the power to designate the following job positions as purchasing agents of the city:
26 Nappanee - Administration
(I) Mayor;
(2) Clerk-Treasurer;
(3) Zoning Administrator;
(4) Fire Chief;
(5) EMS Director;
(6) Senior Center Director;
(7) Police Chief;
(8) Superintendent of Parks and Recreation;
(9) Superintendent of Streets and Sanitation;
(10) Superintendent of Wastewater Treatment Plant;
(11) Superintendent of Water Utility;
(12) President of the Board of Aviation Commissioners; and
(13) President of the Redevelopment Commission.
(B) The purchasing agency is authorized to prepare and/or direct the preparation of any such
specifications. The purchasing agency shall be responsible for the maintenance of any and all records
relating to such specifications.
(Ord. 1484, passed 6-2-14)
§ 34.41 PROCESS FOR OBTAINING QUOTES.
(A) If the purchasing agent expects the purchase to be less than $ 25 ,000, the purchasing agent may
1nake a purchase on the open market under the following purchases policy:
(1) Purchased. with review and approval of the purchasing agency.
(2) Purchasing agency shall approve specifications for purchase.
(3) Purchased with review by City Clerk-Treasurer to certify availability of funds.
(4) Purchased by solicitation of quotes from at least three persons known to deal in the lines
of the service to be purchased.
! I
i /
City Policies 27
(a) Purchasing agent shall mail an invitation to quote at least seven days before the time
fixed for receiving the quotes.
(5) Purchasing agency shall open quotes at a public meeting, as stated in the invitation to quote,
and not before. Any quote received after the time, stated in the invitation to bid, shall remain unopened
and considered noncompliant. Quotes received shall be read aloud.
(a) Quotes may be received by hand postal delivery, facsimile transmittal or electronic mail
in response to an invitation to quote.
(6) Purchasing agent shall present all quotes, as received, to the purchasing agency for award
of a contract.
(a) The purchasing agency shall award a contract to the lowest responsible and responsive
offerer.
(b) The purchasing agency may reject all quotes.
(7) Improper purchases:
(a) Any public works project that is not let in accordance with I.C. 36-1-12-16 shall be
null and void.
(b) The cost of a single public works project may not be divided into two or more projects
for the purpose of avoiding the requirement to solicit bids (I.C. 36-1-12-19).
(B) If the purchasing agent expects the purchase to be more than $25,000 but less than $150,000,
the purchasing agent may make a purchase on the open market under the following purchases policy:
(1) Purchased with review and approval of the purchasing agency.
(2) Purchasing agency shall approve specifications for purchase.
(3) Purchased with review by City Clerk-Treasurer to certify availability of funds.
(4) Purchased by solicitation of quotes from at least three persons known to deal in the lines
of the service to be purchased.
(a) Purchasing agent shall mail an invitation to quote at least seven days before the time
frud for receiving the quotes.
(5) Purchasing agency shall open quotes at a public meeting, as stated in the invitation to quote,
and not before. Any quote received after the time, stated in the invitation to bid, shall remain unopened
and considered noncompliant. Quotes received shall be read aloud.
28 Nappanee - Administration
(6) Purchasing agent shall present all quotes, as received, to the purchasing agency for award
of a contract,
(a) The purchasing agency shall award a contract to the lowest responsible and responsive
offeror.
(b) The purchasing agency may reject all quotes.
(7) Improper purchases:
(a) Any public works project that is not let in accordance with I.C. 36-1-12-16 shall be
null an<l void.
(b) The cost of a single public works project may not be divided into two or more projects
for the purpose of avoiding the requirement to solicit bids (I.C. 36-1-12-19).
(Ord. 1484, passed 6-2-14)
§ 34.42 COMPETITIVE BIDDING.
(A) If the purchasing agent expects the purchase to be more that $150,000 the purchasing agent shall
be required to advertise for competitive bids, pursuant to I.C. 36-1-12-4.
(1) Purchasing agent shall be authorized to prepare specifications by purchasing agency.
(2) Purchasing agency approves specifications and authorizes purchasing agent to advertise an
invitation for bids.
(a) All notices of invitation for bids shall be published in accordance with J.C. 5-3-1 in
the qualified publications for legal advertising as designated by the Common Coun~il,
(b) The purchasing agent shall schedule the publication of notice to provide a reasonable
amount of time for preparation and submission of bids. The notice shall be published two times, at least
one week apart. The second publication rhust occur at least ten days prior to the date the bids will be
opened.
(3) Bids received in response to an invitation for bids must be opened at a public meeting, as
stated in the invitation to bid, and not before. Any bid received after the time, stated in the invitation to
bid, shall remain unopened and considered noncompliant. Bids received shall be read aloud.
(4) All such bids shall be submitted on forms prescribed by the State Board of Accounts, and
shall be accompanied by a financial statement, non-collusion affidavit and bid bond, certified check or
a corporate surety in a sum not more than 10 % of the total bid.
:· }
. ~-:
City Policies 29
(5) The purchasing agency shall unconditionally accept all bids and turn them over to the
purchasing agent for evaluation and recommendation for award of contract.
(6) The purchasing agency shall award a contract with reasonable promptness by written notice
of award to the lowest responsible and responsive bidder.
(7) The purchasing agency may reject all bids.
(8) The purchasing agency shall maintain the following information:
(a) The name of each bidder;
(b) The amount of each bid;
(c) Any other pertinent information;
(d) After contract award this information is subject to public inspection.
(9) Improper purchases:
(a) Any public works project that is not let in accordance with I.C. 36-1-12-16 shall be
null and void.
(b) The cost of a single public works project may not be divided into two or more projects
for the purpose of avoiding the requirement to solicit bids (I.C. 36-1-12-19).
(Ord. 1484, passed 6-2-14)
§ 34.43 SPECIAL PURCHASES.
A purchasing agent may make a special purchase with the approval of the purchasing agency:
(A) When there exists, under emergency conditions, a threat to public health, welfare, or safety.
(B) A purchasing agency shall maintain a record for a special purchase in the official minutes of the
Agencies Public Meeting.
(C) The official minutes shall contain the determination of the basis for the special purchase.
(Ord. 1484, passed 6-2-14)
30 Nappanee R Administration
§ 34.44 USE OF MUNICIPALITY'S OWN WORK FORCE.
(A) A municipal utility may maintain, extend and install its services without adopting plans and
specifications and without awarding a contract, if such work is done by the employees of the public
utility (f.C. 36-1-12-1).
(B) A city, or town may unde11ake a public work project with its own workforce only if the
workforce, through demonstrated skill, training or expertise, is capable of performing the public work
(l.C. 36-1-12-3).
(Ord. 1484, passed 6-2-14)
\.
'(\
~ I
CHAPTER 35: BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, AND DEPARTMENTS
Section
General Provisions
35.01 Boards and commissions established
35.02 Executive departments
Specific Organ'k,otions
35.15 Economic Development Commission
35 .16 Department of Parks and Recreation
35.17 Emergency Medical Services Department
35.18 Department of Streets and Sanitation
35.19 Water Utility Department
35.20 Department of Wastewater Treatment
35.21 Police Reserve Unit
35 .22 Senior Citizen Center
35.23 Department of Redevelopment; Redevelopment Commission
Cross-reference:
City Tree Board, see Chapter 96
Histon'c Preservation Commission, see Chapter 153
Statutory reference:
Establishment of D.epartment of Redevelopment, see I. C. 36-7-14-3
Establishment of firefighting system, see I. C. 36-8-2-3
Establishment of police and law enforcement system, see I. C. 36-8-2-2
Police Reserve Units, see I. C. 36-8-3-20
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 35.01 BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS ESTABLISHED.
(A) There shall be a Police Pension Board of Trustees to perform certain duties prescribed by I. C.
36-8-6 (1925 Fund) and 36-8-8 (1977 Fund) concerning the statutory pensions of City Police.
31
32 Nappanee - Administration
(B) There shall be a Parks and Recreation Board established pursuant to l.C. 36-10-3.
(C) There shall be a Plan Commission organized pursuant to J.C. 36-7-4-207.
(D) There shall be an Economic Development Commission organized pursuant to I.C. 36-7-12.
(E) There shall be a Board of Aviation Commissioners organized pursuant to I.C. 8-22-2.
(F) There shall be a Board of Zoning Appeals organized pursuant to I.C. 36-7-4-902 et seq.
(G) There shall be a Tree Board - local ordinance.
(H) There shall be a Historic Preservation Commission.
(I) There shall be a Redevelopment Commission.
(' 83 Code, § 2-9)
§ 35.02 EXECUTIVE DEPARTMENTS.
(A) There is established a Board of Public Works and Safety within the executive branch. This
Board shall be the chief adroi:n.istrative body of the city and shall have control of the day-to-day
operations of the following executive departments which are established:
(1) Police Department;
(2) Fire Department;
(3) Streets and Sanitation Department;
(4) Water Utilities;
(5) Wastewater Treatment;
(6) Emergency Medical Services (EMS); and
(7) Senior Center.
(B) (1) The members of the Board of Public Works and Safety are the Mayor and two voters of
the city who shall be chosen by the Mayor and serve at his or her pleasure. The City ClerkwTteasurer
shall serve as the Clerk of the Board of Public Works and Safety.
\
•
Boards, Commissions, and Departments 33
(2) The Chiefs of the Police and Fire Departments and the heads of the Departments of Law
and of Streets and Sanitation, the EMS Chief, the Senior Center Director, the Water Utilities
Superintendent, and the Wastewater Treatment Superintendent are appointed by the Mayor and serve at
his or her pleasure. One individual may serve as the head of both Streets and Sanitation and Parks and
Recreation (with the approval of the Board of Parks and Recreation) and one individual may serve as the
head of both the Water Utility and Wastewater Treatment Plant. If one individual is given charge of
more than one department such individual shall have such title as shall be designated by the Mayor and
shall possess such duties and responsibilities as shall be designated to a superintendent of each such
department by the Indiana Code and by the City Code.
(3) Pursuant to J.C. 36-5-9-2, the Mayor shall appoint the superintendent of the Department
of Parks and Recreation and the Zoning Administrator with the approval of the statutory board or
commission operating the department. These appointees serve at the pleasure of the Mayor.
(J.C. 36-4-11-2)
(C) There is established a Department of Law, pnrsuant to I.C. 36-4-9-12, which shall be beaded
by the City Attorney.
(D) Subject to the appropriation power of the City Council, the foregoing departments shall have
the ability to hire employees and purchase or contract for materials or services as the Board of Public
Works and Safety or other governing board or commission deems necessary to perform their public
functions.
('83 Code,§ 2-4) (Ord. 1394, passed 12-19-05)
SPECIFIC ORGANIZATIONS
§ 35.15 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION.
(A) Estabh'shment. The Economic Development Commission is created and established with full
power and authority to act and to do those acts and things as are provided by law.
(B) Membership. The Economic Development Commission shall consist of three members to be
appointed by the Mayor of the city in the following manner: One member shall be nominated and
selected by the Mayor; one member shall be nominated by the County Council of Elkhart County and
for appointment by the Mayor; and the remaining member shall be nominated by the City Council and
for appointment by the Mayor.
(C) Term of office; appoin'tlnent process of successors. At the expiration of the respective terms of
each of the Commissioners, their respective successors shall be selected and nominated before the
expiration of the term in the same manner as the original appointee, and each succeeding member shall
serve a term of four years. In the event that any governing body fails to make a nomination within the
time specified by law, the Mayor may select and appoint a person without nomination. Each selectee
34 Nappanee - Administration
or nominee appointed shall be notified in writing and appointed by the Mayor within ten days after
receiving the nomination. In the event that any person appointed as Commissioner fails to qualify by
taking and subscribing an oath of office within the tenMday period, or if any Commissioner, after
qualifying, dies, resigns, vacates, or is removed from office, a new Commissioner shall be selected or
nominated and appointed to fill the vacancy in the same manner as the Commissioner so appointed and
shall serve for the remainder of the vacated term. Commissioners shall receive no salaries, but be
entitled to reimbursement for any expenses necessarily incurred in the performance of their duties.
Economic Development Commission members continue in service until their successor has been named
and qualified.
{D) Duties. The Economic Development Commission shall have all of the powers and duties as are
provided by law.
(' 83 Code, § 2-10)
§ 35.16 DEPARTMENT OF PARKS AND RECREATION.
(A) Organization. The Department of Parks and Recreation shall be composed of the Board of
Parks and Recreation, a Superintendent, and other personnel as the Board shall determine,
(B) Membership. The Board shall be composed of five members, four of whom are selected and
appointed by the Mayor on the basis of their interest in and knowledge of parks and recreation, but not
more tban two members shall be of the same political party. In addition to the four members appointed
by the Mayor to the Board of Parks and Recreation, there shall be one ex officio member appointed by
the Board of the Public Library from the membership of the Board of the Public Library. This ex officio
member shall serve a term of four years, ending the first Monday in January. Any vacancy occurring
by reason of the death, resignation, or termination of membership of the ex officio member shall be
promptly filled by the appointment of an ex officio member by the Board of the Public Library to serve
the remainder of any unexpired term.
(C) Term of office. As a Board member's term expires, each appointment of a member shall be for
a four-year term. All terms shall expire on the first Monday of January, but an appointee shall continue
in office until his or her successor is appointed.
(D) Officers. At its first regular meeting each year, the Board shall elect a President, a VicePresident,
and a Secretary, The Vice-President shall have authority to act as the President of the Board
during the absence or disability of the President.
(E) Powers. The Board shall have the power to perform all acts necessary to acquire and develop
sites and facilities and to conduct programs as are generally understood to be parks and recreation
functions, including, but not limited to, powers and duties listed in I.C. 36-10-1 et seq.
(F) Councils. The Board may create an advisory council(s) and special committees as may be
necessary and expedient, composed of citizens interested in the problems of parks and recreation in
accordance with governing state law.
Boards, Commissions, and Departments 35
(G) Duties. The Board shall prepare and submit an annual budget in the same manner as other
departments of the city government. The Board may accept gifts, donations, and subsidies for parks and
recreation purposes.
(' 83 Code, § 2-11)
Cross-reference:
Parks and Recreation,- regulations, see Chapter 97
Public officials; surety bonds, see§ 32.01
§ 35.17 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES DEPARTMENT.
(A) Department established. The city Emergency Medical Services Department is created and
established with full power and authority to act and do those acts as are provided by law.
(B) Fund established. The Emergency Medical Services Fund is created and established as incident
to this Department's operation and shall be a part of the General Fund of the city.
(C) City's duty. The city shall operate and maintain emergency medical services, levy taxes, pay
the costs and expenses of establishing, operating, maintaining, or contracting for emergency medical
services, and shall do those other acts and things as may be necessary and as are provided by law.
(D) Appointment of Chief. The Mayor shall appoint a person who shall be licensed by this state as
an emergency medical technician as Chief of the city Emergency Medical Services Deparnnent. The
Chief of the Emergency Medical Services Department shall have the control, subject to the order and
direction of the Board of Public Works and Safety, of all ambulances, invalid coaches, emergency
medical service facilities, and other properties of the Department. The Chief shall, in general, supervise,
administer, and execute the emergency medical services rendered by the Department.
(E) Chief's duties. The Chief shall retain and engage suitable numbers of licensed and certified
Emergency Medical Technicians as may be necessary and convenient to the efficient operation of the
Department, including ambulance drivers, paramedics, technicians, mechanics, and other employees.
(F) Salaries. The Chief, Emergency Medical Technicians, and ambulance drivers shall be paid
pursuant to the salaries set annually for those positions. Each Emergency Medical Technician shall also
be compensated an additional sum per year upon completion of all annual, routine, or other educational
training as specified and determined by the state Emergency Medical Commission.
(G) Dunes of Department.
( 1) It shall be the duty of the city Emergency Medical Services Department to respond with
ambulances, invalid coaches, or other medical service facilities to all emergency patients.
(2) For the purpose of this section, the following defmition shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
36 Nappanee - Administration
EMERGENCY PATIENT. One who is acutely ill, injured, or otherwise incapacitated or
helpless and who requires emergency care including, but not limited to, providing emergency
transportation service to a hospital or similar facility.
(H) Fees and charges. The fees and charges assessed against each emergency patient to or for
whom emergency medical service is provided shall be as specified in§ 38.16.
(I) Collection of fees. The Clerk-Treasurer shall be responsible for the preparation of bills for
emergency medical service fees and charges, and all fee and charge payments shall be made payable to
the city and delivered to the Clerk-Treasurer.
(' 83 Code, § 2-12)
§ 35.18 DEPARTMENT OF STREETS AND SANITATION.
(A) Establishment. The Department of Streets and Sanitation is created and established with full
power and authority to act as provided by law.
(B) Superintendent. The operation of the Department of Streets and Sanitation shall be directed by
a Superintendent who shall receive for bis or her services a sum of money as shall be fixed by the City
Council by ordinance on or before the first day of September of each year as the salary for the following
fiscal year.
(C) Duties of Superintendent. The Superintendent shall have the power, and it shall be directed by
the Superintendent within the general and fiscal policies prescribed by the City Council, to:
(1) Exercise general supervision of and make regulations for the administration of the affairs
of the Department;
(2) Maintain and keep in repair all streets, alleys, crosswalks, public parking areas, and public
sewers, within the city;
(3) Maintain and keep in repair all drains within the radius of the corporate limits of the city
as prescribed by law and which drains afford outlets for storm waters or sanitary sewage for property
within the city;
( 4) Erect, maintain, and keep in repair all street name signs, traffic signs, and regulatory signs
and street or pavement markings that have been or shall be ordered installed by the Board of Works and
Safety or the City Council;
(5) Provide for regular refuse collection within the city;
(6) Operate and maintain the Streets and Sanitation Department building;
\
': !
Boards, Comnrlssions, and Departlllents 37
(7) Plan and carry out a system of mosquito and other insect control with the city and public
parks;
(8) Keep all trucks, tractors, loaders, graders, sweepers, machinery, and equipment of the
Department in good repair;
(9) To designate in the absence of the Superintendent while on vacation, sick leave, or out of
the city on official business, the employee of the Department who shall serve in the absence of the
Superintendent;
(10) Employ workmen and at rates as prescribed by the City Council, setup work schedules and
assign duties, and keep accurate records of the hours of employment on forms to be furnished by the City
Clerk-Treasurer;
(11) Supervise the activities of the business district maintenance person;
(12) Keep maps and other permanent records of all sewer repairs, installations, and cleaning
operations; issue permits and keep records thereof as may be directed by the Board of Public Works and
Safety or the City Council;
(13) Make and/or approve all purchases of materials for the operation of the Department to be
paid for out of funds specifically set aside by the City Council for the operation of the Department;
provided, however, that in no event shall this section be so construed or interpreted as to authorize the
Superintendent to make purchases which in the aggregate shall total a sum greater than the minimum of
a purchase requiring advertising and bidding as determined by the laws of the state;
(14) Prepare and submit an annual budget, accompanied by a complete inventory of the
equipment and supplies of the Department giving age and condition of the major items; and
(15) Advise the City Council from time to time as to the operation of the Department, its needs
and requirements; and to cooperate with other departments, boards, and agencies of the city, and with
the agencies of other taxing units within the state in keeping with the purpose of this section, and for the
general welfare of the city.
('83 Code,§ 2-13)
§ 35.19 WATER UTILITY DEPARTMENT.
(A) The custody, management, and control of the Water Utility Department and all the waterworks
owned and operated by the city shall be wholiy vested in the Board of Public Works and Safety of the
city.
38 Nappanee ~ Administration
(B) The Board of Public Works and Safety·shall direct, supervise, operate, administer, and do all
acts and things necessary and convenient to operate this Department of the city, and including, but not
limited to, the employment of a Superintendent and other employees, as may from time to time be
necessary to the operation.
(C) The City Council shall fix the compensation of all employees, including the Superintendent
(D) The Board of Public Works and Safety may establish rules, regulations, and directives from
time to time, providing same are not in conflict with the rules and regulations of the state, as may be
necessary and convenient to the operation and administration of the Department.
('83 Code,§ 2-14)
§ 35.20 DEPARTMENT OF WASTEWATER TREA1MENT.
(A) The custody, management, and control of the Department of Wastewater Treatment and all the
waterworks owned and operated by the city shall be wholly vested in the Board of Public Works and
Safety of the city.
(B) The Board of Public Works and Safety shall direct, supervise, operate, administer, and do all
acts and things necessary and convenient to operate this Department of the city, and including, but not
limited to, the employment of a SUperintendent and other employees, as may from time to time be
necessary to the operation.
(C) The City Council shall fix the compensation of all employees, including the Superintendent.
(D) The Board of Public Works and Safety may establish rules, regulations, and directives from
time to time, providing same are not ill conflict with the rules and regulations of the state, as may be
necessary and convenient to the operation and administration of the Department.
§ 35.21 POLICE RESERVE UNIT.
(A) Establishment. There is established the city Police Reserve Unit. The members of the Police
Reserve Unit shall be appointed by the Board of Public Works and Safety of the city and shalJ be under
the direct authority and subject to the rules and regulations of the city Police Department.
(B) Reserve police supervision. The city Police Reserve Unit shall be supervised by the Police
Chief or his or her nominee.
(C) Duties. The Police Reserve Unit is authorized to establish rules and regulations governing the
conduct, duties, and activities of the various reserve offices, all of which rules and regulations shall be
approved by the Board of Public Works and Safety of the city.
\
Boards, Commissions, and Departments 39
(D) Rules and regulations. The Police Chief is authorized to establish rules and regulations
governing the conduct, duties, and activities of the various reserve officers, all of which rules and
regulations shall be approved by the Board of Public Works and Safety of the city.
(E) Number of officers. The initial number of police reserve officers shall be 12, which number
may be increased or decreased upon request and approval of the Mayor of the city.
C 83 Code, § 2-20)
§ 35.22 SENIOR CITIZEN CENTER.
(A) Establishment. A Senior Citizen Center is established for the benefit of the senior citizens of
the city.
(B) Director. A Director shall be appointed by the Mayor to perform the following duties for the
Center:
(1) To supervise employees and the operation of the Senior Citizen Center;
(2) To oversee the operation and progranuning of the Senior Citizen Center; and
(3) To prepare budget for Senior Citizen Center.
C 83 Code, § 2-21)
§ 35.23 DEPARTMENT OF REDEVELOPMENT; REDEVEWPMENT COMMISSION.
(A) There is created a Department of Redevelopment.
(B) To control this Department, there is also created the city Redevelopment Commission, which
Commission shall be composed of five members, three of whom shall be appointed by the Mayor of the
city and two of whom shall be appointed by the City Council. This Commission shall possess all the
rights, powers, and responsibilities established for it by law. (Note: Annual term limits for
Redevelopment Commission members.)
C 83 Code, § 2-22) (Ord. 1148, passed 1-20-92)
40 Nappanee - Administration
CHAPTER 36: ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS BUREAU
Section
36.01 Established
36.02 Violations Clerk; appointment
36.03 Violations Clerk; duties
36.04 Schedule of violations and fines adopted by reference
36.05 Civil peualties
§ 36.01 ESTABLISHED.
There shall be created an Ordinance Violations Bureau pursuant to I.C. 33-36-1 et seq., as amended,_
for the city.
(' 83 Code, § 2-40) (Ord. 1100, passed 4-17-89)
§ 36.02 VIOLATIONS CLERK; APPOINTMENT.
The City Clerk-Treasurer is appointed and shall serve as the Violations Clerk, who administers the
Bureau.
(' 83 Code, § 2-41) (Ord. !JOO, passed 4-17-89)
§ 36.03 VIOLATIONS CLERK; DUTIES.
The Clerk-Treasurer and his or her staff, as his or her agents, shall accept written appearances,
waivers of trial, admissions of violations, and payment of civil penalties in the amount and for the
violations as provided below.
(' 83 Code, § 2-42) (Ord. 1100, passed 4-17-89)
§ 36.04 SCHEDULE OF VIOLATIONS AND FINES ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
The schedule of ordinances and City Code provisions set fur th in Ord. 1100, as it may be amended,
shall be subject to the jmisdiction of the Ordinance Violations Bureau, and the first violations within a
calendar year of these ordinances and code provisions shall be subject to the civil penalties set forth
therein.
('83 Code,§ 2-43) (Ord. 1100, passed 4-17-89)
41
42 Nappanee - Administration
§ 36.05 CIVIL PENALTIES.
The provisions of the City Code and the ordinances referred to in the schedule mentioned above are
amended to provide and declare the civil penalty scheduled with the ordinance or code provision to be
the specific civil penalty for the violation of that ordinance or code provision.
('83 Code,§ 2-44) (Ord. 1100, passed 4-17-89)
CHAPTER 37: FUNDS
Section
37 .01 Cumulative Capital Development Fund
37. 02 Cumulative Capital Improvement Fund
37 .03 Cumulative Fund for Firefighting Equipment
37 .04 Parks and Recreation Special Non-Reverting Fund
37.05 Special Recreation Fund
37.06 Golf Course Capital Outlays Fund
3}.07 Special Non-Reverting Day Camp Fund
37. 08 Riverboat 'Revenue S.haring Fund
37.09 Rainy Day Fund
. 37.10 Major Moves Construction Fund
37.11 ECCF Tornado Assistance Grant Fund
37 .12 Rental Housing Registration Fee Non-Reverting Fund
37 .13 Water Utility Cash Reserve Fund
Cross-reference.;
Accident report account, see § 70.16
Emergency Medical Services Fund, see§ 35.17
Enhanced Emergency Telephone System Fund, see § 34. 03
Firearms Training Fund, see§ 34.04
Fireworks Fund, see§ 90.01
School and Home Safety Fund, see § 130. 19
Unscife Building Fund, see§ 152.35
Lmv Enforcement Continuing Education Fund, see § 70. 20
Statutory reference:
cumulative Building and Equipment Funds, see 1. C. 36-8-14-1 through 36-8-14-4
Gumulative Capital Improvement Funds, see I.C. 36-9-16-1through36-9-16-6
§ 37.01 CUMULATIVE CAPITAL DEVELOPMENT FUND.
(A) There is establishe~ a Cumulative Capital Development Fund.
(B) An ad valorem property tax levy shall be imposed, and the revenues from the levy will be
retained in the Cumulative Capital Development Fund.
(C) The funds accumulated in the Cumulative Capital Development Fnnd shall be used for
purchasing park land in accordance with I. C. 36-10-3-21.
43
2016 S-1
44 Nappanee - Administration
(D) (1) Notwithstanding division (C) above, funds accumulated io the Cumulative Capital
Development Fund may be spent for purposes other than that stated in division (C) if the purpose is to
protect the public health, welfare, or safety in an emergency situation which demands immediate action.
(2) Money may be spent under the authority of this division only after the Mayor issues a
declaration that the public health, welfare, or safety is in such immediate danger that it requires the
expenditure of money from the Fund.
C 83 Code, § 2-29) (Ord. 969, passed 8-20-84)
§ 37.02 CUMULATIVE CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT FUND.
(A) Establishment. There is created a special -fund to be known as the Cumulative Capital
Improvement Fund of th~ city, into which the taxes allotted to the city by reason of the state cigarette
tax, as amended, shall be deposited into the Fund and shall he-appropriated and used solely for capital
improvements as hereinafter defined, and none of this money shall revert to the General Fund or be used
for any purpose other than capital improvements.
(B) Definition. For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS. The construction or improvement of any property owned by
the city, including, but not limited to, streets, thoroughfares, and sewers, and retirement of general
obligation bonds of the city issued and the proceeds used for the purpose of constructing CAPITAL
IMPROVEMENTS. CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS shall not ioclude salaries of any public officials or
employees except those which are directly chargeable to a CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT.
(' 83 Code, § 2-30)
§ 37.03 CUMULATIVE FUND FOR FIREF1GHTING EQUIPMENT.
(A) Purpose. The City Council has determined that it is necessary and advisable to purchase certain
firefighting equipment for the purpose of replacing obsolete equipment and maintaining proper
firefighting equipment for the city.
(B) Establishment. There is created a Cumulative Fund for the purchase of firefighting equipment.
('83 Code,§ 2-31)
§ 37.04 PARKS AND RECREATION SPECIAL NON· REVERTING FUND.
(A) Establishment. There is created a Parks and Recreation Special Non-Reverting Fund.
(B) Receipt of monies. All gifts, donations, and subsidies for parks and recreation purposes as may
be transferred by various donors, from time to time, shall be deposited by the Clerk-Treasurer in the
'- ' '
: :
-~/
Funds 45
Special Non-Reverting Fund to be available for expenditure by the Parks and Recreation Board of the
city for purposes specified by the grantor or donor, respectively. All disbursements from the Fund shall
be upon warrants against the Special Non-Reverting Fund only upon vouchers signed by the President
and Secretary of the Parks and Recreation Board.
(C) Uses. All gifts, donations, and subsidies may be designated by the donors for special or
particular parks and recreation uses in the city including, but not limited to, the establishment,
construction, operation, or maintenance of a golf course, bicycle trail, picnic area, shuffleboard courts,
horseshoe courts, croquet courts, volleyball courts, tennis courts, or other wholesome park and
recreational facilities including the acquisition of lands for park or recreation uses. No gift or transfer,
however, shall be made to the Department of Parks and Recreation without approval thereof by the
Board of Parks and Recreation.
C 83 Code, § 2-32)
§ 37.05 SPECIAL RECREATION FUND.
(A) Establishment. There is created a special fund to be known as the Special Recreation Fund.
(B) Deposits. All monies procured from parks and recreation facilities and activities shall be
deposited into it.
(C) Non-reverting fand. This fund shall be non-reverting. Monies shall be disbursed only on a
warrant of the Parks and Recreation Board and signed by the President and Secretary of the Board.
(' 83 Code, § 2-33)
§ 37.06 GOLF COURSE CAPITAL OUTLAYS FUND.
(A) There is hereby established the Golf Course Capital Outlays Fund, and the greens fees specified
in § 38.15 will be receipted into the Golf Course Capital Outlays Fund.
(B) The monies receipted into the Golf Course Capital Outlays Fund shall be used solely for the
purchase of capital equipment and capital llnprovements for use on and about the Municipal Golf Course.
(C) All monies receipted into the Golf Course Capital Outlays Fund are hereby appropriated for the
purchase of capital equipment and capital improvements for the Municipal Golf Course.
(Ord. 1233, passed 3-3-97)
§ 37.07 SPECIAL NON-REVERTING DAY CAMP FUND.
(A) There is hereby established the Special Non-Reverting Day Camp Fund, and the following fees
will be receipted into the Special Non-Reverting Day Camp Fund:
46 Nappanee - Administration
(1) Registration fees; and
(2) WeekJy activity fees.
(B) The monies receipted into the Special Non-Reverting Day Camp Fund shall be used solely for
the expenses of the summer day camp, including but not limited to labor, supplies, fees, memberships,
and travel expenses.
(C) All monies receipted into the Special Non-Reverting Day Ca.mp Fund are hereby appropriated
for the expenses of the summer day camp as stated in division (B) above.
(Ord. 1234, passed 3-3-97)
§ 37.08 RIVERBOAT REVENUE SHARING FUND.
(A) There is established a Riverboat Revenue Sharing Fund.
(B) The revenue receipted into this fund may be used for any of the following purposes:
(1) To reduce the property tax levy of the city for a particular year;
(2) For deposit in a special fund or allocation fund created under l.C. 8-22-3.5, J.C. 36-7-14,
l.C. 36-7-14.5, J.C. 36-7-15. l, and I.C. 36-7-30 to provide funding for additional credits for property
tax replacement in property tax increment allocation areas or debt repayment;
(3) To fund sewer and water projects, including storm water management projects;
( 4) For police and fire pensions; or
(5) To carry out any governmental purpose for which the money is appropriated by the fiscal
body of the city. Money used under this subdivision does not reduce the property tax levy of the city
for a particular year or reduce the maximum levy of the city under I, C. 6-1.1-18 .5.
(Ord. 1358, passed 1-5-04)
§ 37.09 RAINY DAY FUND.
(A) There is established a Rainy Day Fund, into which unused and unencumbered funds in an
amount that does not exceed 10% of the political subdivision's annual budget for that fiscal year shall
be deposited. Also, the County Adjusted Gross Income Tax, County Option Income Tax, and County
Economic Development Income Tax 's distribution of excess balances shall be deposited into this fund.
Funds 47
(B) The revenue receipted into this fund shall be used for any governmental purpose and shall be
subject to the same appropriation process as other funds that receive tax money. The fiscal body shall
make a fmding that the proposed use of the Rainy Day Fund is consistent with the intent of the fund.
(Ord, 1360, passed 3-1-04) >
§ 37.10 MAJOR MOVES CONSTRUCTION FUND.
(A) There is hereby established a Major Moves Construction Fund and all revenue shall be receipted
into this fund and all money remaining in the Major Moves Construction Fund at the end of the calendar
year remains in the Major Moves C~nstruction Fund and does not revert to any other fund.
(B) The revenue receipted into the Major Moves Construction Fund shall be appropriated, in order
to be used for permissible uses as described in J.C. 8-14-16-5, as follows:
(!) Construction of highways, roads and bridges;
(2) In a county that is a member of northwest Indiana regional development authority, or a city,
or town in a county that is a member, the Major Moves Construction Fund money may be expended for
any purpose for which the regional development authority may expend money under I.C. 36-7 .5.
(3) Provide funding for economic development projects as defined by state law.
( 4) Provide matching funds for federal grants for any of these permissible uses of Major Moves
Construction Fund money.
(5) Provide funding for interlocal agreements under I.C. 36-1-7 for any of these permissible
uses of Major Moves Construction Fund money.
(Ord, 1405, passed 11-6-06)
§ 37.11 ECCF TORNADO ASSISTANCE GRANT FUND.
(A) There is hereby established an ECCF Tornado Assistance Grant Fund,
(B) All of the revenue shall be receipted into this fund and all money remaining in the ECCF
Tornado Assistance Grant Fund remains ·in the ECCF Tornado Assistance Grant Fund and does not
revert to any other fund.
(C) The revenue receipted into the ECCF Tornado Assistance Grant Fund shall be distributed for
expenses of tornado victims as authorized by the NITRO Financial Committee and approved by the City
of Nappanee Common Council.
(Ord. 1414, passed 12-3-07)
2016 S-1
48 Nappanee - Administration
§ 37.12 RENTAL HOUSING REGISTRATION FEE NON-REVERTING FUND.
(A) There is hereby established a Rental Housing Registration Fee Non-Reverting Fund.
(B) All of the revenue received by the city shall be receipted into this fund and all money remaining
in the Rental Housing Inspection Non-Reverting Fee Fund does not revert to any other fund.
(C) The revenue receipted into the Rental Housing Registration Fee Non-Reverting Fund shall be
dedicated solely to reimbursing the costs reasonably related to services actually performed by the city
that justified the imposition and amount of the fee.
(Ord. 1458, passed 12-12-11)
§ 37.13 WATER UTILITY CASH RESERVE FUND.
(A) Pursuant to the provisions of J.C. 8-1.5-3-11, a Water Cash Reserve fund for the water utility
of the city is hereby established.
(B) On a monthly basis, surplus earnings of the water utility shall be transferred to the Water Cash
Reserve Fund of the water utility so long as the terms and conditions of any bond ordinance, resolution,
indenture, contract under I.C. 8-1-2.2 or similar instrument are applied.
(C) Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
SURPLUS EARNINGS. Those cash earnings remaining after provisions have been made to
provide for current obligations, including:
(a) Operating expense;
(b) Depreciation or replacement fund;
(c) Bond and interest sinking fund;
(d) Retirement fund; or
(e) AJJ.y other priority fund requirements fixed by law.
(D) The City Council may by further ordinance, make loans from the Water Cash Reserve Fund to
another utility owned by the city, for periods not to exceed five years, at any interest rate. The
repayment of the loan and interest shall be returned to the Water Cash Reserve Fund.
(Ord. 1512, passed 12-14-15)
2016 S-1
,\
;
' '
CHAPTER 38: FEES
Section
General Provisions
38.01 License fees authorized
Fee Schedules
38. 15 Fee schedule
38.16 Emergency medical services; fee schedule
38.17 Construction pennits; inspection fees
Cross-reference:
Building permits, see§§ 150.20 through 150.23
Electrical installation requirements, see§§ 151.45 through 151.51
Emergency Medical Services Department, see § 35.17
General Licensing Procedures, see Chapter 110
Sewer rates and charges, see §§ 51.17through 51.20 and 51.90 through 51.97
Water rates and charges, see §§ 50.15 through 50.28 and 50.40 through 50.42
Statutory reference:
City authority to license, see J.C. 36-1-3-8(5)
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 38.01 LICENSE FEES AUTHORIZED.
The city has the authority to impose a license fee reasonably related to the administrative cost of
exercising regulatory powers.
C 83 Code, § 4-1)
49
50 Nappanee - Administration
FEE SCHEDULES
§ 38.15 FEE SCHEDULE.
Activity Fee Code CornmenD Ord. Date '83
Section No. Passed Code
Accident report $5 70.16 Requested copy 882; 1981; 4-5
1410 3-19-07
Abandoned vehicles $35 94.01 Towing expense 1115 12-18-89 6-57
minimum
Abandoned vehicles $50 94.01 Towing expense 1115 12-18-89 6-57
maximum
Abandoned vehicles $3 per day 94.01 Storage fee 1115 12-18-89 6-57
Alarm system, annual $100 90.01 Annual 1081 5-16-88 4-25
permit
Alarm system, $25 90.01 Added to permit 1081 5-16-88 4-25
delinquency fee fee
Alarm system, $25 90.01 One-time fee 1081 5-16-88 4-25
installation application
Alarm system, nonuser $25 90.01 First instance 1081 5-16-88 4-25
false alarm service
charge
Alarm system, nonuser $25 90.01 Multiply by 1081 5-16-88 4-25
false alarm service multiplied number of false
charge; subsequent alarms in prior
one-year period
Alarm system, $25 90.01 First instance 1081 5-16-88 4-25
reconnection fee
Alarm system, $25 plus 90.01 Subsequent 1081 5-16-88 4-25
reconnection fee; prior :instances withln 6
subsequent amount months
Arborist license $25 96.02 Annual 1168 4-19-93 6-92
Auto, boat, or $5 1264 10-19-98
motorcycle sale, permit
Fees 51
i t
Activity Fee Code Comments Ord. Date '83
Section No. Passed Code
Bicycle permit $1 72.20 102 1938 8-101
Copies, one-sided $.10 Per sheet 1264 10-19-98
Copies, two-sided $.15 Per sheet 1264 10-19-98
Copies mailed, postage $5 In addition to 1264 10-19-98
and handling copying cost
Electrical contractor's $100 151.66 New license 1185 4-5-94 7-130
license, Class A
Electrical contractor's $50 151.66 Renewal 1185 4-5-94 7-130
license, Class A
Electrical license, $100 151.67 Non-refundable 1185 4-5-94 7-131
examination fee
Electrical installation $40 151.49 Minimum fee 1185 4-5-94 7-138
permit
Electrical installation $40 151.49 Added to permit 1185; 4-5-94; 7-138
without permit fee 1378 1-10-05
Electric service entrance, $50 151.49 100 AMP panel; 2 1185; 4-5-94; 7-138
single phase Or three inspections max. 1378 1-10-05
phase
Electric service entrance, $60 151.49 200 AMP panel; 2 1185; 4-5-94; 7-138
single phase or three inspections max. 1378 1-10-05
phase
Electric service entrance, $70 151.49 400 AMP panel; 3 1185; 4-5-94; 7-138
single phase or three inspections max. 1378 1-10-05
phase
Electric service entrance, $80 151.49 600 AMP panel; 4 1185; 4-5-94; 7-138
single phase or three inspections max. 1378 1-10-05
inhase
52 Nappanee - Administration
Activity Fee Code Comments Ord. Date '83
Section No. Passed Code
Electric service entrance, $90 151.49 800 AMP panel; 4 1185; 4-5-94; 7-138
single phase or three inspections max. 1378 1-10-05
phase
Electric service entrance, $40 each 151.49 Additional 1185; 4-5-94; 7-138
single phase or three subpanels 1378 1-10-05
phase
Electric service entrance, $40 151.49 Temporary service 1185; 4-5-94; 7-138
single phase or three 1378 1-10-05
phase
Electric service entrance, $50 151.49 Additional 1185; 4-5-94; 7-138
single phase or three inspection per trip 1378 1-10-05
phase
Enhanced emergency $1 per 34.03 Per telephone 1139 7-1-91 4-9
telephone system month access line or other
exchange access
facility
Fax, long distance $.35 Per sheet 1264 10-19-98
Filing fee, subdivision $100 1264 10-19-98
plat
Filing fee, plat approval $100 If not paid in 1264 10-19-98
subdivision plat
Filing fee, rezoning $100 1264 10-19-98
request
Filing fee, variance $35 1264 10-19-98
Filing fee, special $50 1264 10-19-98
exception
Filing fee, administrative $50 1264 10-19-98
appeal
Filing fee, non- $100 1264 10-19-98
subdivided development
olan
--~-
;!•
Activ#y
Fire Department fire
report
Fire call, response to
Garage, outdoor, or
roadside sale, permit
Golf course greens fees,
weekdays
Golf course greens fees,
weekdays
Golf course greens fees,
weekdays
Golf course greens fees,
weekdays
Golf course greens fees,
weekdays
Golf course greens fees,
weekends
Golf course greens fees,
weekends
Golf course greens fees,
weekends
Golf course greens fees,
weekends
Golf course greens fees,
weekends
Gas service inspection
Historic district,
certificate of
annronriateness
Fee
$3
$200
$5
$1
$1
$1
$1
$1
$2
$3
$3
$2
$3
$35
$10
Fees 53
Code Contments Ord. Date '83
Section No. Passed Code
Per report 1264 10-19-98
Each call 1374 10-4-04
Ill.OS 1264 10-19-98 4-11
37.06 9 holes 1233 3-3-97
37.06 18 holes 1233 3-3-97
37.06 Special, 18 holes 1233 3-3-97
37.06 9 holes, sr. andjr. 1233 3-3-97
37.06 18 holes, sr. and 1233 3-3-97
jr.
37.06 9 holes 1233 3-3-97
37.06 18 holes 1233 3-3-97
37.06 Special, 18 holes 1233 3-3-97
37.06 9 holes, sr. andjr. 1233 3-3-97
37.06 18 holes, sr. and 1233 3-3-97
jr.
Per inspection 1375 12-6-04
153.32 Application fee; 1205 3-6-95
·prior to building
'"'ermit
54 Nappanee - Administration
Activity Fee Code Comments Ora. Date '83
Section No. Passed Code
Incinerator permit $5 92.31 Commercial or 503 1973 6-32
industrial
Junk stores and yards $10 111.22 Annual 178 1951 4-13
Recorded video/audio $5 each Per tape 1343 3-3-03
tapes
Returned check fee $20 Per incident 1264 10-19-98
Satellite dish permit, $5 1264 10-19-98
larger than 24 inches
Sidewalk sale, permit No fee 1264 10-19-98
Sign permit $50 For permanent sign 1264 10-19-98
Taxicabs $5 per 111.51 4-4
vehicle
Temporary toilets, No fee 1264 10-19-98
permit
Vegetation nuisance; $100 per 93.05 Minimum charge 1156 7-20-92 6-46
removal by city hour for cost incurred
Vehicle inspection $5 per 70.20 939; 11-9-83; 4-7
vehicle 1082 5-16-88
§ 38.16 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES; FEE SCHEDULE.
(A) The following rates and charges are established for services rendered to each emergency patient
to or for whom service is provided as follows.
Item Category Item Specifics Fee Ord. No. Date
Passed
Advanced life support Resident $200 1328 3-4-02
Advanced life support Non-resident $700 1328; 3-4-02;
1443 9-9-10
Fees 55
lteni Category Iteni Specifics Fee Ord. No. Date
Passed
Advanced life support Person transported from $200 1328; 3-4-02;
(Single employee) place of employment within 1361 3-15-04
corporate boundaries of the
city, for an employmentrelated
injury
Advanced life support Person transported from $125 1361 3-15-04
(Multi-load employees) place of employment within
corporate boundaries of the
city, for an employment
related injury
Advanced life support Multi-load Resident $125 1361 3-15-04
Advanced life support Multi-load Non-resident $350 1361; 3-15-04;
1443 9-9-10
Advanced life support Per loaded mile $16 1361; 3-15-04;
1443; 9-9-10;
1482 6-2-14
Elkhart General $114 1443 9-9-10
Hospital
Goshen General $108 1443 9-9-10
Hospital
Bremen Community $48 1443 9-9-10
Hospital
South Bend Hospitals $180 1443 9-9-10
Kosciusko Community $114 1443 9-9-10
Hospital
Armboard, long $.75 1328 3-4-02
Armboard, short $.75 1328 3-4-02
Blood draw $10 1328 3-4-02
Blood glucose $10 1328 3-4--02
Burnsheet $10 1328 3-4-02
Cell nhone use $10 1328 3-4-02
56 Nappanee - Administration
Item Category Item Specifics Fee Ord. No. Date
Passed
Cervical immobilization $25 1328 3-4-02
Combine dressing 5x9 $3 1328 3-4-02
Combine dressing 8 x 10 $3.50 1328 3-4-02
Combitube $60 1328 3-4-02
CPR certification Resident No fee 1328 3-4-02
CPR certification Non-resident $10 1328 3-4-02
Defib pads, pair $30 1328 3-4-02
Bpi-pen $45 1328 3-4-02
Hot/cold pack $3.50 1328 3-4-02
Instant glucose $6 1328 3-4-02
Irrigation solution $7.50 1328 3-4-02
Isolation kit $15 1328 3-4-02
I. V. therapy supplies $30 1328 3-4-02
Manual resuscitator $30 1328 3-4-02
Monitor pads, each $.50 1328 3-4-02
Multi-trauma dressing $10 1328 3-4-02
Nasal airway $7.50 1328 3-4-02
Nasal cannula $2.50 1328 3-4-02
Non-rePreather $6.50 1328 3-4-02
O.B. kit $15 1328 3-4-02
Oral airway $2.50 1328 3-4-02
Oxygen $12 1328 3-4-02
Roll gauze 2 inch $2 1328 3-4-02
Roll gauze 4 inch $2 1328 3-4-02
Suction $15 1328 3-4-02
- _,c!
; \
j
Fees 57
(B) A 10% discount shall be calculated upon the total amount due, of any invoice, paid in full
within 15 days of the invoice date.
(C) A neighboring entity shall pay a fee to the Nappanee Emergency Medical Service the amount
of $150 per paramedic intercept if:
(1) The neighboring entity has called upon the Nappanee Emergency Medical Service to
respond for medical assistance in the form of a paramedic intercept;
(2) The neighboring entity and the Nappanee Emergency Medical Service entered into a written
agreement for such service; and
(3) The neighboring entity provides the transportation vehicle for such medical assistance
response to the hospital, with the Nappanee Emergency Medical Service personnel aboard that vehicle.
(Ord. 1361, passed 3-15-04)
§ 38.17 CONSTRUCTION PERMITS; INSPECTION FEES.
Permits required by §§ 150.20 of this code shall be issued upon prior payment of inspection fees
according to the following schedule.
Category 'J'ype of Inspection Item Item Specifl-cs Fee
Commercial, New construction, Building, or addition, or First 1,000 sq. ft. or $100
industrial, additions, individual leasable space part thereof, for each
public alterations when part of a total building, addition, or
complex within one space
building
Commercial, New construction, Building, or addition, or Each additional 100 sq. $4 each
industrial, additions, individual leasable space ft., per unit
public alterations when part of a total
complex within one
building
Commercial, New construction, Demolition $10
industrial, additions,
public alterations
_Commercial, New construction, Electrical 100 AMP panel; 2 $40
industrial, additions, inspections maximum
public alterations
58 Nappanee - Administration
Category Type of Inspection Item Item Specifics Fee
Commercial, New construction, Electrical 200 AMP panel; 2 $50
industrial, additions, inspections maximum
public alterations
Commercial, New construction, Electrical 400 AMP panel; 3 $60
industrial, additions, inspections maximum
public alterations
Commercial, New ColL'ltruction, Electrical 600 AMP panel; 4 $70
industrial, additions, inspections maximum
public alterations
Commercial, New construction, Electrical 800 AMP panel; 4 $80
industrial, additions, inspections maximum
public alterations
Commercial, New construction, Electrical Additional subpanels $30 each
industrial, additions,
public alterations
Commercial, New construction, Electrical Temporary service $30
industrial, additions,
public alterations
Commercial, New construction, Electrical Additional inspection $40 per
industrial, additions, trip
public alterations
Commercial, ReinBpection Charged to builder or One hour minimum $40 per
industrial, contractor hour
public
Residential Additions, Livable floor space Each 100 sq. ft. $4 each
remodeling
Residential Additions, Livable floor space Minimum fee $50
remodeling
Residential Additions, Adding cellar to existing Each 200 sq. ft. $4 each
remodeling residential structure
Residential Additions, Electrical addition $40
remodeling
Residential Demolition $25
Fees 59
Item Category Item Specifics Fee Ord. No. Date
Passed
Residential New construction Livable floor space, First 1,500 sq. ft. or $100
except cellars and part thereof
attached or detached
accessory buildings
Residential New construction Livable floor space Each additional 100 sq. $4 each
ft. or part thereof
Residential New construction Accessory strucrures Under 100 sq. ft. No
charge
Residential New construction Accessory structures 101 to 600 sq. ft. $50
Residential New construction Accessory structures 601 to 1,500 sq. ft. $75
Residential New construction Accessory structures Each additional 100 sq. $4 each
above 1,500 sq. ft. ft. or nart thereof
Residential Swimmin~ pool $40
('83 Code,§ 7-89) (Ord. 1179, passed 12-20-93)
:: \
60 Nappanee - Administration
--- . '
"
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
Chapter
SO. WATER
51. SEWERS
I
2 Nappanee - Public Works
\
'
_/
CHAPTER 50: WATER
Section
General Provist.ons
50.01 Water Utility Department and Waterworks authorized
50.02 Board of Public Works and Safety to control
50.03 Role of Clerk-Treasurer
50.04 Plumber licensing; state regulations
50.15
50.16
50.17
50.18
50.19
50.20
50.21
50.22
50.23
50.24
50.25
50.26
50.27
50.28
Water Usage; Rates and Charges
Rates and charges authorized
Water Utility removed from IRC jurisdiction
Rates and charges established
Metered usage rate
Minimum monthly charge
Fire protection; annual charges
Connection charges
Inspection and meter charges
Temporary users
Reconnection charge
Seasonal water meters
Other charges; equipment and expenses
Billing; discontinued service
Unpaid charges; new service restricted
Use Regulations
50.40 Prohibited acts
50.41 Grounds for service discontinuance
50.42 Water use on construction site
Private Wells
50.55 Private wells restricted
50.56 Private wells for non-consumption uses
50.57 Injunctive relief
3
4 Nappanee~ Public Works
Protection of Water System
50.70 Cross connection and interconnection prohibitions
50.71 Inspections of potential cross connections
50.72 Right of entry; information required
50.73 Discontinuance of service
50.74 Emergency discontinuance
50.75 Hazardous users; backflow preventors required
50. 76 Regulations supplemental
Abandcned Water Wells; Sealing
50.90 Sealing required; state standards apply
50.91 Responsibility and supervision
50.92 Exception; temporary absence
50.93 Sealing report required
50.94 Compliance witQ federal, state, and local regulations
50.95 Violations; remedies
Statutory reference;
Municipally owned utilities, see I.C. 8-1.5-3-9.1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 50.01 WATER UTILITY DEPARTMENT AND WATERWORKS AUTHORIZED.
The city has the authority to establish, construct, equip, own, operate, and maintain waterworks,
water mains, wells, well fields, water storage tanks, and other equipment and appurtenances as may be
necessary, useful, and convenient for the collection, treatment, purification, distribution, and
maintenance of water for home, human, and other consumption or uses, and including the necessary
lands, rights-of-way, and other property therefor within or without the corporate limits of the city.
('83 Code,§ 9-1)
§ 50.02 BOARD OF PUBLIC WORKS AND SAFETY TO CONTROL.
(A) The custody, management, and control of the Water Utility Department and all the waterworks
owned and operated by the city shall be wholly vested in the Board of Public Works and Safety.
(B) The Board of Poblic Works and Safety shall direct arul supervise and shall operate, administer,
and do all acts necessary and convenient to operate the Waterworks and the Water Utility Department,
including, but not limited to, employment of a Superintendent, clerks, and other employees, as may from
time to time be necessary to the operation.
\ ,
Water 5
(C) The Council shall fix the compensation of all employees, including the Siiperintendent; the City
Council shall have authority to lower the compensation but not to raise it.
(D) The Board may establish rules, regulations, and directives from time to time,. provicling same
do not conflict with rules and regulations of the state, as may be necessary and convenient to the
operation and administration of the Water Utility Department and Waterworks.
C 83 Code, § 9-3)
§ 50.03 ROLE OF CLERK-TREASURER.
The Clerk-Treasurer shall be the custodian of all funds belonging to the Waterworks, whether
derived from taxation, appropriation of the City Council, or from rents or other income or charges of
any of the works. All funds belonging to the works shall be checked by the Clerk-Treasurer as a
separate and distinct fund.
C 83 Code, § 9-4)
§ 50.04 PLUMBER LICENSING; STATE REGULATIONS.
The licensing and regulation of plumbers shall be done pwsuant to J.C. 25-28.5-1-2 through
25-28.5-1-38, as it may be amended from time to time.
C 83 Code, § 7-21)
WATER USAGE; RATES AND CHARGES
§ 50.15 RATES AND CHARGES AUTHORIZED.
The city shall establish just and equitable rates or charges for the facilities and services rendered by
the Waterworks, which charges shall be nondiscriminatory, reasonable, and just, and which charges shall
produce sufficient revenue to pay all the legal and other necessary expenses incident to operation of the
utility, to include maintenance costs, operating charges, upkeep, repairs, interest charges, and bonds or
other obligations, to provide a sinking fund for the liquidation of bonds or other evidence of
indebtedness, to provide adequate funds to be used as working capital, as well as funds for making
improvements, extensions and replacements, and also for the payment of any taxes that may be assessed
against the utility, and the rates may be made sufficient to include a reasonable profit on the investment,
it being the intent and purpose hereof that the charges shall produce an income sufficient to maintam the
utility property in a sound physical and financial condition to render adequate and efficient service.
(' 83 Code, § 9-2)
6 Nappanee - Public Works
§ 50.16 WATER UTILITY REMOVED FROM IRC JURISDICTION.
The municipally owned Water Utility of the city shall be taken out of the jurisdiction of the State
Regulatory Commission (IRC) for the approval of rates and charges, and of the issuance of stocks,
bonds, notes, or other evidence of indebtedness.
(' 83 Code, § 9-6) (Ord. 1095, passed 3-20-89)
§ 50.17 RATES AND CHARGES ESTABLISHED.
There are hereby established for the use of and service rendered by the city Waterworks system the
following rates and charges based on the amount of water supplied during each monthly billing period.
(Ord. 1326, passed 3-4-02)
§ 50.18 METERED USAGE RATE.
Metered Usage Per Month Rate Per JOO Cubic Feet
First 333 Cubic feet $3.92
Next 667 cubic feet $3.22
Next 2,333 cubic feet $2.59
Next 3,667 cubic feet $1.94
Over 7, 000 cubic feet $1.56
(Ord. 1326, passed 3-4--02; Am. Ord. 1350, passed 8-18-03; Am. Ord. 1409, passed 12-18-06; Am.
Ord. 1417, passed 5-5-08; Am. Ord. 1447, passed 11-15-10)
§ 50.19 M1NIMUM MONTHLY CHARGE.
Each user shall pay a minimum charge per month corresponding to the installed meter size, for
which the user will be entitled to the quantity of water per the rate schedule in § 50.18 above.
•
Water 7
Meter Size Minimum Charge Per Month
Five-eighths inch through three-fourths ioch $13.05
One inch $25.80
One and one-half inches $38.75
Two inches $77.50
Three inches $155.05
Four inches $322.70
Six inches $374.75
Eight ioches $735.75
(Ord. 1326, passed 3-4-02; Arn. Ord. 1350, passed 8-18-03; Am. Ord. 14-09, passed 12-18-06; Am.
Ord. 1417, passed 5-5-08; Am. Ord. 1447, passed 11-15-10)
§ 50.20 FIRE PROTECTION; ANNUAL CHARGES,
Fire protection charges per annum are as follows.
Fire Protection Item Item Details Annual Charge
Fire hydrant Public, meter size (inches)
5/8 - 3/4 $5.13
1 $12.83
116 $25.65
2 $41.04
3 $76.95
4 $128.25
6 $256.50
8 $410.4()
10 $589.95
Fire hydrants, per hydrant Private $645.70
Fire sprinkler connections Two-inch line $390.80
8 Nappanee - Public Works
Fire Protection Item Item Details Annual Charge
Fire sprinkler connections Each additional two-inch line $313.40
Fire sprinkler connections Four-inch line $774.85
Fire sprinkler connections Each additional four-inch line $706.50
Fire sprinkler connections Six-inch line $1,292.60
Fire sprinkler connections Each additional six-inch line $1,136.40
Fire sprinkler connections Eight-inch line $1,568.65
Fire sprinkler connections Bach additional eight-inch line $1,411.70
Fire sorinkler connections Ten-inch line $2,542.25
Fire snrinkler connections Each additional ten-inch line $2,346.30
(Ord. 1326, passed 3-4-02; Am. Ord. 1350, passed 8-18--03; Am. Ord. 1409, passe<l 12-18-06; Am.
Ord. 1417, passed 5-5-08; Am. Ord. 1447, passe<l ll-15-10)
§ 50.21 CONNECTION CHARGES.
(A) A connection charge shall be collected from each customer prior to connection to the
Waterworks system. Bach new connection to the Waterworks system shall have a minimwn water
service line of one inch. The connection charge shall be an amount as determined by the following.
(B) (1) The following schedule gives connection charges for a service line of one inch.
Year Connection Charge
2008 $1,338
2009 $1,377
2010 $1,416
2011 $1,464
2012 $1,512
2013 $1,560
2014 $1,608
(2) Connection charges fur service lines greater than one inch shall be determined by the
following formula:
Water
Est. maximum daily flow for proposed connection
(est. maximum daily flow for an equivalent single-family dwelling unit) x (applicable
charge for a one-inch service line per the schedule in division (B)(l) above)
9
(a) The estimated maximum daily flow for the proposed connection shall be determined
by utilizing Table 6 of the Indiana State Board of Health Bulletin S.E. 13, or its successors, as amended
from time to time.
(b) The estimated maximum daily flow for an equivalent single family dwelling unit shall
be determined annually by the city's Board of Public Works and Safety (the "Board") and shall remain
applicable and in effect until the Board shall make a subsequent annual determination. Such annual
determination shall be made by multiplying the average water usage on all single family dwelling units
in the city (determined by dividing the total water usage of all single family dwellings units, within the
city, by the number of single family dwelling units in the city) and multiplying that amount by the most
recent determination of the peak factor usage for a single family dwelling as determined by the American
Water Works Association.
(Ord. 1326, passed 3-4--02; Am. Ord. 14ll9, passed 12-18-06; Am. Ord. 1417, passed 5-5--08; Am. Ord.
1447, passed 11-15-10)
§ 50.22 INSPECTION AND METER CHARGES.
(A) A fee of $1.00, plus the cost of the meter, shall be charged for the inspection of all connections
to the municipal water utility, including replacement of existing connections.
(B) AU meters shall remain the property of the Waterworks.
(Ord. 1326, passed 3-4-02; Am. Ord. 14ll9, passed 12-18-06; Am. Ord. 1417, passed 5-5--08; Am. Ord.
1447, passed 11-15-10)
§ 50.23 TEMPORARY USERS.
Except as otherwise provided in § 50.42 of this code, water furnished to temporary users, except
as otherwise herein stated, shall be charged on the basis of metered rates hereinbefore set forth and based
upon usage as estimated and established by the Waterworks Superintendent.
(Ord. 1326, passed 3-4--02)
§ 50.24 RECONNECTION CHARGE.
In the event that service has been discontinued because of nonpayment of any bill or for any other
cause beyond the control of the city, and service is again desired and allowed, a reconnection charge of
$25 shall be assessed against the customer.
(Ord. 1326, passed 3-4-02)
10 Nappanee~ Public Works
§ 50.25 SEASONAL WATER METERS.
For seasonal water meters, a connection charge of $15 and a disconnect charge of $15 will be made.
(Ord. 1326, passed 3-4-Q2)
§ 50.26 OTHER CHARGES; EQUIPMENT AND EXPENSES.
(A) A charge of $25 shall be made for each Touch-Read Register. All new construction shall be
required to have a remote meter installed.
(B) Any material used by the Waterworks and charged to the user pursuant to this chapter shall be
charged at the rate of actual cost plus 20% of that cost, plus sales tax on the total thereof.
(C) Any person or entity requesting temporary access to a fire hydrant shall be charged $25 for the
first connection plus cost of water usage pursuant to the appropriate rates therefor. (There is no
additional charge for each subsequent connection on the same day during working hours.) The charge
will be $50 per connection outside of normal working hours plus cost of water usage pursuant to the
appropriate rates thereof.
(D) All meters that are in the possession of any Waterworks customer and are damaged, for any
reason, shall be replaced at the Waterworks customer's expense and remain the property of the
Waterworks.
(E) If for any reason Waterworks equipment and personnel are requested for assistance to another
municipality there shall be a charge of $50 per hour from time of departure to time of return plus the cost
of labor.
(F) Any check issued in payment to the Waterworks for any reason and returned to the Waterworks
for reason of insufficient funds shall be charged to the customer at a rate of $25 per incident.
(Ord. 1326, passed 3-4-02; Am. Ord. 1409, passed 12-18-06; Am. Ord. 1417, passed5-5-08; Am. Ord.
1447, passed 11-15-10)
§ 50.27 BILLING; DISCONTINUED SERVICE.
(A) All bills shall be rendered monthly by the fifteenth day of the month for the previous month's
service and shall be payable upon receipt. If a monthly bill remains unpaid on the first day of the next
consecutive month, a charge of 10% of the first $3 and 3 % of all over $3 of that bill shall be assessed
as a penalty. If any monthly bill shall remain unpaid on the tenth day of the following month, the
Waterworks may discontinue service to any thus delinquent customer. If the tenth day of the month falls
on a Saturday, Sunday, or holiday, the discontinuance of service may be postponed until the next
working day.
: -
\
'
Water 11
(B) The Clerk-Treasurer is hereby authorized and directed to cause the Superintendent of the
Waterworks or other employee in charge of the operation thereof to shut off and reinstate water service
in accordance with provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 1326, passed 3-4-02; Am. Ord. 1350, passed 8--18-03)
§ 50.28 UNPAID CHARGES; NEW SERVICE RESTRICTED.
Any person or entity vacating any premises without paying all water rents due up to the time of that
vacation shall not thereafter be supplied with water at any location, through any service, until all back
water and service charges are paid.
(Ord. 1326, passed 3-4-02)
USE REGULATIONS
§ 50.40 PROIUBITED ACTS.
(A) Service pipes intended to supply two or more distinct premises or tenants must be provided with
a separate stopcock for each tenant or premises on the outside of each premises. Where only one
stopcock is used, the owner of the service shall pay the water rates for parties who are thus supplied,
and on the failure of any one of the parties to pay the water rates wben due, or to comply with the rules
and regulations of the Waterworks system, the supply of water will be withheld without any liability on
the part of the city to any of the parties.
(B) All real property owners and tenants are strictly prohibited from furnishing water or allowing
the same to betaken from their hydrants or fixtures by any other person unless the owners and/or tenants
secure permisSion from the Waterworks Superintendent.
(C) No person shall take water from any fire hydrant except for fire purposes, or except upon
permission of the Waterworks superintendent.
(D) All persons and entities are forbidden to cover up or in any way interfere with any curb-box,
valve-box, or hydrant.
(Ord. 1326, passed 3-4-02; Am. Ord. 1409, passed 12-18-06; Am. Ord. 1417, passed 5-5-08; Am. Ord.
1447, passed 11-15-10) Penalty, see§ 10.99
§ 50.41 GROUNDS FOR SERVICE DISCONTINUANCE.
All customers or persons and/or entities utilizing the Waterworks system may have their access to
the water supply cancelled for any of the following reasons:
12 Nappanee - Public Works
(A) The wasting or improper use of water through the use of defective or imperfect fixtures, or in
any other manner;
(B) For refusal or neglect to pay bills promptly or any other charges accruing in the matter and at
the time herein provided;
(C) For interference or tampering with the water meter, box meter seals, or any service of appliance
of the Waterworks system used for controlling or regulating the supply of water;
(D) For failure to apply for a permit in case of change of ownership or tenancy;
(E) For defrauding in any other manner the Waterworks Department;
(F) For not constructing water services according to this chapter and any other applicable ordinance,
rule, or regulation; or
(G) (1) For failure to allow and/or for preventing directly or indirectly, the city employee or
representative designated by the Waterworks Superintendent from reading any meter on the premises
within 60 days after a written request to al1ow the reading has been either:
(a) Mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the customer at the address of the
premises or at the billing address previously tendered by the customer:
(b) Delivered in person to the customer or to a party residing at the premises or an
employee of an entity occupying the premises; or
(c) Left at the premises.
(2) No such notice may be issued until at least 120 days after the last reading of the meter.
(Ord. 1326, passed 3-4-02; Am. Ord. 1409, passed 12-18-06; Am. Ord. 1417, passed 5-5-08; Am. Ord.
1447, passed 11-15-10)
§ S0.42 WATER USE ON CONSTRUCTION SITE.
Notwithstanding anything else to the contrary herein, the use of water from the city's Waterworks
system on any site where a new improvement is being constructed shall be governed as follows.
(A) Water from the city's Waterworks system shall not be utilized at the construction site of a new
improvement unless a permit is first obtained from the office of the city's Waterworks Superintendent.
(B) The owner of the real estate on which the new improvements are being located shall be
responsible for obtaining the permit, although the owner may appoint another party who may obtain the
permit on the owner's behalf.
Water 13
(C) There shall be no fee for the above referenced permit. However, the owner shall be responsible
for the payment of $10 plus sales tax per calendar month, and any portion of a calendar month, that the
permit shall be effective.
(D) Once a permit is obtained, the owner may tap into the Warerworks system on the site of the new
improvements. The actual tap into the Waterworks system must be performed in the presence of the
Superintendent of the Waterworks sysrem or his or her nominee.
(E) During the effective term of the above referenced permit, the owner or his or her nominee may
utilize water from the Waterworks system for purposes of testing pipes, mixing cement or mortar, or
for other general construction purposes. Water from the city's Waterworks system may not be utilized
pursuant to the permit for the use of hwnan consumption or habitation of the improvement, or for any
other non-general construction purpose.
(F) Failure to pay aoy bill by the tenth day of the month following the issuaoce of any bill shall
result in the immediate disconnection of water service. Use of water fiom the Waterworks system for
a purpose in violation of division (E) of this section shall result in the immediate issuance by the
Superintendent of the Waterworks system of an order requiring the prohibited use to cease immediately.
A violation of th.is order after it is posted on the premises shall result in a fine of not less than $50 nor
more than $300. Each day in which a violation occurs shall constitute a separate violation.
(G) Upon completion of any new improvement, or the need for water services for the construction
of any new improvement, whichever shall first occur, the owner or his or her nominee shall notify the
office of the Superintendent of the city's Waterworks, and the Superintendent shall cause the service to
be disconnected. Monthly charges shall continue to accrue until this notice has been received.
(H) Service from the city's Waterworks system shall not be reconnected to the completed
improvement nor shall a water meter be installed until the owner or his or her nominee shall have given
evidence to the Superintendent of the Waterworks system that a. certificate of occupancy and all
inspections necessary therefor have been issued for the new improvement by the city.
(Ord. 1326, passed 3-4-02; Am. Ord. 1350, passed 8-18-03; Am. Ord. 1409, passed 12-18-06; Am.
Ord. 1417, passed 5-5-08; Am. Ord. 1447, passed 11-15-10) Penalty, see§ 10.99
PRIVATE WEUS
§ 50.55 PRIVATE WELLS RESTRICTED.
No private wells for the extraction of subterranean water for u.se or consumption by humans shall
be installed or constructed by any person, firm, or corporation within the boundaries of the city, unless,
in the opinion of the Board of Public Works and Safety, it shall be economically impractical or otherwise
not feasible fur the extension of the city's water lines to the property in question. Any permission by
the Board of Public Works and Safety for the installation or construction of such a private well is subject
14 Nappanee - Public Works
to satisfaction of any other federal, state, or local statute, ordinance, resolution, regulation, or rule and
to the approval of any federal, state, or local governing body or governmental subdivision which shall
have jurisdiction over the installation or construction.
C 83 Code, § 7-23) (Ord. 1027, passed 6-2-86) Penalty, see§ 10.99
§ 50.56 PRIVATE WELLS FOR NON-CONSUMPTION USES.
Any person, firm, or corporation desiring to construct a well for the extraction of water for
industrial or other uses, but not for human consumption, shall submit an application to the Board of
Public Works and Safety together with plans, specifications, designs, and other information, whereupon
the Board may approve, modify, approve as modified, or reject the application for a private well;
provided, however, that no permit for a private well shall be approved unless adequate safeguards are
installed and constructed to insure against human consumption of that water.
('83 Code,§§ 7-23 and 7-24) (Am. Ord. 1027, passed 6-2-86) Penalty, see§ 10.99
§ 50,57 INJUNCTIVE RELIBF.
ThiB subchapter shall be enforceable by injunctive or other procedures in any court of competent
jurisdiction.
C 83 Code, §§ 7-23 and 7-25) (Am. Ord. 1027, passed 6-2-86)
PROTECTION OF WATER SYSTEM
§ 50.70 CROSS CONNECTION AND INTERCONNECTION PROHIBITIONS.
(A) For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
CROSS CONNECTION. Any physical connection or arrangement between two otherwise
separate systems, one of which contains potable water from the city water system, and the other, water
from a private source, water of unknown or questionable safety, or steam, gases, or chemicals, whereby.
there may be a flow from one system to the other, the direction of flow depending on the pressure
differential between the two systems.
(' 83 Code, § 9-60)
(B) No person, ftrm, or corporation shall establish or permit to be established or maintain or permit
to be maintained any cross connection. No interconnection shall be established whereby potable water
from a private, auxiliary, or emergency water supply other than the regular public water supply of the
city may enter the supply or distribution system of the municipality, unless that private, auxiliary, or
emergency water supply and the method of connection and use of the supply shall have been approved
Water 15
by the Water Utility and by the state Department of Environmental Management in accordance with 327
I.A.C. 8-10.
(' 83 Code, § 9-61) (Ord. 1096, passed 2-20-89) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 50.71 INSPECTIONS OF POTENTIAL CROSS CONNECTIONS •.
It shall be the duty of the city Water Utility to cause inspections to be made of all properties served
by the public water system where cross connections with the public water system is deemed possible.
The frequency of inspections and reinspections based on potential health hazards involved shall be as
established by the Water Utility. ·
(' 83 Code, § 9-62) (Ord. 1096, passed 2-20-89)
§ 50. 72 RIGHT OF ENTRY; INFORMATION REQUIRED.
Upon presentation of credentials, the representative of the Water Utility shall have the right to
request entry at any reasonable time to examine any property served by a connection to the public water
system of the city for cross connections. On request, the owiler, lessee, or occupant of any property so
served shall furnish to the inspection agency any pertinent information regarding the piping system or
systems on the property. The refusal of access or refusal of requested pertinent information shall be
deemed evidence of the presence of cross connections.
(' 83 Code, § 9-63) (Ord. 1096, passed 2-20-89)
§ SO. 73 DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE.
The Water Utility is authorized and directed to discontinue water service to any property wherein
any connection in violation of this subchapter exists and to take those other precautionary measures
deemed necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of the public water system. Subject to the
provisions of § 50. 74, water service shall be discontinued only a~er 30 days notice is served on the
owner, lessee, or occupants of the property or premises where a violation is found or suspected to exist.
Water service to the property shall not be restored until the cross connection(s) has been eliminated in
compliance with the provisions of this subchapter.
C 83 Code, § 9-64) (Ord. 1096, passed 2-20-89)
§ 50.74 EMERGENCY DISCONTINUANCE.
If it is deemed by the Water Utility that a cross connection or an emergency endangers public health,
safety, or welfare and requires immediate action, and a written finding to that effect is filed with the
ClerkpTreasurer of the city and delivered to the consumer's premises, service may be immediately
discontinued. The consumer shall have an opportunity for heariDg within ten days of an emergency
'--~' discontinuance.
('83 Code, § 9-65) (Ord. 1096, passed 2-20-89)
16 Nappanee - Public Works
§ 50. 75 HAZARDOUS USERS; BACKFLOW PREVENTORS REQUIRED.
All consumers using toxic or hazardous liquids, all hospitals, mortuaries, wastewater treatment
plants, laboratories, and all other hazardous users must install and maintain a reduced-pressure-principle
backflow preventor in the main water line serving each building on the premises, The backflow
preventor must be installed in an easily accessible location not subject to flooding or freezing.
(' 83 Code, § 9-66) (Ord. 1096, passed 2-20-89)
§ 50.76 REGULATIONS SUPPLEMENTAL.
This subchapter does not supersede the state Uniform Plumbing Code as adopted by the city but is
supplementary to it.
('83 Code, § 9-67) (Ord. 1096, passed 2-20-89)
ABANDONED WATER WELLS; SEALING
§ 50.90 SEALING REQUIRED; STATE STANDARDS APPLY.
If any water well within the city shall no longer be in use, then that well must be sealed within 30
days of its last use by a well driller licensed as such by the state, with the well to be sealed in accordance
with the standards established by the state statute in I.C. 25-39 or elsewhere, as amended from time to
time, and in accordance with the regulations established by state agencies as amended from time to time.
(Ord. 1213, passed 8-7-95)
§ 50.91 RESPONSIBILITY AND SUPERVISION.
(A) Any unused well shall be sealed in the presence of the Superintendent of the city Water Utility
(the "Superintendent") or his or her nominee.
(B) The owner of the property on which the well sits shall be solely responsible for the cost of this
work and for making arrangements with the Superintendent or his or her nominee to ensure the presence
of the Superintendent or nominee at the time the well is sealed.
(Ord. 1213, passed 8-7-95)
Water 17
§ 50.92 EXCEPTION; TEMPORARY ABSENCE.
For the purposes of determining if a well is in use, a well need not be sealed if its lack of Use arises
solely from the temporary absence of the occupant of the property on which the well is located from the
city. A temporary absence, as referenced above, shall not be a period longer than nine months.
(Ord. 1213, passed 8-7-95)
§ 50.93 SEALING REPORT REQUIRED.
Any well driller who is engaged to seal a water well within the city shall cause a report to be filed
with the office of the Superintendent of the city Water Utility within 30 days of the sealing of the well.
This report shall give the location of the well, the date the well was sealed, the names of those
individuals present when the well was sealed, and a brief description of the materials and procedures
utilized to seal the well in question. The report shall be signed by tb.e well driller or a duly authorized
representative thereof.
(Ord. 1213, passed 8-7-95)
§ 50.94 COMPLIANCE WITH FEDERAL, STATE, AND LOCAL REGULATIONS.
The sealing of water wells is subject to the satisfaction of any other federal, state, or local statute,
ordinance, resolution, regulation, or rule and to the approval of any federal, state, or local governing
body or governmental subdivision which shall have jurisdiction over this type of matter.
(Ord. 1213, passed 8-7-95)
§ 50.95 VIOLATIONS; REMEDIES.
(A) This subchapter shall be enforceable in any court of competent jurisdiction.
(B) Any person, firm, or corporation who shall violate any requirement of this subchapter or fail
to comply therewith or with any of the requirements thereof shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined.
(C) Additionally, in the event that it is found that a water well located within the city has been
sealed improperly, or in the absence of the superintendent or his or her nominee, then the owner shall,
in addition to any monetary penalty, be required to unseal the well and to cause that well to be properly
re-sealed, all at his, her, or its own costs.
(Ord. 1213, passed 8-7-95) Penalty, see§ 10,99
18 Nappanee - Public Works
CHAPTER 51: SEWERS
Section
Genera/, Provisions
51.001 Purpose and policy
51. 002 Administration
51.003 Abbreviations
51.004 Definitions
General Sewer Use Requirements
51.020 Construction and connections
5(021 Prohibited uses
51. 022 Prohibited discharge standards
51.023 National categorical pretreatment standards
51. 024 State pretreatment standards
51.025 Pollutant concentration guidelines and limits
51.026 Waste strength and content; surcharges
51.00.7 City's right of revision
51.028 Dilution
Pretreatment of Wastewater
51.040 Pretreatment facilities
51.041 Additional pretreatment measures
51.042 Accidental discharge! slug control plans
51. 043 Hauled wastewater
Industrial Wastewater Discharge Permit Application
51.055 Industrial wastewater analysis
51.056 Industrial wastewater discharge permit requirement
51.057 Industrial wastewater discharge permitting: existing connections
51.058 Industrial wastewater discharge permitting: new connections
51.059 Industrial wastewater discharge permit application contents
51.060 Application signatories and certification
51.061 Industrial wastewater discharge permit decisions
19
2016 S-1
20 Nappanee - Public Works
Industrial Wastewater Discharge Permit Issuance Process
51.075 Wastewater discharge permit duration
51.076 Wastewater discharge permit contents
51.077 Wastewater. discharge permit appeals
51.078 Wastewater discharge permit modifications
51.f.fl9 Wastewater discharge permit transfer
51. 080 Wastewater discharge permit revocation
51. 081 Wastewater discharge permit reissuance
51.082 Regulation of waste received from other jurisdictions
Industrial Reporting Requirements
51. 095 Baseline monitoring reports
51.096 Compliance schedule progress reports
51.. 097 Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline
51.098 Periodic compliance reports
51.099 Reports of changed conditions
51.100 Reports of potential problems
51.101 Reports from unpermitted users
51.102 Notice of violation/repeat sampling and reporting
51.103 Notification of the discharge of hazardous waste
51.104 Analytical requirements
51.105 Sample collection
51.106 Timing
51.107 Record keeping
Compliance Monitoring
51.115 Right of entry: inspection and sampling
51.116 Search warrants
Confidential Information
51.130 Confidential information
Publication of Users in Significant Noncompliance
51.145 Publication of users in significant noncompliance
2016 S-1
51.160 Minor infraction
51.161 Notification of violation
51.162 Consent orders
51.163 Show cause order and hearing
51.164 Compliance orders
51.165 Cease and desist orders
51.166 Revocation order
51.167 Emergency suspensions
51. 168 Termination of discharge
Sewers
Enforcement
51.169 Right of appeal; Board of Public Works and.Safety
51.170 Injunctive relief
51.171 Civil penalties
51.172 Remedies nonexclusive
51.173 Service
51.174 Effective date of notice, order of statement
Supplemental Enforcement Action
51.185 Performance bonds
51.186 Liability insurance
51.187 Water supply severance
51.188 Public nuisances
51.189 Contractor listing
Affirmative Defenses to Discharge Violations
51.200 Upset
51.201 Prohibited discharge standards
51.202 Bypass
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 51.001 PVRPOSE AND POLICY.
21
(A) This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for users of the Nappanee Wastewater Departinent
Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW} for the city and enables the city to comply with all applicable
state and Federal laws, including the Cleau Water Act (33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.) and the general
pretreatment regulations (40 CFR Part 403). The objectives of this chapter are:
2016 S-1
22 Nappanee - Public Works
(1) To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the Nappanee POTW that will interfere with
its operation;
(2) To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the Nappanee POTW that will pass through
the POTW, inadequately treated, into receiving waters, or otherwise be incompatible with the POTW;
(3) To protect both Nappanee POTW personnel who may be affected by wastewater and sludge
in the course of their employment and the general public;
(4) To promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater and sludge from the Nappanee
POTW; and
(5) To enable Nappanee POTW to comply with its National Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System Permit conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements, and any other Federal or state laws to
which the Nappanee POTW is subject.
(B) This chapter shall apply to all users of the Nappanee POTW. This chapter authorizes the
issuance of wastewater discharge permits; provides for monitoring, compliance, and enforcement
activities; establishes administrative review procedures; requires user reporting; and provides the
authority to recover the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein.
(Ord. 1516, passed 2-16-16) ·
§ 51.002 ADMINISTRATION.
Except as otherwise provided herein, the Utilities Manager shall administer, implement, and enforce
the provisions of this chapter. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the Utilities Manager may
be delegated by him to other Nappanee Wastewater Department personnel.
(Ord. 1516, passed 2-16-16)
§ 51.003 ABBREVIATIONS.
The following abbreviations, when used in this chapter, shall have the designated meanings:
ASTM. American Society for Testing Materials.
BOD. Biochemical ox)rgen demand.
CFR. Code of Federal Regulations.
COD. Chemical oxygen demand.
2016 S-1
Sewers 23
EPA. Environmental Protection Agency.
gpd. Gallons per day.
ISDH. Indiana State Department of Health.
L. Liter.
mg. Milligrams.
mg IL. Milligrams per liter.
NPDES. National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.
NSIU. Non-significant industrial user.
O&M. Operation and maintenance.
PO'TW. Publicly Owned Treatment Works.
RCRA. Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (PL 94-580).
SIC. Standard industrial classification.
SWDA. Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 U.S.C. 6901, et. seq.
SIU. Significant industrial user.
SNC. Significant noncompliance.
TSS. Total suspended solids.
USC. United States Code.
WEF. Water Environment Federation.
40 CFR 403. General Pretreatment Regulations as published in the Federal Register on June 26,
1978, and on January 28, 1981, and in subsequent amendments thereto.
(Ord. 1516, passed 2-16-16) 1
2016 S-1
24 Nappanee - Public Works
§ 51.004 DEFINITIONS.
Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this
chapter, shall have the meanings hereinafter designated.
ACT or THEA CT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, (PL 92-500) also known as the Clean
Water Act of 1977, as amended, 33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq. (PL 95-217); as well as any guidelines,
limitations and standards promulgated by the Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to THE ACT.
APPLICABLE PRETREATMENT STANDARD. Any pretreatment limit or prohibitive standard
(federal and/or local) contained in this chapter deemed to be.the most restrictive which non-domestic
users will be required to comply with.
APPROVAL AUTHORITY. The Indiana Department of Environmentaf Management.
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF THE USER.
(1) If the user is a corporation, the president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice president of the
corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy
or decision-making functions for the corporation.
(2) If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general partner or proprietor,
respectively.
(3) If the user is a Federal, state, or local governmental facility: a director or highest official
appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government
facility, or their designee.
(4) The Utilities Manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operating facilities,
provided the Manager is authorized to make management decisions that govern the operation of the
regulated facility by having the explicit or implicit duty of making major capital investment
recommendations, and initiate and direct other comprehensive measures to assure the long-term
environmental compliance with environmental laws and regulations; can ensure that necessary systems
are established or actions taken to gather complete and accurate information for individual wastewater
permit requirements; and where authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the
manager in accordance with corporate procedures.
(5) The individuals described in divisions (1) through (4), above, may designate another
authorized representative if the authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or
position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or
having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and the written authorization
is submitted to the Nappanee Board of Public Works and Safety.
2016 S-1
Sewers 25
AVERAGE MONTHLY DISCHARGE LIMITATION. The highest allowable average of daily
discharges over a calendar month, calculated as the sum of all daily discharges measured during a
calendar month divided by the number of daily discharges measured during that month.
BENEFICIAL USES. These uses include, but are not limited to, domestic, municipal, agricultural,
and industrial use, power genefation, recreation, aesthetic enjoyment, navigation, and the preservation
and enhancement of :fish, wildlife, and other aquatic resources or reserves, and other uses, both tangible
and inmngible, as specified by state or Federal law.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES or BMPs. Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices,
maintenance procedures, and other management practices to implement the prohibitions listed in
§ 51.020(A) and (B) [40 CFR 403.5(a}(l) aod (b)]. BMPs include treatment requirements, operating
procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or
drainage from raw materials storage.
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND or BOD. The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical
oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures for five days at 20 degrees Centigrade,
usually expressed as a concentration (e.g., mg/L). The laboratory determinations shall be made in
accordance with procedures set forth in STANDARD METHODS.
BOARD OF PUBLIC WORKS AND SAFETY. The administrative governing body of the public
utilities of the city or any duly authorized officials acting on its behalf. This body is sometimes
hereinafter referred to as the "Board."
CATEGORICAL INDUSTRIAL USER. An industrial user subject to a categorical pretrea1ment
standard or categorical standard.
CATEGORICALPl/ETl/EATMENT STANDARD or CATEGORICAL STANDARD. Any Federal
regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in accordance with Section 307(b)
and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317) which apply to a specific category of users and which appear in
40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471.
CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND( COD). Of sewage, sewage effluent, polluted waters or industrial
wastes is a measure of the oxygen equivalent of that portion of the organic matter in a sample that is
susceptfule to oxidation by a strong chemical oxidant. The laboratory determination shall be made in
accordance with procedures set forth in STANDARD METHODS.
CITY. The City of Nappanee, Indiana.
COMBINED PUBUC SEWER. A wastewater collection sewer owned by the city which has been
designed and constructed to convey sanitary wastewaters (domestic, commercial, or industrial
wastewaters) and storm water through a single pipe system to the POTW treatment plant.
2016 S-1
26 Nappanee ~ Public Works
COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT. Wastewater having or containing measurable biochemical oxygen
demand (BOD), suspended solids, pH, and fecal coliform bacteria, or additional pollutants identified or
defined in the city's NPDES permit, State of Indiana or United States EPA. Examples of the additional
pollutants which may be compatible include:
(!) Chemical oxygen demand;
(2) Total organic carbon;
(3) Phosphorus and phosphorus componnds;
- (4) Nitrogen and nitrogen compounds; and
(5) Fats, oils, and greases of animal or vegetable origin except as prohibited where their
materials would interfere with the operation of the Treatment Works.
COMPOSITE SAMPLE. Should contain a minimum of eight discrete samples taken at equal time
intervals over the compositing period or proportional to the flow rate over the compositing period. More
than the minimum number of discrete samples will be required where the wastewater loading is highly
variable.
CONTROL AUTHORITY. The Commissioner of the Indiana Department of Environmental
Management.
DAILY DISCHARGE. Discharge of a pollutant "measured during a calendar day or any 24 hour
period that reasonably represents the calendar day for purposes of sampling."
DEBT SERVICE COSTS. The average annual principal and interest payments on all outstanding
revenue bonds or other long term capital debt.
DEPARTMENT. The Wastewater Department, including the Publicly Owned Treatment Works
(POTW) operated by such DEPARTMENT.
EASEMENT. An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others.
EFFLUENT. Water, together with any wastes that may be present, flowing out of a drain, sewer,
receptacle, or outlet.
ENVIRONMENTALPROTECTIONAGENCY(EPA). The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
or, where appropriate, the Regional Water Management Division Director, or other duly authorized
official of said agency.
2016 S-1
Sewers 27
ESCHERICHIA COU (E. COLI). Any number of organisms common to the intestinal tract of man
and animals whose presence in sanitary sewage is an indicator of pollution.
EXCESSIVE STRENGTH SURCHARGE. An additional charge which is billed to users for treating
sewage wastes with an average strength in excess of normal domestic sewage ..
EXJSTING$0URCE. Any source of discharge, the construction or operation of which commenced
prior to the publication by EPA of proposed categorical pretreatment standards, which will be applicable
to such source if the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with Section 307 of.the Act.
FEDERAL ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, PL 92-500, and any amendments
thereto; as well as any guidelines, limitations, and standard promulgated by the Environmental Protection
Agency pursuant to the act. ·
FLOATABLE OIL. Oil, fat, or grease in a physical state, such that will separate by gravity from
wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment facility.
GARBAGE. Any solid wastes from the preparation, cooking, or dispensing of food and from the
handling, storage, or sale of produce.
GENERAL PROHIBITIONS. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW any
pollutant or wastewater which causes pass through or interference. These GENERAL PROHIBITIONS
apply to all users of the POTW whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or
any other national, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements.
GRAB SAMPLE. A random sample which is taken from a wastestrearn without regard to the flow
in the wastestream or time of day and over a period of time not to exceed 15 minutes.
GREASE and OIL. A group of substances including hydrocarbons, fatty acids, soaps, fats, waxes,
oils or any other material that is extracted by a solvent from an acidified sample and that is not
.volatilized during the laboratm:y test procedures. GREASES and OILS are defined by the method of their
determination in accordance with standard methods.
GROUND (SHREDDED) GARBAGE. Garbage that is shredded to such a degree that all particles
will be carried freely in suspension under the conditions normally prevailing in the sewerage system,
with no particle being greater than half an inch in dimension,
HAZARDOUS WASTE. A:ny waste defined as a hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part 261.
HOLDING TANK WASTE. A:ny waste from holding tanks, such as chemical toilets, campers,
trailers, septic tanks, vacuum pump trucks, etc.
2016 S-1
28 Nappanee - Public Works
INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANT. Any pollutant that is not defined as a compatible pollutant.
INDIRECT DISCHARGE or DISCHARGE. The introduction of pollutants into the POTW from
any non-domestic source regulated under Section 307 (b), (c), or (d) of the Act.
INDUSTRIAL USER. Any industrial or commercial establishment, manufacturing, or processing
facility that discharges a non-domestic waste to a POTW.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE PERMIT. A permit to deposit or discharge non-domestic waste into any
sanitary sewer as issued by the POTW.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES. Any solid, liquid, or gaseous substance or form of energy discharged,
permitted to flow or escaping from an industrial, manufacturing, commercial, or business process or
from the development, recovery, or processing of any natural resource carried on by any person and
shall further mean any waste from a non-domestic user.
INFILTRATION. The water entering a sewer system, including sewer service connections, from
the ground, through such means as, but not "limited to, defective pipes, pipe joints, connections, or
manhole walls.
INFILTRATION/INFLOW. The total quantity of water from both infiltration and inflow without
distinguishing the source.
INFLOW. The water discharged into a sewer system, including service connections from such
sources as, but not limited to, roof leaders, cellar, yard, and area drains, foundation drains, cooling
water discharges, drains from springs and swampy areas, manhole covers, catch basins, stormwaters,
surface runoff, street wash waters, or drainage. INFLOW does not include, and is distinguished from,
infiltration.
INFLUENT. The water, together with any wastes that may be present, flowing into a drain, sewer,
receptacle, or outlet.
INSPECTOR. Utilities Manager or his duly authorized representative responsible for the inspection
of the connection to the public sewer system and activities related to the evaluation and assurance of
compliance relative to any such connection.
INTERFERENCE. A discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from
other sources, both:
(1) Inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations, or its sludge
processes, use or disposal; and
2016 S-1
Sewers 29
(2) Therefore is a cause of a violation any requirement of the city1 s NP DES permit (including
an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or
disposal in compliance with . the following statutory provisions and regulations or permits issued
thereunder (or more stringent state or local regulations): Section 405 of the Clean Water Act, the Solid
Waste Disposal Act (SWDA) (including Title Il, more commonly referred to as the Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), and including state regulations contained in any state sludge
management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the SWDA), the Clean Air Act, the Toxic
Substances Control Act, and the Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act.
LATERAL SEWER. The sewer from the building to the public sewer.
(1) SANITARY LATERAL SEWER. A lateral sewer which conveys sanitary or industrial
sewage only to the public sewer.
(2) STORM LATERAL SEWER. A lateral sewer which conveys stnnnwater or other clear
water drainage, but no sanitary or industrial sewage, to the public sewer.
LOCAL UMIT. Specific discharge lintits developed and enforced by the city upon industrial or
commercial facilities to implement the general and specific discharge prohibitions listed in 40 CPR
403.S(a)(l) and (b).
MAXIMUM DAILY DISCHARGE LIMITATIONS. Highest allowable daily discharge .
.MAY. The act referred to as permissive.
MEDICAL WASTE. Isolation wastes, infectious ageuts, human blood and blood products,
pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated
laboratory wastes, and dialysis wastes.
MINOR INFRACTION. Includes, but is not limited to, one time missed reporting deadlines,
short-term excursions of pollutant limitations (provided that no pass-through, interference or
environmental or health damage occurs), improper disposal of non-hazardous wastes or unintentional
discharge of a prohibited substance provided the discharge is a one-time occurrence and immediate steps
were taken to :minimize the discharge.
MONTHLY A VERA GE. The sum of all dally discharges measured during a calendar month divided
by the number of daily discharges measured during that month.
MONTHLY AVERAGE UMIT. The highest allowable average of dally discharges over a calendar
month, calculated as the sum of all daily discharges measured during that month.
NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, lak:e1 or other body of surface or
groundwater.
2016 S~l
30 Nappanee - Public Works
NEW SOURCE.
(1) Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is (or may be) a discharge
of pollutants, the construction of which connnenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment
standards under Section 307(c) (33 U.S. C. 1317) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if
such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that:
(a) The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at a site at which no other
source is located;
(b) The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces the process or
production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or
( c) The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility,
or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining
whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new _facility is
integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general
type of activity as the existing source, should be considered.
(2) Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather
than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility, or installation
meeting the criteria of divisions (l)(b) or (c) above but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing
process or production equipment.
(3) Construction of a NEW SOURCE as defined under thiB paragraph has commenced if the
owner or operator has:
(a) Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous, onsite construction program:
1. Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment;or
2. Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of
existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation
of new source facilities or equipment; or
(b) Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment
which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts
which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering,
and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this definition.
NONCONTACT COOLING WATER. Water used for cooling which does not come into direct
contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product, or finished product.
2016 S·l
Sewers 31
NON-SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER. (Formerly "minor contributor.") A non-major
contributor that has potential for:
(1) Discharging pollutants that could violate specific local limits; and
(2) Accidental spill or slug discharges of pollutants to the sewage system.
NORMAL DOMESTIC SEWAGE. (For the purpose of determining surcharges.) Wastewater or
sewage having an average daily concentration as follows:
(1) BOD not more than 200 mgn;
(2) Total suspended solids not more than 240 mg/I;
(3) Ammonia not more than 20 mg/I; and
( 4) Phosphorus not more than 10 mgn.
NPDES PERMIT. National pollutant discharge elimination system permit setting forth conditions
for the discharge of any pollutant or combination of pollutants to the navigable waters of the United
States pursuant to Section 402 of PL 95-217.
NUISANCE. Anything which is injurious to health or offensive to the senses or an obstruction to
the free use of property so as to interfere with the comfort or enjoyment of life or property.
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE COSTS. Include all costs, direct and indirect, necessary to
provide adequate wastewater collection, transport, and treatment on a continuing basis and to produce
discharges to receiving waters that conform with all related Federal. state and local requirement. These
costs include replacem"ent.
OTHER SERVICE CHARGES. Tap charges, connection charges, area charges, and other
identifiable charges other than user charges, debt service charges, and excessive strength surcharges.
PASS THROUGH. The discharge of pollutants by an industrial user through the Nappanee POTW
into navigable waters in quantities or concentrations which are a cause of or significantly contribute to
a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude
or duration of a violation) and as defined in 40 CFR 403, Part 403 .3 (n).
PERSON. Any and all persons, natural or artificial, including any individual, firm, company,
municipal, or private corporation, partnership, co-partnership, joint stock company, trust, estate,
association, society, institution, enterprise, governmental agency, the State of Indiana, the United States
of America, or other entity, or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns. The masculine gender shall
include the feminine, the singular shall include the plural where indic'\ted by the context.
2016 S-1
32 Nappanee - Public Works
pH. The logarithm (to the base ten) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration of a solution
expressed in gramwatoms per liter of solution. A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution,
expressed in standard units.
POLLUTANT. Dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage,
sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials,
heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal, agricultural and industrial
wastes, and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD,
COD, toxicity, or odor).
POUUTION. An alteration of the quality of the waters of the state by waste to a degree which
unreasonably affects such waters for beneficial uses or facilities which serve such beneficial uses. The
man-n::i,ade or man-induced alteration of the chemical, physical, biological, and radiological integrity of
water.
· PREMISES. A parcel of real estate including any single improvements thereon which is determined
by the Nappanee Wastewater Department to be a single user for purposes of receiving, using, and paying
for service. Any additional improvement on the same parcel of real estate which is determined by the
city to be a user shall be separately connected to the sewerage system for the purposes of receiving,
using, and paying for service.
PRETREATMENT. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the
alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of
discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into the Nappanee POTW. The reduction or
alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical, or biological processes, process changes, or by other
means, except as prohibited by 40 CPR§ 4Q3.6(d); and shall include all applicable rules and regulations
contained in the Code of Federal Regulations as published in the Federal Register, under Section 307
of PL 95-217, under regulation 40 CFR Part 403 pursuant to the Act, and amendments.
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS. Any substantive or procedural requirement related to
pretreatment, other than a pretreatment standard, imposed on an industrial user.
PRETREATMENT STANDARDS or STANDARDS. Prohibited discharge standards, categorical
pretreatment standards, and pollutant limits.
PRIVATE SEWER. Any sewer that is not located on a public street, alley or easement dedicated
to the city.
PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS or PROHIBITED DISCHARGES. Absolute.
prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances; these prohibitions appear in§ 51.022 of this
chapter.
?.016 S-1
Sewers 33
PROPER OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE. Procedures executed in a prudent, cost-effective,
and workmanlike manner which achieve the highest and/or required effluent quality of industrial
discharge attainable in conformance with the best available technology and practices. PROPER
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE requirements include avoidance of operational error, adherence
to manual instructions, preventive maintenance, avoidance of careless or improper operation, neat
accurate sampling, analysis, and records retention; storage of process chemicals, lubricants, solvents,
etc., in a safe and organized manner, avoidance of accidental spillage, keeping operating logs, and any
other activities which produce the desired effluent quality.
PUBUCLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW). A Treatment Works, as defined by Section
212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. §1292) which is owned by the city. This definition includes any sewers that
convey wastewater to the Nappanee POTW treatment plant, but does not include pipes, sewers, or othet
conveyances not connected to a facility providing treatment. For the purposes of this chapter, PO'I'W
shall also include any sewers that convey wastewaters tO the POTW from persons outside the city who
are, by contract or agreement with Nappanee, users of the Nappanee POTW.
PUBLIC SEWER. Any sewer that is located in a public street, public alley or easement dedicated
to the city.
RECEIVING STREAM. The watercourse, stream, or body of water receiving the waters finally
discharged from the wastewater treatment plant.
REPLACEMENT COSTS. The expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment, accessories,
or appurtenances which are necessary during the useful life of the POTW equipment to maintain the
capacity and performance for which these works were designed and constructed.
SANITARY PUBUC SEWER. A sewer that conveys liquid and water-carried wastes from
residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions, and to which storm, surface, and
ground waters are not intentionally allowed to enter.
SEPTIC TANK WASTE. Any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, cbendcal toilets, campers,
trailers, and septic tanks.
SEWAGE. The combination of the liquid and water carried wastes from residences, commercial
buildings, industrial plants and institutions, including polluted cooling water. The three most common
types of SEWAGE are:
(1) COMBINED SEWAGE. Wastes including sanitary sewage, industrial sewage, storm water,
infiltration, and inflow carried to the wastewater treatment facilities by a COMBINED SEWER;
(2) INDUSTRIAL SEWAGE. A combination of liquid and water-carried wastes, discharged
from any industrial establishment, and resulting from any trade or process carried on in that
establishment, and shail include the wastes fron1 pretreatment facilities and polluted cooling water; and
2016 S-1
34 Nappanee - Public Works
(3) SANITARY SEWAGE. A combination of liquid and water-carried wastes discharged from
toilet and other sanitary plumbing facilities.
· SEWER. A pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or drainage water,
(1) SANITARY SEWER. A sewer that conveys liquid and water-carried wastes from
residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions, and to which storm, surface, and
ground waters are not intentionally allowed to enter.
(2) STORM SEWER. A sewer which is designed to carry only storm water but excludes other
liquid and water-carried wastes.
(3) COMBINED SEWER. A wastewater collection sewer owned by the city which has been
designed and constructed to convey sanitary wastewaters (domestic, commercial, or industrial
wastewaters) and storm water through a single pipe system to the POTW treatment plant.
SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER. (Formerly a major contributor.)
(1) A user subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or
(2) A user that:
(a) Discharges an average of 25,000 gpd or more of process wastewater to the Nappanee
POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling, and boiler blowdown wastewater);
(b) Contributes a process wastestream which makes up 5 % or more of the average dry
weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant; or
(c) Is designated as such by Nappanee on the basis that it has a reasonable potential for
adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement.
(3) Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in division (2) has no reasonable potential
for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement,
the city may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition received from a user, and in
accordance with procedures in 40 CFR 403.8(t)(6), determine that such user should not be considered
a SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER.
2016 S-1
Sewers 35
SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE (SNC). Includes any the following violations:
(1) CHRONIC VIOLATIONS OF WASTEWATER DISCHARGE UMITS. Those in which
66 % or more of wastewater measurements taken during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude)
a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement inc.luding instantaneous limits as defined by § § 51.020
et seq. of this chapter;
(2) TECHNICAL REVIEW CRITERIA (TRC) VIOLATIONS. Those in which 33 % or more
of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant parameter during a six-month period equals or
exceeds the product of the numeric pretreatment standards or requirement including instantaneous limits,
as def'med by §§ 51.020 et seq. of this cbapter multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS,
fats, oils, ~d grease, 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH);
(3) Any other discharge violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement as defined by
§§ 51.020 et seq. of this chapter (daily maximum, long-tenn average, instantaneous limit, or narrative
standard) that the Utilities Manager believes has caused, alone or in combination with oilier discharges,
interference or pass through, including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public;
(4) Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to the public or to the
environment, or bas resulted in the Nappanee Board of Public Works and Safety's exercise of its
emergency authority to halt or Prevent such a discharge;
(5) Faih.rre to meet, within 90 days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone
contained in a wastewater discharge permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing
construction, or attaining final compliance;
(6) Failure to provide within 45 days after the due date, any required reports, including
baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines,
periodic self-~onitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules;
(7) Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
(8) Any other violation(s), which may include Best Management Practices (BMPs), that the
Nappanee Board of Public Works and Safety upon recommendation of the Utilities Manager determines
will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the. local pretreatment program.
SLUDGE. Any solid, semi-solid, or liquid waste generated from a municipal, commercial, or
industrial wastewater treatment plant, water supply treatment plant, Or air pollution contro.l facility or
any other waste having similar characteristics and effects as defined in standards issued under Section
402, 405 of the Federal Act and in the applicable requirements uuder Sections 3001, 3004, and 4004 of
the Solid Waste Disposal Act, PL 94-580.
2016 S-1
36 Nappanee - Public Works
SLUG LOAD or SLUG/ SLUG LOAD or SLUG DISCHARGE. Any discharge at a flow rate or
concentration, which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in§ 51.022 of this
chapter. A SLUG DISCHARGE is any discharge of a non routine, episodic nature, including but not
limited to an accidental spill or a non customary batch discharge, which has a reasonable potential to
cause interference or pass through, or in any other way violate the POTW's regulations, local limits or
permit conditions.
STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC) CODE. A classification pursuant to the
Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the United States Office of Management and Budget.
STANDARD METHODS. The laboratory procedures set forth and in accordance with 40 CFR Part
136 and amendments thereto or with any other test procedures approved by EPA.
STORM PUBUC SEWER. A sewer which is designed to carry only storm water but excludes other
liquid and water-carried wastes.
STORM SEWER. A sewer which is designed to carry only storm water but excludes other liquid
and water-carried wastes.
STORMWATER. Water resulting from rain, melting or melted snow, hail or sleet.
SUPERINTENDENT. The SUPERINTENDENT of the municipal POTW of the city, or his or her
authorized deputy, agent, or representative. The SUPERINTENDENT may be the same individual as
the Utilities Manager.
SURCHARGE. A charge for services in addition to the basic service charge.
TOTAL SUSPENDED SOUDS. Solids which either float on the surface of or are in suspension in
water, sewage, or other liquid and which are removable by laboratory filtration. Their concentration
shall be expressed in milligrams per liter. Quantitative determination shall be made in accordance with
procedures set forth in STANDARD METHODS.
TOXIC AMOUNT. Concentrations of any pollutant or combination of pollutants which, upon
exposure to or assimilation into any organism, will cause adverse effects such as cancer, genetic
mutations, and physiological manifestations, as defined in standards issued pursuant to the Clean Water
Act (PL 95-217).
TOXICANT. A substance that is known or suspected to contain carcinogens, mutagens, or
teratogens and substances present in industrial discharges with known toxic effects on human and aquatic
life which is among the list of elements and compounds known as priority pollutants developed under
the Clean Water Act.
2016 S-1
Sewers 37
UNPOLLUTED WATER. Water of quality equal to or better than the effluent criteria in effect, or
water that would not cause violation of receiving water quality standards and would not be benefited by
discharge to sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.
UPSET. An exceptional incident in which a discharger unintentionally and temporarily is in a state
of noncompliance with the standards set forth in this chapter due to factors beyond the reasonable control
of the discharger, and excluding noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly
designed pretreatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation
thereof.
USER. Any person th.at discharges, causes, or permits the discharge of wastewater into the sewerage
system.
USER CHARGE. A charge levied on users of the wastewater treatment works for the cost of
operation and maintenance of the works pursuant to Section 204(b) of PL 92-500 (33 USC 1284).
USER CLASS. The division of wastewater treatment customers by source, function, waste
characteristics, and process or discharge similarities (such as residential, commercial, industrial,
institutional, and governmental classes).
(1) COMMERCIAL USER. Any establishment involved in a connnercial enterprise, business,
or service which, based on a determination by the city, discharges primarily segregated domestic wastes
or wastes from sanitary conveniences.
(2) GOVERNMENTAL USER. Any Federal, state, or local governmental user of the
wastewater treatment works.
(3) INDUSTRIAL USER. Any manufacturing or processing facility that discharges industrial
waste to a publicly owned treatment works.
(4) INSTITUTIONAL USER. Any establishment involved in a social, charitable, religious,
and/or educational function which, based on a determination by the city, discharges primarily segregated
domestic wastes or wastes from sanitary conveniences.
(5) RESIDENTIAL USER. A user of the treatment works whose premises or building is used
primarily as a residence for one or more persons, including all dwelling units, and the like.
UTILITIES MANAGER. The person designated by the Board of Works to supervise the operation
of the Nappanee POTW, and who is charged with certain duties and responsibilities by this chapter, or
a duly authorized representative. The Utilities Manager may be the same individual as the
Superintendent.
2016 S-1
38 Nappanee - Public Works
VOLATILE ORGANIC MATTER. The material in the sewage solids transformed to gases or vapors
when heated at 550 degrees Centigrade for 15 to 20 minutes. Quantitative determination shall be made
in accordance with procedures set forth in STANDARD METHODS.
WASTE. Includes sanitary sewage and any and all other waste substances, liquid, solid, gaseous,
or radioactive, associated with human habitation, or of human or animal origin, or from any producing,
processing, manufacturing, or industrial operation of whatever nature, including such waste placed
within containers or whatever nature prior to, and for purposes of, disposal.
WASTEWATER. Liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and sewage from residential dwellings,
commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or
untreated, which are contributed to the Nappanee POTW.
WASTEWATER CONSTITUENTS AND CHARACTERISTICS. The individual chemical, physical,
bacteriological, and radiological parameters, including volume, flow rate, and such other parameters that
serve to define, classify, or measure the contents, quality, quantity, and strength of wastewater.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT OR TREATMENT PLANT. That portion of the Nappanee
POTW which is designed to provide treatment of municipal sewage and industrial waste.
WATERCOURSE. A natural or artificial channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.
WATERS OF THE STATE. Any water, surface or underground, within the boundaries of Indiana,
except confined waters in sewers, tanks, etc.
(Ord. 1516, passed 2-16-16)
GENERAL SEWER USE REQUIREMENTS
§ 51.020 CONSTRUCTION AND CONNECTIONS.
(A) Private sewers prohibited. The construction of private sewers in any public street, alley, or
public way is expressly prohibited. All sewers hereafter constructed in or along any public street, alley
or public way shall be and become the property of the city and shall be and become apart of the POTW,
provide that they meet all applicable standards.
(B) Connection; application required. Any property owner desiring to tap on to a city sewer shall
file a written application for the sewer connection with the Board of Public Works and Safety.
2016S-1
•
Sewers 39
(C) Construction or connection permit required. No person shall uncover or disturb any lateral
sewer or public sewer thereof without first obtaining the written permission of the Utilities Manager or
his or her designee. No unauthorized person shall use, or make any connections with or opening into,
any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first satisfying all the requirements set forth herein.
In the event the Utilities Manager or his or her designee deems there to be an emergency, the Utilities
Manager or his or her designee may approve emergency repairs and/or connection to the public sewer.
(D) Permit process.
(1) Contents of the request for availability of service. Any person interested in connecting to
a public sewer shall submit a written request for connection to the Board consisting of the following
information:
(a) A detailed summary of the facilities which will discharge to public sewers;
(b) An estimate of projected peak and average wastewater flows which will be discharged
to public sewers;
(c) Identification of, if any, wastes other than domestic wastewater which will be
discharged. If so, specify the flow and characteristics of waste;
(d) The proposed implementation schedule for completion of design, acquiring necessary
construction permits, start of construction, completion of construction, and date sewer service will be
needed. Also, identify any schedule for phased development;
(e) The source of water supply, if other than city water utility, and information relative
to the metering of that water supply;
(t) To the extent that an interested person desires to make multiple connections on a parcel
of prOperty, the Utilities Manager may require such information as deemed reasonably necessary by the
Board of Public Works and/or Utilities Manager to determine that availability for multiple connections;
and
(g) Any additional information as requested by the Board and/or Utilities Manager.
(2) Review and determlnation regarding request of availability of connection.
(a) Upon receipt of the request fOr availability, the Board will review the request at its next
scheduled Board meeting which is not less than ten days after the date the request and information is
received by the Board. The Board may, however, at its own discretion, review the request at an earlier
date. Receipt by the Board shall be deemed to occur when the written request and all the above
referenced information is received by the office of the city's Clerk-Treasurer. Notwithstanding anything
2016 S-1
40 Nappanee - Public Works
herein to the contrary, in the event of a request to review the availability of capacity for multiple
connections, the Board shall review the request within 60 days of receipt of all information deemed
necessary and as requested by the Board and/or Utilities Manager.
(b) At the Board meeting, the Board will authorize the issuance of a letter of availability
of connection to the perspn submitting the application, if in the opinion of the Board, there is sufficient
capacity available to all downstream sewers, lift stations and force mains to accommodate the use or
connection. The letter of availability is not an approval of connection or use but is only an indication that
the Public Sewer possesses significant capacity for the use or connection. The letter of availability will
only be valid for 12 months, and, if a pennit to connect has not been issued within 12 months from the
date of issuance of the letter of availability, the letter of availability will be void.
(3) Requirements/or application/or permit to connect. Upon the issuance to a person of a letter
of availability of connection, the person may submit a written application for a permit to connect, to the
Board, together with the full permit fee. This application shall include the following information:
(a) A copy of the State Department of Environmental Management application for water
pollution control facility construction permit, if required by 327 I.A.C. Article 3 or any amended
suc.cessor regulation;
(b) A copy of ilie Sanitary Sewer Design Summary, if required by 327 I.A.C. Article 3
or any amended successor regulation;
(c) Plans and specifications for the sewer use or connection prepared, certified, and sealed
by an individual qualified under applicable laws of the state, unless the preparation of plans and
specifications for a particular use or connection are not otherwise required by law;
(d) A detailed description of the property for the facility proposed to be connected to the
public sewer, the name or names of the owners of record of the property, and any restrictions, restrictive
covenants, or easements which have been placed on the property;
(e) Evidence of proper zoning for the facility proposed to be connected to the sewer;
(f) If the person submitting the application is not an individual, the articles of
incorporation or other governing instrument of an entity together with name, address, and telephone
number of the official of the entity who may be contacted regarding the application;
(g) The names and types of waste products to be discharged to the sanitary sewer system;
and
(h) Any additional information as requested by the Utilities Manager.
2016 S-1
Sewers 41
(4) Permit application review.
(a) Upon receipt of the application for permit to connect and the above referenced
information, the Board will review the application at its next scheduled Board nieeting which is not less
than 21 days after the date the application information is received by the Board. The Board may,
however, at its own discretion, review the Application at an ear lier date. Receipt by the Board shall be
deemed to occur after the issuance of a letter of availability when the application and all the above
referenced information is received by the city's Clerk-Treasurer.
(b) Should the information submitted with the application for permit to connect not reveal
any reason why the permit should not be issued, the Board shall approve the application and issue a
permit to connect to the applicant.
(5) Permit issuance. Upon the issuance to a person of a permit to connect, and upon the
issuance of a certificate by the Inspector that all construction of the proposed facilities has been properly
performed and completed pursuant to the plans and specifications approved by the Board and any
applicable standards adopted by the Board, the person shall submit a written request to activate
connection to the inspector. For purposes of the issuance of the above referenced certificate by the
Inspector, no area of the proposed facilities, including sewer lines, shall be covered by any material,
earth fill, or otherwise until the Inspector or his or her designee has reviewed any such area. Upon a
written request to activate connection, the Inspector may activate the connection after all the conditions
of the permit to connect have been met.
(E) Connection and inspection fees; payment.
(1) Connection. Except as otherwise provided herein, a connection charge shall be collected
from each customer prior to connecting to the POTW. Each new connection to the sewer system shall
have a minimum service line of four inches. The connection charge for service lines shall be recovered
in accordance with and as provided by separate ordinance.
(2) Inspection/meter charge. Any inspection/meter chfilge in accordance with and as provided
by such separate ·ordinance.
(F) Old building sewers. Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are found, on examination and test by the Inspector, to meet all requirements of this chapter.
(G) Materials and procedures; standards. The size, slope, alignment, and materials of construction
of a building sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and
backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other
applicable rules and regulations of the city. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof,
the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the A.S. T .M. and W .E. F. Manual
of Practice No. 9 shall apply.
2016 S-1
42 Nappanee - Public Works
(H) Elevation. Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation
below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow
to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by that building drain shall be lifted by an approved means
and discharged to the building sewer.
(I) Connections prohibited. Connections prohibited/prohibited uses are further defined in § 51.022.
(J) Connection standards. The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform
to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the
city or the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the A.S.T.M. and the W.E.F. Manual
of Practice No. 9. All connections shall be made gas tight and water tight. Any deviation from the
prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the Superintendent before installation .
.(K) Inspection. The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the Utilities Manager when
the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection and testing
shall be made under the supervision of the Inspector or his or her designated representative.
(L) Excavations; barricades; festoration.
(1) All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades
and lights so as to protect the public from hazard.
(2) Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the work
shall be restored in a manner, and within a reasonable time period, as deemed satisfactory to the city.
(Ord. 1516, passed 2-16-16)
§ 51.021 PROHIBITED USES.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary
manner on public or private property within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city any
human or animal excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste.
(B) Storm water, surface water, ground water, roof run-off, subsurface drainage, cooling water,
unpolluted water, or unpolluted industrial process water may be admitted to storm public sewers which
have adequate capacity for their accommodation. No person shall use these sewers, however, without
the specific permission of the city.
(C) No new connection shall be made to any public sanitary sewer or public storm sewer unless
there is capacity available in all downstream sewers, lift stations, force mains, and the sewage treatment
plant, including capacity for BOD and suspended solids.
2016 S-1
'
Sewers 43
(D) No person shall place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public
or private property within the jurisdiction of the city any wastewater or other polluted waters except
where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with provisions of this chapter and the NPDES
permit.
(E) No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged to any natural outlet any wastewater or
other polluted waters except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with provisions
of this chapter and the city's NPDES permit.
(F) Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy
vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
(G) The owner of all houses, buildings, or properties used for hwnan occupancy, employment,
recreation, or other purposes, situated within the city and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way,
in which there is now located a public sanitary sewer of the city, is required at his or her expense to
install suitable toilet facilities therein and to connect these facilities directly with the proper public sewer
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, within 60 days after date of official notice to do so,
provided that the public sewer is within 300 feet of the property line.
(H) No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged to any public sanitary sewer, either directly
or indirectly, storm waters, surface water, ground water, roof run-off, subsurface drainage, cooling
water, unpolluted water, or unpolluted industrial process water. The city shall reqUire the removal of
unpolluted wastewater collection or treatment·facility if that removal is cost-effective and in the best
interests of all users of those facilities.
(I) No person shall construct a public combined sewer at any location within the city which is
outside the existing combined sewer area. For purposes of this chapter the term existing combined sewer
area is that area enclosed by the red boundary on Appendix A which is attached to Ord. 1516 itnd made
a part hereof and which is entitled Appendix A: Combined Sewer System Boundary Map.
(J) Any new building constructed in the existing combined sewer area shall have its inflow
connection separate and distinct from the sanitary lateral sewer connection to the POTW to facilitate
disconnection of the former if a separate public storm sewer subsequently becomes available.
(Ord. 1516, passed 2-16-16)
§ 51.022 PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS.
(A) General prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW any
pollutant or wastewater which causes pass through or interference with the operation or performance of
the POTW. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the Nappanee POTW whether or not they
are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other national, state, or local pretreatment
standards or requirements.
2016 S-1
44 Nappanee - Public Works
(B) Specific prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW the
following pollutants, substances, or wastewater:
(1) Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the Nappanee POTW, including but
not limited to, waste streams with a closed-cup flashpoint ofless than 140 degrees F (60 degrees C) using
the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21;
(2) Wastewater having a pH less than 5.5 or more than 9.0, or otherwise causing corrosive
structural damage to the Nappanee POTW or equipment;
(3) Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause obstruction of the flow in a sewer
or other interference with the operation of the POTW;
( 4) Pollutants, including oxygeo-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.), released in a discharge at
a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants,
will cause interference in the Nappanee POTW;
(5) Wastewater having a temperature greater than 150 degrees F (65 degrees C), or which will
inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant resulting in interference or damage to the POTW, but
in no case wastewater which causes the temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed
104 degrees F (40 degrees C);
(6) Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin, in amounts
that will cause interference or pass through;
(7) Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the Nappanee
POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems;
(8) Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the Nappanee Board
of Public Works and Safety upon recommendation of the Utilities Manager in accordance with § 51.043.
(9) Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other wastewater which, either singly or
by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or a hazard to life, or to
prevent entry :into the sewers for maintenance or repair;
(10) Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the treatment process, such
as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to
the treatment plant's effluent, thereby violating the city's NPDES permit;
(11) Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except in compliance with
applicable state or Federal regulations;
2016 S-1
'
Sewers 45
(12) Stormwater, surface water, groundwater, artesian well water, roof runoff, subsurface
drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate, deionized water, noncontact cooling water, and
unpolluted wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the Board of Public Works and Safety upon
recommendation of the Utilities Manager;
(13) Sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of industrial wastes;
(14) Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the Nappanee Board of Public Works
and Safety upon recommendation of the Utilities Manager in a wastewater discharge permit;
(15) Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources, the treatment plant's
effluent to fail a toxicity test;
(16) Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances which may cause excessive-foaming
in the Nappanee POTW;
(17) Any water or waste containing fats, oils, and/or greases of mineral or petroleum in origin
in excess of 100 mg/l or of animal or vegetable in origin in excess of 200 mg/I;
(18) Wastewater causing two readings on an explosion hazard meter at the point of discharge
into the Nappanee POTW, or at any point in the Nappanee POTW, over 10% of the lower explosive
limit of the meter.
(19) Any garbage that has not been properly ground or shredded. The installation and operation
of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-quarters horsepower (0. 76 HP metric) or greater
shall be subject to the review and approval by the Utilities Manager;
(20) Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, wood, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar,
plastics, paunch manure, butchers' offal, or any solid or viscous substances capable of causing
obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the sewerage system
or the wastewater treatment plant;
(21) Any waters or wastes containing acid metallic pickling wastes or concentrated plating
solutions; and
(22) Prohibited materials include, but are not limited to, gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene,
toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, percblorates, bromates,
carbides, hydrides, and sulfides, and any other substances which the city, the state, or EPA has notified
the user is a frre hazard or a hazard to the system.
(C) Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this section shall not be processed or stored
in such a manner that they could be discharged to the Nappanee POTW.
(Ord. 1516, passed Z..16-16)
2Ql6 S-1
46 Nappanee - Public Works
§ 51.023 NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.
When applicable, compliance is required with all applicable pretreatment standards and requirements
by indirect dischargers. The categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR, Chapter I, Subchapter
N, Parts 405-471 are hereby incorporated.
(A) Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of either the mass or the
concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the Utilities Manager may impose equivalent concentration
or mass limits in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(c).
(B) When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is mixed with wastewater not
regulated by the same standard, the Utilities Manager shall impose an alternate limit using the combined
wastestream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e).
(C) A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance with 40 CFR
403.15.
(Ord. 1516, passed 2-16-16)
§ 51.024 STATE PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.
State pretreatment standards are located in 327 I.A.C. Article 5. When applicable, compliance is
required with all applicable pretreatment standards and requirements by indirect dischargers.
(Ord. 1516, passed 2-16-16)
§ 51.025 POLLUTANT CONCENTRATION GUIDELINES AND LIMITS.
(A) The Nappanee Utilities Manager has the legal authority to establish local limits pursuant to 40
CFR 403.5 (c) for a pollutant contributed by an industrial user that has caused or is likely to cause
interference or pass through at the POTW and the recurrence of the contributed pollutant's effect on the
POTW. No person shall discharge wastewater containing in excess of the following. Persons discharging
wastewater in excess of the pollutant limits shall be subject to fines and service termination.
Pollutant Parameter Daily Maximum Limit
Arsenic 8.64 mg/I
Cadmium 0.11 mgn
Chromium, total 2.77 mg/l
Hexavalent Chromium 1.76 mg/I
2016 S-1
•
Sewers 47
Pollutant Parameter Daily Maximwn limit
Copper 3.38 mg/l
Cyanide 0.55 mg/I
Fats, Oils & Grease (mineral or 100 mg/l
petroleum)
Fats, Oils & Grease (animal or 200 mg/I
vegetable)
Lead 0.69 mg/1
Molybdenum 23.75 mg/l
Nickel 3.98 mg/!
Selenium 0.32 mg/!
Silver 0.43 mg/l
Total Toxic Organics (TTO) 1.0 mg/1
Zinc 2.61 mgll
pH range 5.5 - 9.0
(B) The above pollutant guidelines and limits apply at the point where the wastewater is discharged
to the Nappanee POTW. All concentrations for metallic substances are for ''total" metal unless indicated
otherwise. The Wastewater Utilities Manager may impose mass limitations in addition to, or in place
of, the concentration-based limitations above.
(q Best ma.oogement practices. Under the direction of the Utilities Manager, BMP's may be
required as part of the local limits under this section and may include, -but- are not limited to the
following: treatment requirements; operating proce·dures and practices to control site runoff, spillage or
leaks, sludge or waste disposal; or drainage from raw materials storage.
(Ord. 1516, passed 2-16-16)
§ 51.026 WASTE STRENGTH AND CONTENT; SURCHARGES.
(A) In order that the rates and charges may be justly and equitably adjusted to the service rendered
to users, the city shall base its charges not only on the volume, but also on strength and character of the
stronger than normal domestic sewage and wastes which it is required to treat and dispose of. The city _
shall require the user to determine the strength and content of all sewage discharged either directly or
2016 S-1
48 Nappanee - Public Works
indirectly to the POTW, in that manner, by that method, and at those times as the city may deem
practicable in light of the conditions and attending circumstances of the case, in order to determine the
proper charge. The user shall furnish a central sampling point available to the city at all times.
{B) Additional charges for treating stronger than normal domestic waste are provided by such
separate ordinance and shall be based on the following thresholds:
(1) Total suspended solids. Shall be surcharged in excess of 240 milligrams per liter of fluid.
(2) BOD. Shall be surcharged in excess of 200 milligrams per liter of fluid.
(3) Ammonia. Shall be surcharged in excess of 20 milligrams per liter of fluid.
(4) Phosphorus. Shall be surcharged in excess of ten milligrams per liter of fluid.
(C) The detennination of suspended solids, five-day biochemical oxygen demand, ammonia, and
phosphorus contained in the waste shall be in accordance with the latest copy of standard methods for
the elimination of water, sewage, and industrial wastes, as written by the American Public Health
Association, the American Water Works Association, and the Water Environment Federation, and in
conformance with guidelines establishing test procedures for analysis ofpoliutants: 40 CFR 136.
(Ord. 1516, passed 2-16-16)
§ 51.027 CITY'S RIGHT OF REVISION.
The city may establish, by ordinance or in wastewater discharge permits, more stringent standai:ds
or requirements on discharges to the Nappanee POTW. The city may revise the limitations if the
Nappanee POTW monitoring data indicates interference or increased Nappanee POTW operating
tolerance to pollutants. The city may also accept or deny any new or increased dischargers from any
indirect discharger. The city will require compliance with all applicable pretreatment standards and
requirements by all indirect dischargers.
(Ord. 1516, passed 2-16-16)
§ 51.028 DILUTION.
No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge,
as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a dischai:ge
limitation unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement. The
Utilities Manager may impose mass limitations on users who are using dilution to meet applicable
pretreatment standards or requirements or in other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is
appropriate.
(Ord. 1516, passed 2-16-16)
2016 S-1
I
h
Sewers 49
PRETREATMENT OF WASTEWATER
§ 51.040 PRETREATMENT FACILITIES.
(A) Users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply with this chapter and shall
achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment standards, pollutant concentration guidelines and
limits, and the prohibitions set out in §§ 51.020 et seq. of this chapter within the time limitations
specified by EPA, the state, or the Nappanee Board of Public Works and Safety, whichever is more
stringent. Any facilities necessary for compliance shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the
user's expense. Detailed plans describing such fa~ilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to
the·Utilities Manager for review, and shall be acceptable to the Utilities Manager before such facilities
are constructed. The review of such plans and operating procedures shall in no way relieve the user from
the responsibility of modifying such facilities as necessary to produce a discharge acceptable to the
Nappanee POTW_under the provisions of this chapter.
(B) The user shall maintain suitable operating records and shall submit to the Utilities Manager such
monthly summary reports of the character of the influent and effluent as the latter may prescribe.
(Ord. 1516, passed 2-16-16)
§ 51.041 ADDITIONAL PRETREATMENT MEASURES.
(A) Whenever deemed necessary, the Utilities Manager may require users to restrict their discharge
during peak flow periods, designate that certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers,
relocate and/or consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage wastestreams from industrial
wastestreams, and such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the Nappanee POTW. and
determine the user's compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
(B) The Utilities Manager may require any person discharging into the Nappanee POTW to install
and maintain on their property and at their expense, a suitable storage and flow-control f3.cility to ensure
equalization of flow. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely for flow equalization.
( C) Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the Utilities
Manager, they are necessary for the proper handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of
grease and oil, or sand; except that such interceptors shall not be required for residential users. All
interception units shall be of type and capacity approved by the Utilities Manager and shall be so located
to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned, and
repaired regularly, as needed, by the user at their expense.
(D) Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be required to install and
maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter. ·
(Ord. 1516, passed 2-16-16)
2016 S-1
50 Nappanee - Public Works
§ 51.042 ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE/ SLUG CONTROL PLANS.
At least once every two years, the Utilities Manager shall evaluate whether each significant
industrial user needs an accidental discharge/slug control plan. The Utilities Manager may require any
user to develop. submit for approval, and implement such a plan. Alternatively, the Utilities Manager
may develop such a plan for any User. An accidental discharge/slug control plan shall address, at a
minim.um, the following:
(A) Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch discharges;
(B) Description of stored chemicals;
(C) Procedures for immediately notifying the Utilities Manager of any accidental or slug discharge,
as required by § 51.100; aud
(D) Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge. Such procedures
include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of
materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of
containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants, including
solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency response.
(Ord. 1516, passed 2-16-16)
§ 51.043 HAULED WASTEWATER.
(A) Septic tank waste may be introduced into the Nappanee POTW only at locations designated by
the Utilities Manager, and at such times as are established by the Utilities Manager. Such waste shall not
violate§§ 51.020 et seq. or any other requirements established by the Nappanee POTW. The Utilities
Manager may require septic tank waste haulers to obtain wastewater discharge permits.
(B) The Utilities Manager may require haulers of industrial waste to obtain wastewater discharge
permits. The Utilities Manager shall require generators of hauled industrial waste to obtain wastewater
discharge permits. The Utilities Manager may also prohibit the disposal of hauled industrial waste. The
discharge of hauled industrial waste is subject to all other requirements of this chapter.
(C) Industrial waste haulers may discharge loads only at locations designated by the Utilities
Manager. No load may be discharged without prior consent of the Utilities Manager. The Utilities
Manager may collect samples of each hauled load to ensure compliance with applicable standards. The
Utilities Manager may require the industrial waste hauler to provide a waste analysis of any load prior
to discharge.
2016 S-1
Sewers 51
(D) Industrial waste haulers must provide a waste-tracking for.m for every load. This form shall
include, at a minim.um, the name and address of the industrial waste hauler, permit number, truck
identification, names and addresses of sources of waste, and volume and characteristics of waste. The
form shall identify the type of industry, known or suspected waste constituents, and whether any wastes
are RCRA hazardous wastes.
(E) Septic tank waste and industrial waste haulers must discharge amounts that will not cause pass
through and interference of the POTW.
(Ord. 1516, passed 2-16-16)
INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT APPUCATION
. § 51.055 INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER ANALYSIS.
When requested by the Utilities Manager, a .user must submit information on the nature and
characteristics of its wastewater within ten days of the request. The Utilities Manager is authorized to
prepare a form for this purpose and may periodically require users to update this information.
(Ord. 1516, passed 2-16-16)
§ 51.056 INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT REQUIREMENT.
(A) No significant industrial user shall discharge wastewater into the Nappanee POTW without first
obtaining a wastewater discharge permit from the Utilities Manager, except that a significant industrial
user that has filed a timely application pursuant to § 51.057 may continue to discharge for the time
period specified therein.
(B) The Utilities Manager may require other users to: obtain wastewater discharge permits as
necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter.
(C) Any violation of the terms and conditions of a wastewater discharge permit shall be deemed a
violation of this chapter and subjects the wastewater discharge permittee to the sanctions set out in
§§ 51.160 et seq., S 1.185 et seq., and 51.200 et seq. Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit does not
relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply with all Federal and state pretreatment standards of
requirements or with any other requirements of Federal, state, and local law.
(Ord. 1516, passed 2-16-16)
2016 S-1
52 Nappanee - Public Works
§ 51.057 INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITTING: EXISTING
CONNECTIONS.
Any user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who was discharging wastewater into the
POTW prior to the effective date of this chapter and who wishes to continue such discharges in the future
shall not cause or allow discharges to the POTW to continue after the effective date of this chapter except
in accordance with a wastewater discharge permit issued by the Utilities Manager.
(Ord. 1516, passed 2-16-16)
§ 51.058 INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITTING: NEW
CONNECTIONS.
Any user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who proposes to begin or recommence
discharging into the Nappanee POTW must obtain such permit prior to the beginning or recommencing
of such discharge. An application for this wastewater discharge permit, in accordance with § 51.059,
must be filed at least 60 days prior to the date upon which any discharge will begin or recommence.
(Ord. 1516, passed 2-16-16)
§ 51.059 INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT APPLICATION
CONTENTS.
(A) All users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit must submit a permit application.
The Utilities Manager may require all users to submit as part of an application the following information:
(1) All information required by§ 51.095;
(2) Description of activities, facilities, and plant processes on the premises, including a list of
all raw materials and chemicals used or stored at the facility which are, or could accidentally or
intentionally be, discharged to the Nappanee POTW;
(3) Number and type of employees, hours of operation, and proposed or actual hours of
operation;
(4) Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes, and rate of production;
(5) Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day);
(6) Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details to show all sewers, floor
drains, and appurtenances by size, location, and elevation, and all points of discharge;
2016 S-1
Sewers 53
(7) Time and duration of discharges; and
(8) Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the Utilities Manager to evaluate
the wastewater discharge permit application,
(B) Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be returned to the user for
revision.
(Ord. 1516, passed 2-16-16)
§ 51.060 APPLICATION SIGNATORIES AND CERTIFICATION.
All wastewater discharge permit applications and user reports must be signed by an authorized
representative of the user and contain the following certification statement:
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared
under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that
qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on
my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly
responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of
my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are
significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine
and imprisonment for knowing violations,"
(Ord. 1516, passed 2-16-16)
§ 51.061 INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT DECISIONS.
The Utilities Manager will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional
information. Within 60 days of receipt of a complete wastewater discharge permit application, the
Utilities Manager will determine whether o.r not to issue a wastewater discharge permit. The Utilities
Manager may deny any application for a wastewater discharge permit.
(Ord. 1516, passed 2-16-16)
INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT ISSUANCE PROCESS
§ 51.075 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT DURATION.
A wastewater discharge permit shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five years
from the effective date of the permit. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued for a period less than
2016 S-1
54 Nappanee - Public Works
five years, at the discretion of the Utilities Manager. Each wastewater discharge permit will indicate a
specific date upon which it will expire.
(Ord. 1516, passed 2-16-16)
§ 51.076 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT CONTENTS.
A wastewater discharge permit shall include such conditions as are deemed reasonably necessary
by the Utilities Manager to prevent pass through or interference, protect the quality of the water body
receiving the treatment plant's effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge management
and disposal, and protect against damage to the Nappanee POTW.
(A) Industrial wastewater discharge permits must contain:
(1) A statement that indicates wastewater discharge permit duration, which in no event shall
exceed five years;
(2) A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable without prior
notification to the city in accordance with§ 51.080, and provisions for furnishing the new owner or
operator with a copy of the existing wastewater discharge permit;
(3) Effluent limits based on applicable pretreatment standards including any applicable best
management practices;
( 4) Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and record-keeping requirements. These
requirements shall include an identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling
frequency, and sample type based on Federal, state and local law;
(5) A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment stan¢rrds
and requirements, and any applicable compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for
compliance beyond that required by applicable Federal, state, or local law; and
(6) Requirements to control slug discharges, if determined by the Utilities Manager to be
necessary.
(B) Wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be limited to, the following conditions:
(1) Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of discharge, and/or
requkements for flow regulation and equalization;
(2) Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology, pollution control, or
construction of appropriate containment devices, designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the
introduction of pollutants into the treatment works;
2016 S-1
Sewers 55
(3) Requirements for the development and implementation of spill control plans or other special
conditions including management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated,
or non-routine discharges; ·
(4) Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce the amount of
pollutants discharged to the Nappanee POTW;
(5) The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the management of the wastewater
discharged to the Nappanee POTW;
(6) Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities and
equipment;
(7) A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit does not relieve the
permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable Federal and state pretreatment standards,
including those which become effective during the term of the wastewater discharge permit; and
(8) Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the Utilities Manager to ensure compliance with
this chapter, and state and Federal laws, rules, and regulations.
(Ord. 1516, passed 2-16-16)
§ 51.077 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT APPEALS.
The Utilities Manager shall provide public notice of the issuance of a wastewater discharge permit.
Any person, including the user, may petition the Nappanee Board of Public Works and Safety to
reconsider the terms of a wastewater discharge permit within 30 days of notice of its issuance.
(A) Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be a waiver of the
administrative appeal.
(B) In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the wastewater discharge permit provisions
objected to, the reasons for this objection, and the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the
wastewater discharge permit.
(C) The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit shall not be stayed pending the appeal.
(D) If the Nappanee Board of Public Works and Safety fails to act witlrin 60 days, a request for
reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions not to reconsider a wastewater discharge permit,
not to issue a wastewater discharge permit, or not to modify a wastewater discharge permit shall be
considered fmal administrative actions for purposes of judicial review.
2016 S-1
56 Nappanee M Public Works
(E) Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of the final administrative wastewater discharge
permit decision must do so by filing a complaint with the circuit or superior courts of the coUnty in
which the wastewater discharge in question enters the POTW.
(Ord. 1516, passed 2-16-16)
§ 51.078 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT MODII1CATIONS.
The Utilities Manager may modify a wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not
limited to, the following reasons:
(A) To incorporate any new or revised Federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or
requirements;
(B) To address significant alterations or additions to the user's operation, processes, or wastewater
volume or character since the time of wastewater discharge permit issuance;
(C) A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination
of the authorized discharge;
(D) Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the city's POTW, city
personnel, or the receiving waters;
(E) Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge permit;
(F) Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge
permit application or in any required reporting;
(G) To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge permit; or
(H) To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a new owner or operator.
(Ord. 1516, passed 2-16-16)
§ 51.079 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT TRANSFER.
(A) Wastewater discharge permits may be transferred to a new owner or operator only if the
permittee gives at least 30 days advance notice 'to the Utilities Manager and the Utilities Manager
approves the wastewater discharge permit transfer. The notice to the Utilities Manager must include a
written certification by the new owner or operator which:
(1) States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate intent to change the facility's
operations and processes;
2016 S-1
Sewers 57
(2) Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; and
(3) Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the exist~g wastewater discharge
permit.
{B) Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the wastewater discharge permit void
as of the date of facility transfer.
(Ord. 1516, passed 2-16-16)
§ 51.080 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT REVOCATION.
(A) The Nappanee Board of Public Works and Safety upon recommendation of the Utilities Manager
may revoke a wastewater discharge permit after a show cause hearing as defined in§ 51.163 and after
good cause is established by the Board of Public Works and Safety. Good cause may include, but is not
limited to, the following reasons;
(1) Failure to notify the Utilities Manager of significant changes to the wastewater prior to the
changed discharge;
(2) Failure to provide prior notification to the Utilities Manager of changed conditions pursuant
to § 51.099;
(3) Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge
permit application;
(4) Falsifying self-monitoring reports;
(5) Tampering with monitoring equipment;
( 6) Refusing to allow the Utilities Manager timely access to the facility premises and records;
(7) Failure to meet effluent limitations;
(8) Failure to pay fines;
(9) Failure 1D pay sewer charges;
(10) Failure to meet compliance schedules;
(11) Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater discharge pennit application;
2016 S-1
58 Nappanee - Public Works
(12) Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business ownership of a permitted
facility; or
(13) Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of the wastewater
discharge permit or this chapter.
(B) Industrial wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon cessation of operations or
transfer of business ownership. All wastewater discharge permits issued to a particular user are void
upon the issuance of a new wastewater discharge permit to that user.
(Ord. 1516, passed 2-16-16)
§ 51.081 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT REISSUANCE.
A user with an expiring wastewater discharge perm.it shall apply for wastewater discharge permit
re issuance by submitting a complete permit application, in accordance with § 51.059, a minimum of 90
days prior to the expiration of the user's existing wastewater discharge permit.
(Ord. 1516, passed 2-16-16)
§ 51.082 REGULATION OF WASTE RECEIVED FROM OTHER JURISDICTIONS.
(A) If another municipality, or user located within another municipality, contributes wastewater to
the Nappanee POTW, the Nappanee Board of Public Works and Safety upon recommendation of the
Utilities Manager shall enter into an intermunicipal agreement with the contributing municipality,
(B) Prior to entering into an agreement required by division (A), above, the Nappanee Board of
Public Works and Safety upon recommendation of the Utilities Manager shall request the following
information from the contributing municipality:
(1) A description of the quality and volume of wastewater discharged to the Nappanee POTW
by the contributing municipality;
(2) An inventory of all users located within the contributing municipality that are discharging
to the Nappanee POTW; and
(3) Such other information as the Utilities Manager may deem necessary.
(C) An intermunicipal agreement, as required by division (A), above, shall contain the following
conditions:
(1) A requirement for the contributing municipality to adopt a sewer use ordinance which is
at least as stringent as this chapter and local ·limits which are at least as stringent as those set out in
2016 S-1
I
Sewers 59
§ 51.025. The requirement shall specify that such chapter and limits must be revised as necessary to
reflect changes made to the city's ordinance or local limits;
(2) A requirement for the contributing municipality to submit a revised user inventory on at
least an annual basis;
(3) A provision specifying which pretreatment implementation activities, including wastewater
discharge pennit issuance, inspection and sampling, and enforcement, will be conducted by the
contributing municipality; which of these activities will be conducted by the Nappanee POTW and which
of these activities will be conducted jointly by the contributing municipality and the Nappanee POTW.
(4) A requirement for the contributing municipality to provide the Utilities Manager with access
to all information that the contributing municipality obtains as part of its pretreatment activities;
(5) Limits on the nature, quaiity, and volume of the contributing municipality's wastewater at
the point where it discharges to the Nappanee POTW;
(6) Requirements for monitoring the contributing municipality's discharge;
(7) A provision ensuring the Utilities Manager access to the facilities of users located within
the contributing municipality's jurisdictional boundaries for the purpose of inspection, sampling, and any
other duties deemed necessary by the Utilities Manager; and
(8) A provision specifying remedies available for breach of the terms of the intennunicipal
agreement.
(Ord. 1516, passed 2-16-16)
INDUSTHIAL REPORTING REQUIREMENTS
§ 51.095 BASELINE MONITORING REPORTS.
(A) Within either 180 days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or the fmal
administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later,
existing categorical users currently dischargjng to or scheduled to discharge to the Nappanee POTW shall
submit to the Control Authority and the Utilities Manager a report which contains the information listed
in division (B), below. At least 90 days prior to commencement of their discharge, new sources, and
sources that become categorical users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical
standard, shall submit to the Control Authority and the Utilities Manager a report which contains the
2016 S-1
60 Nappanee - Public Works
information listed in division (B), below. A new source shall report the method of pretreatment it intends
to use to meet applicable categorical standards. A new source also shall give estimates of its anticipated
flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged.
(B) Users described above shall submit the information set forth below.
(1) Identifying information. The name and address of the facility, including the name of the
operator and owner.
(2) Environmental permits. A list of any envlronmental control permits held by or for the
facility.
(3) Description of operations. A brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and
standard industrial classifications of the operation(s) carried out by such user. This description should
include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the Nappanee POTW from
the regulated processes.
(4) Flow measurement. Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily
flow, in gallons per day, to the Nappanee POTW from regulated process streams and other streams, as
necessary, to allow use of the combined wastestream formula set out in 40 CPR 403.6(e).
(5) Measurement of pollutants.
(a) The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process.
(b) The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration, and/or
mass, where required by the standard, Control Authority or Utilities Manager, of regulated pollutants
in the discharge from each regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term av·erage
concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily
operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in § 51. 104.
(c) Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out in§ 51.105.
( d) The user shall take a minimum of one representative sample to compile that data
necessary to comply with the requirements of this section.
( e) Samples should be taken immediately downstream from pretreatment facilities if such
exist or immediately downstream from the regulated process if no pretreatment exists. If other
wastewaters are mixed with the regulated wastewater prior to pretreatment the user should measure the
flows and concentrations necessary to allow use of the combined wastestream formula in 40 CPR
403.6(e) to evaluate compliance with the pretreatment standards. Where an alternate concentration or
mass limit has been calculated in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(e) this adjusted limit along with
supporting data shall be submitted to the Control Authority and the Utilities Manager.
2016 S-1
Sewers 61
(f) Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with § 51.104.
(g) The Control Authority and/or the Utilities Manager may allow the submission of a
baseline report which utilizes only historical data so long as the data provides information sufficient to
determine the need for industrial pretreatment measures; and
(h) The baseline report shall indicate the time, date and place of sampling and methods of
analysis, and shall certify that such sampling and analysis is representative of normal work cycles and
expected pollutant discharges to the POTW.
(6) Certification. A statement, reviewed by the user's authorized representative and certified
by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent
basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment
is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements.
(7) Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the
pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment
and/or O&M. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established
for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this section lJllIBt meet the
requirements set out in§ 51.096.
(8) Signature and certification. All baseline monitoring reports must be signed and certified
in accordance with § 51. 060.
(C) Use of representative analysis. Until an adequate analysis of a representative sample of user's
wastes has been obtained, the Control Authority andfor Utilities Manager shall, for the purpose of this
chapter., make a determination of the character and concentration of the user's wastes by using data based
on analysis of similar processes or data for this type of business that are available from th,e U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency or from industry-recogniZed authoritative sources. This method, "if
selected by the Control Authority and/or Utilities Manager, shall continue at the Control Authority's
and/or the Utilities Manager's pleasure or until an adequate analysis has been made.
(D) Solvent management pTan. Any industrial user who discharges solvents must submit a solvent
~anagement plan that specifies to the Control Authority's and/or the Utilities Manager's satisfaction: ··
(1) The toxic organic compounds used;
(2) The method of disposal used instead of dumping, such as reclamation, contract hauling,
etc.; and
(3) Procedures for assuring that toxic organics do not spill or leak into the POTW' s wastewater
facilities, in lieu of monitoring for total toxic organics (TTO). Further, the industrial user requesting the
TTO monitoring waiver must make the following certification:
2016 S-1
62 Nappanee - Public Works
11Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible for managing
compliance with the pretreatment standards for total toxic organics (TTO), I certify
that, to the best of my knowledge and belief, no dumping of concentrated toxic
organics into the wastewaters has occurred since filing the last discharge monitoring
report. I further certify that this facility is implementing the solvent management plan
submitted to the Control Authority."
(E) Special, agreements. No statement contained in this section shall be construed as prohibiting any
special agreement or arrangement between the Nappanee Board of Public Works and Safety and any
person whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the Nappanee
POTW for treatment whether with or without pretreatment, provided that such agreement does not
violate national categorical pretreatment standards for the specific category of industrial user, provided
that there is no impairment of the functioning of the POTW by reason of the admission of such wastes
and provided that no extra costs are incurred by the Nappanee POTW without recompense by the person.
(Ord. 1516, passed 2-16-16)
§ 51.096 COMPLIANCE SCHEDULE PROGRESS REPORTS.
The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule required by§ 51.095(B)(7):
(A) The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement and
completion of major evenIB leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required
for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but are not limited to,
hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major components,
commencing and completing construction, and beginning and conducting routine operation);
(B) No increment referred to above shall exceed nine months;
(C) The user shall submit a progress report to the Control Authority and the Utilities Manager no
later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date of compliance including, as a
minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if
appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule; and
(D) In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress reports to the Control
Authority and the Utilities Manager.
(Ord. 1516, passed 2-16-16)
§ 51.097 REPORTS ON COMPLIANCE WIIB CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT
STANDARD DEADLINE.
Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment
standards, or in the case of a new source, following commencement of the introduction of wastewater
2016 S-1
Sewers 63
into the POTW, any user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the
Control Authority and the Utilities Manager a report containing the in.formation described in
§ 51.095(B)(4) through (6). For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established in
accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR 403. 6(C), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of
the user's long-term production rate. For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment standards
expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of
operation), this report shall_ include the user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period.
All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with§ 51.060.
(Ord. 1516, passed 2-16-16)
§ 51.098 PERIODIC COMPLIANCE REPORTS.
(A) All significant industrial users shall, within 30 days of the end of the second and fourth quarters
of each calendar year or more frequently as determined necessary and prudent by the Control Authority
and/or the Utilities Manager, submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the
discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards arid the measured or estimated average and
maximum daily flows for the reporting period. In cases where the pretreatment standard requires
compliance with a best manageinent practice or pollution prevention alternative, the user must submit
documentation required by .the Control Authority, Utilities Manager or the pretreatment standard
necessary to determine the compliance status of the user. All periodic compliance reports must be signed
and certified in accordance with § 51.060.
(B) All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring
and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working
order at all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not
be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge.
(C) If a user subject to the reporting requirements in this section monitors any pollutant more
frequently than required by the Control Authority and/or the Utilities Manager, using the procedures
prescribed in § 51.105, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report.
(Ord. 1516, passed 2-16-16)
§ 51.099 REPORTS OF CHANGED CONDITIONS.
Each user must notify the Control Authority and the Utilities Manager of any planned significant
changes to the user's operations or system which might alter the nature, quality, or volume of its
wastewater at least 60 days before the change,
(A) The Utilities Manager may require the user to submit such information as may be deemed
necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit
application under§ 51.059.
2016 S-1
64 Nappanee - Public Works
(B) The Utilities Manager may issue a wastewater discharge permit under§ 51.061 or modify an
existing wastewater discharge permit under § 51.078 in response to changed conditions or anticipated
changed conditions.
(Ord. 1516, passed 2-16-16)
§ 51.100 REPORTS OF POTENTIAL PROBLEMS.
(A) (1) In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to, accidental discharges, discharges
of a nonroutine, episodic nature, a noncustomary batch discharge, or a slug load, that may cause
potential problems for the POTW, the user shall Un:mediately telephone and notify the Utilities Manager
of the incident. This notification shall include the location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration
and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the user.
(2) Such notification will not relieve users of liability for any expense, loss, or damage to the
sewerage system, wastewater treatment plant, or treatment process, or any fines imposed by the city.
(B) Within five days following such discharge, the user shall submit a detailed written report
describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future
occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability
which may be incurred as a result of damage to the Nappanee POTW, natural resources, or any other
damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, penalties, or other
liability which may be imposed pursuant to this chapter.
(C) A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place
advising employees whom to call in the event of a discharge described in division (A), above. Employers
shall ensure that all employees, who may cause such a discharge to occur, are advised of the emergency
notification procedure.
(D) Significant industrial users are required to notify the Control Authority and the Nappanee
Utilities Manager immediately of any changes at its facility affecting the potential for a slug discharge.
(Ord. 1516, passed 2-16-16)
§ 51.101 REPORTS FROM UNPERMITTED USERS.
All users not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall provide appropriate reports to
the Utilities Manager as the Utilities Manager may require.
(Ord. 1516, passed 2-16-16)
2016 S-1
Sewers 65
§ 51.102 NOTICE OF VIOLATION/ REPEAT SAMPLING AND REPORTING.
If sampling perfonned by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify the Control Authority and
the Utilities Manager within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the
sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the Control Authority and the
Utilities Manager within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation.
(Ord. 1516, passed 2-16-16)
§ 51.103 NOTIFICATION OF THE DISCHARGE OF HAZARDOUS WASTE.
The Nappanee POTW prohibits the discharge of hazardous waste. In the event that a hazardous
waste is discharged to the Nappanee POTW, the Control Authority and the Utilities Manager or his or
her designee must be notified immediately by the user.
(Ord. 1516, passed 2-16-16)
§ 51.104 ANALYTICAL REQUIREMENTS.
All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as part of a wastewater
discharge permit application or report shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed
in 40 CPR Part 136, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40
CFR Part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling
and analyses must be performed in accordance with procedures approved by EPA.
(Ord. 1516, passed 2-16-16)
§ 51.105 SAMPLE COLLECTION.
(A) Except as indicated in division (B), below, the user must collect wastewater samples using flow
proportional composite cqllection techniques. In the event flow proportional sampling is infeasible, the
Control Authority and/or Utilities Manager may authorize the use of time proportional sampling or a
minimum of four grab samples where the user demonstrates that this will provide. a representative sample
of the effluent being discharged. In addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with
instantaneous discharge limits.
(B) Samples for oil and grease, temper_ature, pH, and cyanide must be obtained using grab collection
techniques.
(C) Except as indicated in divisions (B) and (D), the user must collect wastewater samples using 24
hour flow proportional composite sampling techniques, unless time proportional composite sampling or
grab sampling is authorized by the Control Authority and/or Utilities Manager. Where time proportional
2016 S-1
66 Nappanee - Public Works
composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the Control Authority and/or city, the samples
must be representative of the discharge. Using protocols (including appropriate preservation) specified
in 40 CPR Part 136 and appropriate EPA guidance, multiple grab samples collected during a 24 hour
period may be composited prior to the analysis as follows: for cyanide, the samples may be composited
in the laboratory or in the field; for oil and grease, the samples may be composited in the laboratory.
Composite samples for other parameters unaffected by the compositing procedures as documented in
approved EPA methodologies may be authorized by the Control Authority and/or Nappanee Wastewater
Department, as appropriate. In addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with
instantaneous limits.
(D) For sampling required in support ofbaseline monitoring and 90 day compliance reports required
in§§ 51.095 amd 51.097 (40 CPR 403.12(b) and (d)), a minimum of four grab samples must be used
for pH, cyanide, and oil and grease for facilities for which historical sampling data do not exist; for
facilities for which historical sampling data are available, the Control Authority and/or Utilities Manager
may authorize a lower minimum. For the reports required by § 51.098 (40 CFR 403.12(e) and
403 .12(h)), the industrial user is required to collect the number of grab samples necessary to assess and
assure compliance by with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements.
(Ord. 1516, passed 2-16-16)
§ 51.106 TIMING.
Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date postmarked. For reports which
are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date
of receipt of the report shall govern.
(Ord. 1516, passed 2-16-16)
§ 51.107 RECORD KEEPING.
Users subject to the reporting requirements of this chapter shall retain, and make available for
inspection and copying, all records of information obtained pursuant to any monitorj,ng activities required
by this chapter and any additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities
undertaken by the user independent of such requirements. Records shall include the date, exact place,
method, and time of sampling, and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses were
perfonned; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used; the results of such
analyses; and if applicable, any record-keeping documentation associated with best management
practices. These records shall remain available for a period of at least three years. This period shall be
automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the user or the city, or where the
user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the Control Authority or the Utilities
Manager.
(Ord. 1516, passed2-16-16)
2016 S-1
Sewers 67
COMPLIANCE MONITORING
§ 51.115 RIGHI OF ENTRY: INSPECTION AND SAMPLING.
The Utilities Manager or duly authorized representative (Inspector) bearing the proper identification
and credentials shall have the right to enter the premises of any user to determine whether the user is
complying with all requirements of this chapter and any wastewater discharge permit or order issued
hereunder. Users shall allow the Inspector ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of
inspections, surveillance, record review, monitoring as necessary to determine compliance with this
chapter, if applicably or any industrial wastewater pretreatment permit.
(A) Where a user has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance
before entry into its premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so
that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the Inspector will be permitted to enter without delay
for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities.
(B) The Inspector shall have the right to set up on the user's property, or require installation of,
such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the user's operations.
(C) The Utilities Manager may require the user to install monitoring equipment as necessary, The
facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper
operating condition by the user at its own expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and
quality shall be calibrated annually to ensure their accuracy.
(D) Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected
and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the user at the written or verbal request of the Utilities
Manager and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the user,
(E) Unreasonable delays in allowing the Inspector access to the user's premises shall be a violation
of this chapter.
(F) Inspection of industrial' users for the purposes of verifying industry self-monitoring information
will be done at such intervals as determined by the Utilities Manager to be necessary to detect prohibited
discharges. The minimum surveillance schedule to be conducted by the POTW, if deemed warranted by
the Utilities Manager, will be semi-annually.
(G) A seven day monitoring period shall be allowed if deemed warranted in order to obtain
representative data. The surveillance period will normally be for a period of one day representative of
the normal production day, but can be of longer duration at the discretion of the Utilities Manager. In
cases where the surveillance period extends for a greater number of consecutive days than seven, the
Nappanee POTW shall have the prerogative of selecting the seven consecutive days of its choice for
· establishing rates and charges. ~/
2016 S-1
68 Nappanee - Public Works
(H) The Nappanee POTW may sample and conduct inspection activities of SIU's contributing and
non-SIU industries when deemed necessary by the Utilities Manager to verify, independent of
information supplied by industrial users, compliance or non-compliance with applicable pretreatment
standards. For scheduled surveillance, the user shall be given the option of splitting the obtained sample
such that it may be analyzed by the user.
(I) While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to above, the Utilities
Manager or duly authorized employees .of the city shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises
established by the user, and the user shall be held harmless for injury or death to the city employees and
the city shall indemnify the user against loss or damage to .its property by city employees 8.nd against
liability claims and demands· for personal injury or property damage asserted against the user and
growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as they may be caused by negligence or
failure of the user to maintain safe conditions.
(J) The Utilities Manager and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper
credentiais and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties for the following activities,
including, but not limited to inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance.
All entry and subsequent work, if any, on an easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms
of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved.
(Ord. 1516, passed 2-16-16)
§ 51.116 SEARCH WARRANTS.
If the Utilities Manager or his designee has been refused access to a building, structure or property
or any part thereof, and if the Utilities Manager has demonstrated probable cause to believe that there
may be a violation of this chapter or that there is a need to inspect as part of a routine inspection program
of the city designed to verify compliance with this chapter or any permit or order issued hereunder, or
to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community or the environment, then upon
application by the City Attorney, a judge of a circuit or superior court of the county in which the
wastewater discharge in question enters the POTW shall issue a search and/or seizure warrant describing
the specific location subject to the warrant. The warrant shall specify what, if anything, may be searched
and/or seized on the property described. Such warrant shall be served at reasonable hours by the Utilities
Manager in the company of a uniformed police officer of the city. In the event of an emergency affecting
public health and safety or environmental quality, inspections shall be made without the issuance of a
warrant.
(Ord. 1516, passed 2-16-16)
?.016 S-1
Sewers 69
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
§ 51.130 CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.
Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater discharge permit
applications, wastewater discharge permits, and monitoring programs, and from the Utilities Manager's
inspection and sampling activities, shall be available to the public without restriction, unless the user
specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Utilities Manager that the
release of such information would divulge information, processes, or methods of production entitled to
protection as trade secrets under applicable state law or would otherwise be exempt from disclosure
pursuant to applicable law. Any such request must be asserted at the time of submission of the
information or data. When requested and demonstrated by the user furnishing a report that such
information should be exempt from disclosure, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets
or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public. Notwithstanding anything
herein to the contrary, any such infonnation and/or data shall be made immediately available if access
to such information and/or data is specifically required by a state or Federal statute, rule or regulation
or is ordered by a court (with appropriate jurisdiction) under the rules of discovery.
(Ord. 1516, passed 2-16-16)
PUBLICATION OF USERS IN SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE
§ 51.145 PUBLICATION OF USERS 1N SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE.
(A) The Nappanee Wastewater Department shall publish annually, in a newspaper of general
circulation that provides meaningful public notice within the jurisdictions served by the Nappanee
POTW, a list of the users which, during the previous 12 months, were in significant noncompliance with
applicable pretreatment standards and requirements.
(B) Definition. For this section, the following term shall apply, unless context indicates or requires
a different meaning.
SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE.
(a) CHRONIC VIOLATIONS OFWASTEWATERDISCHARGELIMITS. Defined here
as those in which 66 % or more of wastewater measurements taken during a six-month period exceed (by
any magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement including instantaneous limits as defined
by§ 51.020 et seq.;
2016 S-1
70 Nappanee~ Public Works
(b) TECHNICAL REVIEW CRITERIA (TRC) VIOIATIONS. Defined here as those in
which 33 % or more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant parameter during a six-month
period equals or exceeds the product of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement including
instantaneous limits, as defined by§§ 51.020 et seq. multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD,
COD, TSS, fats, oils, and grease, 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH);
( c) Any other discharge violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement as defined by
§ 51.020 et seq. (daily maximum, long-term average, instantaneous limit, or narrative standard) that the
Utilities Manager believes has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or
pass through, including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public;
( d) Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to the public or
to the environment, or has resulted in the Nappanee Board of Public Works and Safety's exercise of its
emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge;
( e) Failure to meet, within 90 days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone
contained in a wastewater discharge permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing
construction, or attaining final compliance;
(f) Failure to provide within 45 days after the due date, any required reports, including
baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines,
periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules;
(g) Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
(h) Any other violation(s), which may include best management practices (BMPs), that the
Nappanee Board of Public Works and Safety upon recommendation of the Utilities Manager determines
will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program.
(Ord. 1516, passed 2-16-16)
ENFORCEMENT
§ 51.160 MINOR INFRACTION.
(A) A minor infraction may include, but is not limited to, one time missed reporting deadlines,
short-term excursions of pollutant limitations (provided that no pass-through, interference or
environmental or health damage occurs), improper disposal of non-hazardous wastes or unintentional
discharge of a prohibited substance provided the discharge is a one-time occUITence and immediate steps
were taken to minimize the discharge, When the Utilities Manager finds that any user bas experienced
2016 S-1
•
Sewers 71
a minor infraction of this section or any permit issued hereunder, the Utilities Manager may, at the
Utilities Manager's discretion, notify the user of the infraction by telephone call or via electronic mail
(e-mail). Said telephone call or e-mail may be considered the first step in any enforcement action that
may subsequently occur. The telephone call or e-mail shall:
(1) Notify the user of the type and duration of the infraction.
(2) Request that the user respond to the notification in writing within a period of time required
by the Utilities Manager.
(B) Telephone or e-mail notification will be waived in the event of repeated violations or intentional
discharges of prohibited substances. Enforcement activity in the case of more serious or repeat violations
shall be initiated through a notice of violation listing the type, date and duration of the violation and a
requirement for a written response,
(Ord. 1516, passed 2-16-16)
§ 51.161 NOTIFICATION OF VIOLATION.
Whenever the Utilities Manager finds that any user has violated or is violating this chapter, a
discharge permit, any prohibition, limitation or requirement, or any order issued hereunder, the Utilities
Manager or the Utilities Manager's agent may serve upon the user a written notice of violation setting
forth the. nature of the violation(s). The notice may also include specific corrective actions and
compliance schedules to which the Utilities Manager requires the user to adhere. Within ten days of the
date of receipt of this notice, the user shall submit to the Utilities Manager a written explanation of the
violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, consistent with the terms of
the notice (to include specific corrective actions and compliance schedules). Compliance with the
conditions, requirements and terms of this notice shall not be construed to relieve the user of its
obligation to comply with its discharge permit which remains in full force and effect nor does such
compliance excuse violations occurring before or after receipt of this notice of violation. Additional
enforcement action may be pursued if corrective actions are not accomplished as scheduled a.Iid the
Utilities Manager expressly reserves the right to seek any and .all remedies available to it under this
chapter for any violations cited by the notice. Nothing in this chapter shall limit the authority of the city
to take any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement actiOn, without first issuing
a notice of violation.
(Ord. 1516, passed 2-16-16)
§ 51.162 CONSENT ORDERS.
The Utilities Manager is hereby empowered to enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary
compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any user responsible for
noncompliance. Such orders will include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the
2016 S-1
72 Nappanee - Public Works
noncompliance including, but not limited to, compliance schedules, stipulated fines or remedial actions,
and signatures of the Utilities Manager and user representatives. Consent orders shall have the same
force and effect as any other orders issued by the Board of Public Works and Safety under this chapter.
(Ord. 1516, passed 2-16-16)
§ 51.163 SHOW CAUSE ORDER AND BEARING.
(A) The Utilities Manager may serve upon any user who causes, allows or contributes to a violation
of this chapter, its discharge permit, or any order issued hereunder, or an unauthorized discharge to enter
the POTW a written show cause order, Said order must be given at least ten days prior to the hearing
in accordance with this chapter. The show cause order must contain:
(1) The name and address of the user to whom the show cause order is issued;
(2) The address, or the parcel number, of the property that is the subject of the order, if
different from division (A) above;
(3) The nature of the violation(s);
(4) An order to the user to appear before the Board of Public Works and Safety to show cause
as to why the city should not initiate formal enforcement action against the user or discontinue service
to the user;
(5) A statement indicating the exact time and place of the hearing, and that the person to whom
the show cause order was issued is entitled to appear at the hearing with or without legal counsel, present
evidence, cross examine opposing witnesses and present arguments;
(6) A statement of the proposed enforcement action and the reasons therefore;
(7) A statement indicating that a failure to comply with any of the conditions, requirements or
terms of the show cause order shall constitute a violation of this chapter and may subject the user to such
other enforcement response that may be appropriate;
(8) The name, address and telephone number of the Utilities Manager of the city.
(B) The Board of Public Works and Safety may itself conduct a hearing and take the evidence, or
may designate any of its members or any officer or employee of the Wastewater Department to:
(1) Issue in the name of the Board of Public Works and Safety notices of hearings requesting
the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of evidence relevant to any matter involved
in such hearing;
2016 S-1
Sewers 73
(2) Take the evidence; and
(3) Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including transcripts and other evidence,
together with recommendations to the Board of Public Works and Safety for action thereon.
(C) A hearing must be held relative to each show cause order of the city and the hearing shall be
held on a business day no earlier than ten days after notice of the show cause order is given. In this
regard, the show cause order shall be served upon the user in accordance with § 51. 173 and the show
cause order is effective on the date considered given in accordance with § 51. 174. At any hearing held
pursuant to this chapter, testimony taken must be under oath and recorded stenograpbically or
mechanically. The person to whom the show cause order was issued, or any other person with an interest
in the proceedings may appear in person or by counsel at the hearing. Whether or not a duly notified user
appears as noticed, enforcement action may be pursued as appropriate. Each person appearing at the
hearing is entitled to present evidence, cross .examine oppOsing witnesses and present arguments. The
transcript, so recordetj., will be made available to any member of the public or any party to the hearing
upon payment of the usual charges therefore.
(D) After the Board of Public Works and Safety has reviewed the evidence and if it fmds any
violation(s) of this chapter, any prohibition, limitation or requirement contained herein or of the user's
discharge permit, or of any order issued hereunder, it shall make findings and it may issue to the user
responsible for the discharge any orders or directives as are necessary and appropriate. Issuance of a
show cause order shall not be a prerequisite to taking any other action against a user.
(Ord. 1516, passed 2-16-16)
§ 51.164 COMPLIANCE ORDERS.
When the Utilities Manager finds that a user has violated or continues to violate this chapter,
discharge permits or orders issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, he may
issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that the user come into compliance
within a specified time period. If the user does not come into compliance within the specified time
period, sewer service shall be discontinued to the user unless and until adequate treatment facilities,
devices or other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated. Such service shall not
recommence until such time as the user is able to demonstrate that it can and will maintain compliance.
Failure to comply with this compliance order may subject the user to having its connection to the sanitary
sewer sealed by the city and assessed the costs therefore. Compliance orders may also contain Such other
requirements as might be reasonably necessary and appropriate to address the noncompliance, including,
but not limited to, the installation of pretreatment technology, additional self-monitoring and improved
management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW. A
compliance order may not extend the deadline for compliance established for a Federal pretreatment
standard oi requjrement, nor does a compliance order release the· user of liability for any violation,
including any continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a prerequisite to taking
any other action against the user.
(Ord. 1516, passed 2-16-16)
2016 S-1
74 Nappanee - Public Works
§ 51.165 CEASE AND DESIST ORDERS.
(A) When the Utilities Manager finds that a user is violating this chapter, the user's discharge
permit, any order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or that the user's
past violations are likely to recur, the Utilities Manager may issue an order to the user directing it to
cease and desist all such violations and directing the user to:
(1) Immediately comply with all requirements;
(2) Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address
a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and termffiating the discharge.
(B) In an emergency, the order to cease and desist may be given by the Utilities Manager by
telephone. In non-emergency situations, the cease and desist order may be used to suspend or revoke
discharge permits. Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a prerequisite to taldng any other
action against the user.
(Ord. 1516, passed 2-16-16)
§ 51.166 REVOCATION ORDER.
When the Utilities Manager finds that a user is violating this section, the user's discharge permit,
any order issued hereunder, any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or any order or directive
issued by the Board of Public Works and Safety pursuant to a show cause hearing, the Utilities Manager
may issue an order to the user revoking the user's discharge permit and directing the user to immediately
stop or eliminate non-domestic contribution into the City of Nappanee' s POTW. Failure to comply with
this order may subject the user to having any or all connections to the sanitary sewer sealed by the City
of Nappanee and assessed the costs therefore. Revocation orders may be issued by the Utilities Manager
pursuant to § 51.080 and shall not be a prerequisite to taldng any other action against the user.
(Ord. 1516, passed 2-16-16)
§ 51.167 EMERGENCY SUSPENSIONS.
(A) The city may, upon informal notice to the user, immediately suspend a user's discharge
whenever such suspension is necessary, in the opinion of the Utilities Manager, in order to halt· or
prevent an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present an immediate or substantial
endangerment to human health, to the welfare of the public, or to the environment, that threatens to
interfere with the operation of the POTW or is causing or will cause the city to violate any condition of
its NPDES permit.
(B) Any user notified of a suspension of the waste water treatment service and/or the discharge
permit shall immediately stop or eliminate the discharge. In the event of a failure of the person to comply
2016 S-1
Sewers 75
voluntarily with the suspension order, the Utilities Manager shall take such steps as deemed necessary,
including, but not limited to, immediate severance of the sewer connection, to minimize damage to the
POTW system or endangerment to any individuals or to the environment.
(C) The Utilities Manager shall allow the user to recommence its discharge when the user has
demonstrated to the satisfaction of the city that the period of' endangennent has passed, unless the
termination proceedings set forth in § 51.169 are initiated against .the user.
(D) A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for. any discharge presenting imminent
endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement describing the causes of the harmful contribution
and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence to the Utilities Manager prior to the date of any
show cause or termination hearing.
(E) Compliance with the conditions, requirements and terms of the suspension order shall not be·
construed to relieve the user of its obligation to comply with its discharge permit which remains in full
force and effect nor does such compliance excuse previous violations. Additional enforcement action may
be pursued if corrective actions are not accomplished as required and the city expressly reserves the right
to seek any and all remedies available to it under this chapter for any violations cited by the suspension
order. Further, a failure to comply with any of the conditions, requirements or terms of the suspension
order shall constitute a further violation of this chapter and may subject i:he user to such other
enforcement response that may be appropriate.
(F) The Utilities Manager may deny or condition new or increased discharges by a user or changes
in the nature of pollutants discharged by the user if the discharge does not meet applicable pretreatment
standards or will cause the city to violate its NPDES permit.
(G) Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted as -requiring a hearing prior to any emergency
suspension.
(Ord. 1516, passed 2-16-16)
§ 51.168 TERMINATION OF DISCHARGE.
(A) In addition to the provisions of§ 51.080, any user who violates the following conditions is
subject to discharge termination:
(1) Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions;
(2) Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge;
(3) Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater volume, constituents, and
characteristics prior to discharge;
2016 S-1
76 Nappanee - Public Works
(4) Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection,
monitoring, or sampling; or
(5) Violation of the pretreatment standards in §§ 51.020 et seq.
(B) Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge and be offered an
opportunity to show cause under§ 51.163 why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this
option by the Nappanee Board of Public Works and Safety shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for,
taking any other action against the user.
(Ord. 1516, passed 2-16-16)
§ 51.169 RIGHT OF APPEAL; BOARD OF PUBLIC WORKS AND SAFETY.
(A) Any user or applicant for any permit filed pursuant to this chapter affected by any decision,
action, or determination, including cease and desist orders, made by any Nappanee representative; e.g. ,
Inspector, Utilities Manager, Board, interpreting or implementing the provisions of this chapter, or any
permit issued herein, or the denial of any application for permit provided in this chapter, may file with
the Utilities Manager a written request for reconsideration within 30 days of such a decision, action, or
determination, setting forth in detail the facts supporting the user's request for reconsideration.
(B) If the rulirig made by the Utilities Manager is unsatisfactory to the person requesting
reconsideration, he may within 30 days from the notification of the Utilities Manager, file a written
appeal to the Nappanee Board of Public Works and Safety. The written appeal shall be heard by the
Board within 30 days from the date of filing. The Nappanee Board of Public Works and Safety shall
ri::take a final ruling on the appeal within 30 days of the close of the meeting. The Nappanee Board of
Public Works and Safety's decision, action, or determination shall remain in effect during such period
of reconsideration.
(C) The findings of the Board of Public Works and Safety shall be in writing and shall be available
to the public upon request. However, neither the city nor the Board of Public Works and Safety is
required to give any person notice of the findings and orders issued thereto other than the user or
applicant to whom said orders may be directed. The findings and any orders issued by the Board of
Public Works and Safety shall be served upon the user in accordance with§ 51.173 and the notice is
effective on the date considered given in accordance with§ 51.174.
(D) Compliance with the conditions, requirements and terms of any of the orders issued by the
Board of Public Works and Safety pursuant to§ 51.163(D) will not be construed to relieve the user of
its obligation to comply with i:ts waste water contribution permit which remains in full force and effect
nor does such compliance excuse previous violations. Additional enforcement action may be pursued
if corrective actions are not accomplished as scheduled and the city expressly reserves the right to seek
any and all remedies available to it for any violation found by the Board of Public Works and Safety.
2016 S-1
,. __ \ Sewers 77
Further, a failure to comply with any of the conditions, requirements or terms of the orders shall
constitute a further violation of this chapter and may subject the user to such other enforcement response
that may be appropriate.
(E) Any action taken by the Boro:d of Public Works and Safety under this chapter is subject to
review by the Circuit or Superior Court of the County out of which the matter dealt with by the Board
of Public Works and Safety arose, on the request of any user or applicant to whom the respective order
was issued or to any interested party. Any person requesting judicial review under this section must file
a verified complaint with the Clerk of the appropriate Circuit or Superior Court within ten days of the
date when the Board of Public Works and Safety issued its findings of fact and accompanying order.
An appeal under this section is an action de nova. The court may affirm, modify or reverse the action
taken by the Board of Public Works and Safety.
(Ord. 1516, passed 2-16-16)
§ 51.170 INJUNCTIVE RELIEF.
Whenever a user has violated a pretreatment standard or requirement or continues to violate the
provisions of this chapter, discharge permits or orders issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment
requirement, or any order or directive issued by the Board of Public Works and Safety pursuant to this
chapter, the Utilities Manager, or his or her designee, may petition a judge of a circuit or superior court
of the county from which the action sought to be restrained or the action sought to be compelled has
arisen, through the City Attorney, for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as
appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance of the discharge permit, order, or other
requirements imposed by this chapter on activities of the industrial user. Such other action as appropriate
for legal andior equitable relief may also be sought by the city. A petition for injunctive relief need not
be filed as a prerequisite to taldng any other action against a user.
(Ord. 1516, passed 2-16-16)
§ 51.171 CIVIL PENALTIES.
(A) Any user which has violated or continues to violate this chapter, any order or discharge permit
issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall be liable to the city for a civil
penalty of not more than $2,500 per day, per violation for a first violation nor more than $7 ,500 per day,
per violation for subsequent violations, in accordance with I. C. 36-1-3-S(a)(lO)(B).
(B) The city may recover reasonable attorney's fees, court costs and other expenses associated with
enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses and the cost of any actual damages
incurred by the city, including fines, penalties, costs or damages imposed upon the City of Nappanee
by the State of Indiana; EPA or other governmental entities pursuant to this chapter.
2016 S-1
78 Nappanee - Public Works
(C) In determining the amount of civil liability,. the court shall take into account all relevant
circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude
and duration, any economic benefit gained through the user's violation, corrective actions by the user,
the compliance history of the user and any other factor as justice requires.
(D) Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a prerequisite for taldng any other action against a
user.
(Ord. 1516, passed 2-16-16)
§ 51.172 REMEDIES NONEXCLUSIVE.
The provisions set forth in§§ 51.160 et seq. are not exclusive remedies. The city reserves the right
to take any, all or any combination of these actions against a non compliant user. Enforcement of
pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance with the city's enforcement response plan.
However, the city reserves the right to take other action against any user when the circumstances
warrant. Further, the city is empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any
non-compliant user. These actions may be taken concurrently.
(Ord. 1516, passed 2-16-16)
§ 51.173 SERVICE.
(A) Any notice of noncompliance, notice of orders, notice of any other directives issued by the city
or by the Board of Public Works and Safety may be served upon any principle executive, general
partner, corporate officer, or the individual in charge of the user's waste water treatment program as
designated by the user, and shall be given by either:
(1) Sending a copy of the notice, order or statement by registered or certified mail to the place
of business or employment of the person to be notified, with return receipt requested; or
(2) Delivering a copy of the notice, order or statement personally to the person to be notified;
or
(3) Leaving a copy of the notice, order or statement at the place of business or employment of
the person to be notified.
(B) When service is made by any of the means described, the person making service must make an
affidavit stating that he has made this service, the manner in which the service was made, to whom the
notice, order or statement was issued, the nature of the notice, order or statement and the date of service.
The affidavit must be placed on file with the city,
?011; S-1
Sewers 79
(D) If, after reasonable effort, service is not obtaine_d by a means described above in division (A),
service may be made by publishing a notice of the notice, order or statement in each newspaper which
the city has currently aesignated as a newspaper in which it shall publish legal notices. Publication may
be made on consecutive days. If service of an order is made by publication, the publication must include
a statement indicating generally what action is required by the notice, order or statement and that the
exact terms of the notice, order or statement may be obtained from the city.
(Ord. 1516, passed 2-16-16)
§ 51.174 EFFECTIVE DATE OF NOTICE, ORDER OF STATEMENT.
The date when the notice, order or statement is considered given is as follows:
(A) If the notice, order or statement is delivered personally or left at the usual place of business or
employment, notice is considered given on the day when the notice, order or statement is delivered to
the person or left at the person's usual place of business or employment.
(B) If the notice, order or statement is mailed, notice is considered given on the date shown on the
return receipt, or, if no date is shown, on the date when the return receipt is received by the city.
(C) Notice by publication is considered given on the date of the second day that publication was
made.
(Ord. 1516, passed 2-16-16)
SUPPLEMENTAL ENFORCEMENT ACTION
§ 51.185 PERJiORMANCE BONDS.
The Nappanee Board of Public Works and Safety may decline to issue or reissue a wastewater
discharge permit to any user who has failed to comply with any provisions of this chapter, a previous
wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or
requirement, unless such user first files a bond as deemed satisfactory to the Board, payable to the city,
in a sum not to exceed a value determined by the Utilities Manager to be necessary to achieve consistent
compliance and payable upon occurrence of damages to the POTW.
(Ord. 1516, passed 2-16-16)
§ 51.186 I.JABILITY INSURANCE.
The Nappanee Board of Public Works and Safety may decline to issue or reissue a wastewater
discharge permit to any user who bas failed to comply with any provision of this chapter, a previous
2016 S-1
80 Nappanee - Public Works
wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard of
requirement, unless the user first submits proof that it has obtained financial assurances sufficient to
restore or repair damage to the POTW caused by its discharge. Any such financial assurances in the form
of :insurance policies shall name the city as an additional insured.
(Ord. 1516, passed 2-16-16)
§ 51.187 WATER SUPPLY SEVERANCE.
Whenever a user has violated or continues to violate any provision of this chapter, a wastewater
discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, water
service to the user may be severed by the Board. Service will only recommence, at the user's expense,
after it has satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply. A users' ability to utilize the POTW shall
be contingent based on the user's timely payment of the bill issued by the city for water and sewer
service. Failure to make such timely payment shall subject the user to the shut·off of water and
wastewater services.
(Ord. 1516, passed 2-16-16)
§ 51.188 PUBLIC NUISANCES.
A violation of any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit, or order is.Sued
hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement is hereby declared a public nuisance and
shall be corrected or abated as directed by the Nappanee Board of Public Works and Safety. Any
person(s) creating a public nuisance shall be subject to the provisions of the City Code governing such
nuisances, including reimbursing the city for any costs incurred in removing, abating, or remedying said
nuisance.
(Ord. 1516, passed 2-16-16)
§ 51.189 CONTRACTOR LISTING.
Users which have not achieved compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements
are not eligible to receive a contractual award for the sale of goods or services to the city or the
Nappanee Wastewater Department. Existing contracts for tJ?.e sale of goods or services to the city held
by a user found to be in significant noncompliance with pretreatment standards or requirements may be
terminated at the discretion of the Nappanee Board of Public Works and Safety.
(Ord. 1516, passed 2-16-16)
2016 S-1
•
Sewers 81
AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES TO DISCHARGE VIOLATIONS
§ 51.200 UPSET.
(A) For the purposes of this section:
UPSET. An exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance
with categorical pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the user. An
UPSET does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed
treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or
improper operation.
(B) An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance with
categorical pretreatment standards if the requirements of division (C), below, are met.
(C) ·A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall demonstrate, through
properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence th~:
(1) An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the upset;
(2) Th~ facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and worlanan-like manner and in
compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures; and
(3) The user has submitted the following information to the Utilities Manager within 24 hours
of becoming aware of the upset, if this information is provided orally, a written submission must be
provided within five days:
(a) A description of the indirect discharge and cause of noncompliance;
(b) The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times, or, if not corrected, the
anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue; and
(c) Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the
noncompliance.
(D) In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall
have the burden of proof.
(E) Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any claim of upset only in an
enforcement action brought for noncompliance with categoric~l pretreatment standards.
2016 S-1
82 Nappanee - Public Works
(F) Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance
with categorical pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the
facility is restored or an alternative rμ.ethod of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the
situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced,
lost, or fails.
(Ord. 1516, passed 2-16-16)
§ 51.201 PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS.
A user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought against it for
noncompliance with the general prohibitions in§ 51.022(A) or the specific prohibitions in§ 5l.022(B)
if it can prove that it did not know, or have reason to know, that its discharge, alone or in conjunction
with discharges from other sources, would cause pass through or interference and that either:
(A) A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user was in compliance with each limit
directly prior to, and during, the pass through or interference; or
(B) No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change substantially in nature or constituents
from the user's prior discharge when the city was regularly in compliance with its NPDES Permit, and
in the case of interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal requirements.
(Ord. 1516, passed 2-16-16)
§ 51.202 BYPASS.
(A) For the purposes of this section:
BYPASS. The intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion of a user's treatment
facility.
SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE. Substantial physical damage to property, damage to the
treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural
resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. SEVERE PROPERTY
DAMAGE does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production.
(B) A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment standards or
requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation.
These bypasses are not subject to the provisions of divisions (C) and (D) of this section.
(C) (1) If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the
Utilities Manager, at least ten days before the date of the bypass, if possible.
2016 S-1
Sewers 83
(2) A user shall submit oral notice to the Utilities Manager of an unanticipated bypass that
exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within 24 hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass.
A written submission shall also be provided within five days of the time the user becomes aware of the
bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause, the duration of
the bypass, including exact dates and times, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time
it is expected to continue, and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the
bypass. The Utilities Manager may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has
been received within 24 hours.
(D) (1) Bypass is prohibited, and the Nappanee Board of Public Works and Safety may take an
enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless:
(a) Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property
damage;
(b) There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment
facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtjme.
This condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the exercise
of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of
equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and
(c) The user submitted notices as required under division (C) of this section.
(2) The Utilities Manager may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse
effects, if the Utilities Manager determines that it will meet the three conditions listed in division (D)(l)
of this section.
(Ord. 1516, passed 2-16-16)
2016 S-1
84 Nappanee - Public Works
,i \
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
Chapter
70. GENERAL PROVISIONS
71. TRAFFIC RULES
72. PEDESTRIANS AND NON-MOTORIZED VEHICLES
73. PARKINGREGULATIONS
74. TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
75. PARKING SCHEDULES
I
2 Nappanee M Traffic Code
)
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
70.01 Title
70.02 Definitions
70.03 Use of golf carts
General Provis.ions
Administration and Enforcement
70.15 Police Department duties
70. 16 Records
70.17 Annual traffic safety report
70.18 Chief of Police; traffic~control duties
70. 19 Emergency and experimental regulations
70.20 Vehicle inspections
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 70.01 TITLE.
This title shall be known as the "Traffic and Parking Laws of the city," and shall regulate the traffic,
parking, and use of streets within the city limits.
(' 83 Code, § 8-1)
§ 70.02 DEFINITIONS.
(A) Whenever any words or phrases used herein are not defined herein, but are defined in the state
laws regulating the operation of the vehicles, any definition therein shall be deemed to apply to those
words and phrases used herein.
(B) For the purpose of this title, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
3
4 Nappanee - Traffic Code
AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE. Police and Fire Department vehicles, city
ambulances and emergency vehicles, and vehicles designated or authorized by the Chief of Police to
serve as emergency vehicles.
BICYCLE. Every device propelled by human power upon which any person may ride, having
tandem wheels, either of which is more than 12 inches in diameter.
BOARD. The Board of Public Works and Safety of the city.
BUSINESS DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to and including a highway when within any
600 feet along that highway there are buildings in use for business or industrial purposes, including but
not limited to hotels, banks, office buildings, railroad stations, and public buildings which occupy at least
300 feet collectively on both sides of the highway.
CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT. All streets and portions thereof within the area described
as follows: All that area bounded on the north by the north line of Walnut Street; on the south by the
south line of Baltimore & Ohio Railroad right-of-way; on the east by the east line of North and South
Elm Street; and on the west by the west line of North and South Clark Street.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE. Every vehicle designed, maintained, or used primarily for the
transportation of property.
CROSSWALK. The part of a roadway at an intersection included within the connections of the
lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the highway measured from the curbs, or in the absence
of curbs from the edges of the traversable roadway, or any portion of a roadway at an intersection or
elsewhere distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other marking 011 the surface.
CURB LOADING ZONE. A space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles
during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials.
DRIVER. Every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a vehicle.
HIGHWAY. The entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained
when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel.
INDIVIDUAL PARKING SPACE. A portion of the paved surface of the street of sufficient
length and depth from the sidewalk curb to accommodate a vehicle to be parked, as shall be specified
and marked off by the Board of Public Works and Safety.
INTERSECTION. The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral curb
lines, or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the roadways of the two highways which join one
another at, or approximately at, right angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different
highways joining at any other angle may come in conflict, or where a highway includes two roadways
General Provisions 5
30 feet or more apart, then every crossing of each roadway of separate INTERSECTION. In the event
an intersecting highway also includes two roadways 30 feet or more apart, then ever.y crossing of two
roadways of these highways shall be regarded as a separate INTERSECTION.
LANED ROADWAY. A roadway which is divided into two or more clearly marked lanes for
vehicular traffic.
MOTOR VEHICLE. Every vehicle which is self-propelled, including farm tractors and
implements of husbandry.
MOTORCYCLE. Every motor vehicle having a seat or saddle for the use of the rider and
designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact With the ground, but excluding a tractor.
OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD. Whenever certain hours are named herein, they shall mean
Eastern Standard Time or Daylight Saving Time as may be in current use in this city.
OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES. All signs, signals, markings, and devices not
inconsistent with this code placed or erected by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction,
for the purpose of regulating, warning, or guiding traffic.
PARKING. The standing of a vehicle upon a street whether that vehicle is occupied or not and
whether the vehicle be accompanied or not by an operator for a period of time in excess of two minutes.
PEDESTRIAN. Any person afoot.
PERSON. Extends to and includes: an individual or other entity, including but not limited to,
a firm, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, trustee, lessee, or receiver. Whenever used
in any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER as applied to any
unincorporated entity shall mean the partners or members thereof, and as applied to corporations, the
officers or agents thereof.
POUCE OFFICER. Every officer of the municipal Police Department or any officer
authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations.
PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY. Every way or place in private ownership and used for
vehicular travel by the owner and those having express or implied permission from the owner, but not
by other persons.
RESIDENCE DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to and including a highway not comprising
a business district when the property on that highway fur a distance of 300 feet or more is in the main
improved with residences and buildings in use for residences.
RIGHT-OF-WAY. The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway.
6 Nappanee - Traffic Code
ROADWAY. The portion of a highway improved, designed, or ordinarily used for vehicular
travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder. In the event a highway includes two or more separate
ROADWAYS, the term ROADWAY, as used herein, shall refer to any one ROADWAY separately but
not to all those ROADWAYS collectively.
SAFETY ZONE. The area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the exclusive use
of pedestrians and which is protected or is so marked or indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly
visible at all times which set it apart as a SAFETY ZONE.
SIDEWALK. The portion of a street between the curb lines, or the lateral lines of a roadway,
and the adjacent property lines, intended for use of pedestrians.
STAND or STANDING. The halting of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than for
the purpose of and while actually engaged in receiving or discharging passengers.
STOP. When required, means complete cessation from movement.
STOP or STOPPING. When prohibited, means any halting, even momentarily, of a vehicle,
whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with
the directions of a police officer or traffic-control sign or signal.
STREET or HIGHWAY. The entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly
maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel.
THROUGH HIGHWAY. Every highway or portion thereof on which vehicular traffic is given
preferential right-of-way and at the entrance to which vehicular traffic from intersecting highways is
required by law to yield right-of-way to vehicles on that highway in obedience to either a stop sign or
yield sign when the sign is erected as provided in this title.
TRAFFIC. Pedestrians, vehicles, bicycles, and other conveyances, either singly or together,
while using any highway for purposes of travel.
TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNAL. Any device, whether manually, electrically, or mechanically
operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and proceed.
VEHICLE. Any device in or upon whlch any person or property is or may be transported upon
a public highway, except such as are used exclusively by human power,
(' 83 Code, § 8-2)
§ 70.03 USE OF GOLF CARTS.
(A) The use of a golf cart upon the streets and alleys of the city is permitted upon satisfaction or the
terms and requirements of this section with the specific exception that a golf cart shall not be operated
on any highway within the corporate boundaries of the city which is designated as part of the Indiana
General Provisions 7
State Highway System other than to cross any such state highway at its intersection with a local street
under the jurisdiction of the city.
(B) For purposes of this section, the term GOLF CART means a four wheeled motor vehicle
originally and specifically designed and intended to transport one or more individuals and golf clubs for
the purpose of playing the game of golf on a golf course.
(C) A golf cart operated on the streets and alleys of the city shall at all times display either a slow
moving vehicle emblem in accordance with J.C. 9-21-9-3 as amended from time to time or an amber
flashing lamp in accordance with I. C. 9-21-9-4, as amended from time to time.
(D) A golf cart operated on the streets and alleys of the city shall at all times be operated by an
individual who possesses a valid state issue driver's license.
(E) A person shall not operate a golf cart on the streets and alleys of the city if fmancial
responsibility is not in effect with respect to the golf cart. Proof of financial responsibility shall be in
accordance with l.C. 9-25-4-4, as amended from time to time. A person who operates a golf cart on the
streets and alleys of the city shall at all times maintain the state required minimum amount of :financial
responsibility for the operation of a motorized vehicle on public rights-of-way.
(F) While operating a golf cart on the streets and alleys of the city, the operator of such cart must
follow and obey all traffic laws, whether federal, state or local, including traffic signs.
(G) No golf cart shall be operated on the streets and alleys of the city during any time period when
visibility is limited, whether due to darkness, fog, rain, snow or otherwise, unless it is fully equipped
with operational headlamps, tail lamps, turn signals and brake lights.
(H) No person shall operate a golf cart unless any and all passengers of said golf cart are seated in
a seat attached to the golf cart as manufactured and the number of such passengers shall not exceed the
limit of passengers designated by the manufacturer of such golf cart for normal use.
(I) No person shall operate a golf cart so that it impedes or blocks the normal flow of traffic.
(J) No person shall operate a golf cart on any bicycle path or on any sidewalk in the city.
(K) No golf cart shall be operated within the city unless the owner of such golf cart shall have
applied for and obtained a valid golf cart permit from the city. Application for such a pennit shall be
made to the Police Department utilizing the application form as approved from time to time by the Board
of Public Works and Safety. The fee for such application shall be $20 made payable to the City of
Nappanee. Such permit shall have an effective length of two years from the date of issuance. In
connection with the application for such permit, the owner of the golf cart roust present the golf cart fur
inspection by a member of the Police Department. Upon issuance of a golf cart permit, the golf cart
owner shall be provided a decal which must be affixed to the left rear of the golf cart at all times so as
to be visible from the rear of the vehicle and left front side quarter panel.
8 Nappanee - Traffic Code
(L) A person or entity may apply for a variance from the application of this section involving the
use of a golf cart or golf carts during or in connection with parades and festivals authorized by the city
by presenting a petition for such variance to the Board of Public Works and Safety which shall have
authority pursuant to this section to determine whether a variance authorizing specific use of such a golf
cart or golf carts in connection with such a parade or festival should be issued and to issue such a
variance. In the event that the Board of Public Works and Safety shall determine that a variance for such
a use should be issued, the Board of Public Works and Safety shall issue a variance for such use with
such limitations as the Board of Public Works and Safety shall determine provided that any such variance
shall have an effective period of not longer than five days from the effective start date of such variance,
as determined by the Board of Public Works and Safety.
(M) A person who violates this section shall on the first offense be fined an amount of $100. A
person who violates this section a second time within a calendar year of the first offense shall be fmed
the sum of $250. For each violation over two times in a two year period, a person shall be fined a sum
not to exceed $2,500. Each day of violating this section shall be construed as a separate violation.
(N) All fines collected pursuant to division (M) of this section shall be deposited in the general fund
of the City of Nappanee.
(Ord. 1442, passed 9-7-10; Am. Ord. 1462, passed 5-21-12)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 70.15 POLICE DEPARTMENT DUTIES.
(A) Traffic regulations. It shall be the duty of the Police Department and all of the officers thereof
to enforce the street traffic regulations of this city and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to street
traffic in this city, to issue citations for traffic violations, to inveEtigate accidents, and to cooperate with
other officers of the city in the administration of the traffic laws and development of ways and means
to improve traffic conditions, and to carry out those duties specially imposed upon it by this title and the
traffic ordinances of the city.
(B) Parking violations.
(1) It shall be the duty of police officers acting in accordance with instructions issued by the
Board to report:
(a) The date and location of any parking violation;
(b) The state license number of each vehicle in violation;
(c) The time during which the vehicle is parking in violation of any of the provisions of
this title; and
General Provisions 9
(d) The circumstances attending the violation.
(2) The police officer shall also attach to the vehicle a notice to the owner or operator thereof
that the vehicle has been parked in violation of a provision of this title and instructing and advising the
owner or operator of the total amount of the penalty for that violation and the mode and manner by
which the penalty shall be paid.
(' 83 Code, § 8-3)
§ 70.16 RECORDS.
(A) Records of traffic violations.
(1) The Police Department shall keep a record of all violations of the city traffic ordinances
and state vehicle laws of whlch any person has been charged and the fmal disposition of all these alleged
offenses,
(a) This record shall be so maintained as to show all types of violations and the total of
each.
(b) The record shall accumulate during at least a five~year period, and from that time on
the record shall be maintained for at least the most recent five-year period.
(2) All forms for records shall be public records.
(' 83 Code, § 8-4)
(B) Traffic accident reports. The Police Department shall maintain a suitable system of filing traffic
accident reports.
(' 83 Code, § 8-5)
(C) Drivers' files to be maintained.
(1) The Police Department shall maintain a suitable record of all traffic accidents, warnings,
arrests, convictions, and complaints reported for each driver which shall be filed alphabetically under
the name of the driver concerned.
(2) The Chief of Police shall study the cases of all the drivers charged with frequent or serious
violations of the traffic laws or involved in frequent traffic accidents or any serious accident, and shall
attempt to discover the reasons therefor and shall take whatever steps are lawful and reasonable to
prev.ent the same or to have the licenses of these persons suspended or revoked.
(3) These records shall accumulate during at least a five-year period and from that time on the
-~\ records shall be maintained complete for at least the most recent five-year period.
(' 83 Code, § 8-6)
10 Nappanee - Traffic Code
(D) Fee for accident report. Pursuant to Public Law 174 - House Enrolled Act 1158 - effective
July 1, 2006 - Accident Reports - requires all law enforcement agencies to charge a fee for providing
accident reports that is fixed by ordinance in an amount not less than $5:
(1) The Police Department is authorized to charge a fee of $5 for a photocopy of each accident
report furnished upon request to all interested persons, firms, or corporations.
(2) Monies collected shall become a part of the Law Enforcement Continuing Education Fund.
('83 Code,§ 4-5) (Am. Ord. 1410, passed 3-19-07)
§ 70.17 ANNUAL TRAFFIC SAFETY REPORT.
(A) The Chief of Police shall annually prepare a traffic report which shall be filed with the Mayor.
(B) This report shall contain information on traffic matters in this city as follows:
(1) The number of traffic accidents, the number of persons killed, the number of persons
injured, and other pertinent traffic accident data;
(2) The number of traffic accidents investigated and other pertinent traffic data on the safety
activities of the police; and
(3) The plans and recommendations of the division for future traffic safety activities.
('83 Code,§ 8-7)
§ 70.18 CIDEF OF POLICE; TRAFFIC-CONTROL DUTIES.
It shall be the general duty of the Chief of Police to determine the installation and proper timing and
maintenance of traffic-control devices, to conduct engineering analysis of traffic accidents and to devise
remedial measures, to conduct engineering investigation of traffic conditions, to plan the operation of
traffic on the streets and highways of this city, and to cooperate with other city officials in the
development of ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and to carry out the additional powers and
duties imposed by ordinances of this city.
C 83 Code, § 8-8)
§ 70.19 EMERGENCY AND EXPERIMENTAL REGULATIONS.
(A) The Chief of Police is empowered to make regulations necessary to make effective the
provisions of the traffic ordinances of this city and to make and enforce temporary or experimental
regulations in effect for more than 90 days.
General Provisions
(B) The Chief of Police may test traffic-control devices under actual conditions of traffic.
('83 Code, § 8-9)
§ 70.20 VEIIlCLE INSPECTIONS.
11
(A) Pursuant to I.C. 9-17 et seq. and 9-29 et seq. and all acts amendatory thereto, the Police
Department is authorized to collect a fee for each vehicle inspected upon the request of any person who
owns a vehicle which must be inspected prior to registration in the state.
(B) Each police officer of the city, be he or she a full-time or reserve officer, shall collect a fee as
specified in§ 38.15 for each inspection, by that officer, of a motor vehicle pursuant to the terms and
conditions of l.C. 9-17 et seq. and 9-29 et seq., as amended by P.L. 29-1988.
(C) The officer inspecting motor vehicles shall make a record of each inspection upon the requisite
application form, as prepared by the Bureau of Motor Vehicles, and shall verify the facts set out in that
application for use and benefit of the Bureau of Motor Vehicles.
(D) A receipt shall be issued by the officer to the person requesting the inspection for each fee
collected. A copy of each receipt shall be kept on file with the records of the Police Department. The
funds received for the motor vehicle inspections shall be remitted once a month to the Clerk-Treasurer
of the city.
(E) The Clerk-Treasurer of the city shall keep a perm.anent record of all funds received from these
motor vehicle inspections. The Clerk-Treasurer of the city shall receipt the fees derived from motor
vehicle inspections into the Law Enforcement Continuing Education Fund, and the funds thus received
shall be designated, with appropriation, only fur law enforcement purposes.
('83 Code, § 4-7) (Ord. 939, passed 11-9-83; Am. Ord. 1082, passed 5-16-88)
12 Nappanee - Traffic Code
___ /:
CHAPTER 71: TRAFFIC RULES
Section
Genend Provisions
71.001 Compliance with traffic and parking laws required
71.002 Police and Fire Department officials; authority
71. 003 Obedience to Police and Fire Department officials required
71.004 Immediate notice of accident
71.005 Application to public employees
Emergency Vehicles and Equipment
71.015 Authorized emergency vehicles; exemptions and regulations
71.016 Vehicles approaching authorized emergency vehicle
71.017 Following fire apparatus prohibited
71.018 Crossing fire hose prohibited
Traffic-Control Devices and Controlled Zo1ies
71.030 Installation authority
71.031 Manual and specifications
71.032 Obedience required
71.033 Signs; when required for enforcement
71.034 Traffic-control signal lights
71. 035 Flashing signals
71.036 Pedestrian-control signals
71.037 Unauthorized signs, signals, and markings prohibited
71.038 Interference with official traffic-control devices prohibited
71.039 Play streets
71.040 Crosswalks and safety zones; designation authority
71.041 Traffic lanes
Speed Regulations
71.055 State speed laws applicable
71. 056 Decrease of maximum permitted speed
71. 057 Speed regulation by traffic signals
71. 058 Speed limits on school properties
13
14 Nappanee - Traffic Code
Turning Movements
71.070 Turning at intersection; method
71.071 Turning markers and indications
71.072 Restricted rum signs
71.073 Compliance with restricted turn signs required
One-Way Streets and Alleys
71. 085 Designating signs required
71.086 Traffic direction restricted
71. 087 Temporary one-way traffic designation authorized
Stops and Yields
71.100 Designated through streets; signs and signals required
71.101 Stop signs; standards
71.102 Approaching stop intersection
71.103 Emerging from alley, driveway, or building
71.104 Stop when traffic obstructed
71.105 Approaching train; stop at railroad crossing
Additional Driving Rules
71.120 Funeral and other processions
71.121 Procession driving
71.122 Procession permission requirement
71.123 Driving on sidewalk prohibited
71.124 Restrictions on backing
71.125 Opening vehicle doors
71.126 Riding on motorcycles
71. 127 Load restrictions on certain highways
Cross-reference:
Trciffic regulations in parks, see§§ 97.35 through 97.40
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 71.001 COMPLIANCE WITII TRAFFIC AND PARKING LAWS REQUIRED.
It is an infraction for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act required in this
title.
('83 Code,§ 8-11) Penalty, see§ 10.99
Traffic Rules 15
§ 71.002 POLICE AND F1RE DEPARTMENT OFFICIALS; AUTHORITY.
(A) It shall be the duty of the officers of the Police Department or those officers as are assigned by
the Chief of Police to enforce all street traffic laws of this city and all of the state vehicle laws applicable
to street traffic in this city.
(B) Officers of the Police Department or those officers as are assigned by the Chief of Police are
authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand, or signal in conformance with traffic laws, provided that,
in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of
the Police Department may direct traffic as conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions of
the traffic laws.
(C) Officers of the Fire Department, when at the scene of a fire, may direct or assist the police in
directing traffic thereat or in the immediate vicinity,
('83 Code,§ 8-10)
§ 71.003 OBEDIENCE TO POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENT OFF1CIALS REQUIRED.
No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of a police
officer or Fire Department official.
('83 Code,§ 8-12) Penalty, see§ 10.99
§ 71.004 IMMEDIATE NOTICE OF ACCIDENT.
The driver of a vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to or death of any person or
property damage to an apparent extent of $750 or more shall immediately, by the quickest means of
communication, give notice of that accident to the Police Department if the accident occurs within the
city.
('83 Code,§ 8-18)
§ 71.005 APPLICATION TO PUBLIC EMPLOYEES.
The provisions of this title shall apply to the driver of any vehicle owned by or used in the service
of the United States government, the state, the county, or the city, and it shall be unlawful for any driver
so described to violate any of the provisions of this title except as otherwise permitted in this title or by
stanites of the state.
(' 83 Code, § 8-15)
16 Nappanee - Traffic Code
EMERGENCY VEHICLES AND EQUIPMENT
§ 71.015 AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES; EXEMPTIONS AND REGULATIONS.
(A) The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an emergency call or when
in the pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law or when responding to, but not upon rerurning
from a fire alarm, may exercise the privileges set forth in this section, but subject to the conditions
herein stated.
(B) The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle may:
(1) Park or stand, irrespective of the provisions of this title;
(2) Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after slowing down as may be
necessary for the safe operation of this and other vehicles in the immediate vicinity;
(3) Exceed the maximum speed limits so long as he or she does not endanger life or property;
and
( 4) Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning in specified directions.
(C) The exemptions herein granted to an authorized emergency vehicle shall apply only when the
driver of any authorized emergency vehicle, while in motion, sounds audible signal by bell, siren, or
exhaust whistle as may be reasonably necessary, and when the vehicle is equipped with at least one
lighted lamp displaying a red light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500
feet to the front of the vehicle, except that an authorized emergency vehicle operated as a police vehicle
need not be equipped with or display a red light visible from the front of the vehicle,
(D) Privately owned vehicles owned and operated by members and officials of the city's Volunteer
Fire Department or the city's full-time or volunteer members of the Emergency Medical Services
Department and which are equipped with a blue light or green light, respectively, visible 300 feet from
the front of the vehicle, shall be deemed to be emergency vehicles during the time of an actual
emergency wherein that vehicle is actually en route to the Fire Department Station or emergency medical
services building in response to a fire alarm, or en route to the actual location of the frre or other
emefgency; provided, however, that the operator thereof shall cause to be displayed his or her blue light
or green light and in addition thereto he or she may emit audible horn signal.
(E) The foregoing provisions shall not relieve the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from
the duty to drive with regard for the safety of all persons nor shall these provisions protect the driver
from the consequences of reckless disregard for the safety of others.
(' 83 Code, § 8-16)
Traffic Rules 17
§ 71.016 VEIDCLES APPROACIIlNG AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEIDCLE.
(A) Upon the inunediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle making use of audible and
visual signals meeting the requirements of the laws of this state or as hereinabove related, or of a police
vehicle properly and lawfully making use of an audible signal only, the driver of every other vehicle
shall yield the rightwofwway and shall immediately drive to a position parallel to and as close as possible
to the right hand edge or curb of the roadway clear of any intersection and shall stop and remain in that
position until the authorized emergency vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by a police
officer.
(B) This section shall not operate to relieve the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from the
duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons using the highways.
(' 83 Code. § 8-17)
§ 71.017 FOLLOWING FIRE APPARATUS PROIDBITED.
No driver of any vehicle other than one on official business may follow any fire apparatus traveling
in response to a fire alarm closer than 500 feet or drive into or park his or her vehicle within the block
where fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm.
('83 Code. § 8-52) Penalty, see§ 10.99
§ 71.018 CROSSING FIRE HOSE PROIDBITED.
No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of a Fire Department, when laid down on any
street or private driveway to be used at any fire or alarm of fire, without the consent of the Fire
Department official in command.
(' 83 Code, § 8-53) Penalty, see§ 10.99
TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES AND CONTROUED ZONES
§ 71.030 INSTALLATION AUTHORITY.
The Board of Public Works and Safety shall cause to be placed and maintain trafficwcontrol signs,
signals, and devices when and as required under the traffic ordinances of this city, and make effective
the provisions of these ordinances, and may place and maintain additional traffic-control devices and
information and warning signs and devices as it may deem reasonably necessary to regulate traffic under
the traffic ordinances of this city or under any other law or authority of this state.
('83 Code,§ 8-19)
18 Nappanee - Traffic Code
§ 71.031 MANUAL AND SPECIFICATIONS.
All traffic-control signs, signals, and devices shall conform to the manual and specifications
approved by the State Highway Commission. All signs and signals required hereunder for a particular
purpose shall so far as is practicable be uniform as to type and location throughout the city. All trafficcontrol
devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of state laws or this title shall be
official traffic-control devices.
C 83 Code, § 8-20)
§ 71.032 OBEDIENCE REQUIRED.
The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official traffic-control device applicable
thereto placed in accordance with the provisions of this title unless otherwise directed by a traffic or
police officer, subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle in this
title.
('83 Code,§ 8~21) Penalty, see§ 10.99
§ 71.033 SIGNS; WHEN REQUIRED FOR ENFORCEMENT.
(A) No provision of this title for which signs are required shall be enforced against an alleged
violator if at the time and place of the alleged violation, an official sign is not in proper position and
sufficiently visible to be seen.by an ordinarily observant person.
(B) Whenever a particular section does not state that signs are required, that section shall be
effective even though no signs are erected or in place.
('83 Code, § 8-22)
§ 71.034 TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNAL LIGHTS.
(A) Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals exhibiting different colored lights
successively one at a time or with arrows, the following colors only shall be used and these lights shall
indicate and apply to drivers of vehicles and pedestrians as follows; provided, however, where
pedestrian-control signals are installed and maintained, pedestrians shall only proceed pursuant to those
pedestrian-control signals as set forth in § 71.036 of this code.
(B) (I) Green alone:
(a) Vehicular traffic facing the signal may proceed straight through or turn right or left
unless a sign at that place prohibits either rurn. But vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right
or left, shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles or to pedestrians lawfully within the intersection or
an adjacent crosswalk at the time the signal is exhibited; and
I,''
Traffic Rules 19
(b) Pedestrians facing the signal may proceed across the roadway within any marked or
unmarked crosswalk.
(2) Yellow steady alone:
(a) Vehicular traffic facing the signal is thereby warned that the red or stop signal will be
exhibited immediately thereafter, and that vehicular traffic shall not enter or be crossing the intersection
when the red or stop signal is exhibited; and
(b) No pedestrian facing this signal shall enter the roadway until the green or go signal is
shown alone.
(3) Red steady alone:
(a) Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near
side of the intersection or, if none, then before entering the intersection, and shall there remain until
green is shown alone; and
(b) No pedestrian facing this signal shall enter the roadway until the green or go signal is
shown alone.
(4) Red steady with green arrow:
(a) Vehicular traffic facing this signal may cautiously enter the intersection only to make
the movement indicated by the arrow, but shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within a
crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection; and
(b) No pedestrian facing this signal shall enter the roadway until the green or go signal is
shown alone.
(C) In the event that an official traffic-control signal is erected and maintained at a place other than
an intersection, the provisions of this section shall be applicable except as to those provisions which by
their nature can have no application. Any stop required shall be made at a sign or marking on the
pavement indicating where the stop shall be made, but in the absence of any indicative sign or marking,
the stop shall be made at the signal.
(' 83 Code, § 8-23) Penalty, see§ 10.99
§ 71.035 FLASHING SIGNALS.
(A) (1) Obedience. Whenever an illuminated flashing red or yellow signal is used in a traffic sign
or signal, it shall require obedience by vehicular traffic as follows:
(2) Flashing red (stop signal). When a red lens is illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes,
drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at a limit line
20 Nappanee - Traffic Code
when marked, or if none, then before entering the intersection, and the right to proceed shall be subject
to the rules applicable after stopping at a stop sign.
(B) This section shall not apply at railroad grade crossings. The conduct of drivers of vehicles
approaching railroad crossings shall be governed by the rules as set forth in§ 71.105 of this code.
(' 83 Code, § 8-25) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 71.036 PEDESTRIAN-CONTROL SIGNALS.
Whenever special pedestrian-control signals exhibiting "walk" or "wait" or "don't walk" are in
place, these signals shall indicate as follows.
(A) "Walk. " Pedestrians facing this signal may proceed across the roadway in the direction of the
signal and shall be given the right-of-way by the drivers of all vehicles.
(B) "Wait" or "don't walk. " No pedestrian shall start to cross the roadway in the direction of these
signals, but any pedestrian who has partially completed his or her crossing on the "walk" signal shall
proceed to a sidewalk or safety zone while the "wait" signal is showing.
('83 Code,§ 8-24) Penalty, see§ 10.99
§ 71.037 UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS, SIGNALS, AND MARKINGS PROIIlBITED.
(A) No person shall place, maintain, or display upon or in view of any highway an unauthorized
sign, signal, marking, or device which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official trafficcontrol
device or railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic, or which
hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any official traffic-control device or any railroad
sign or signal.
(B) No person shall place or maintain nor shall any public authority permit upon any highway any
traffic sign or signal bearing thereon any commercial advertising.
(C) This section shall be deemed not to prohibit the erection upon private property adjacent to
highways of signs giving useful directional information and of a type that cannot be mistaken for official
signs.
(D) Every herein prohibited sign, signal, or marking is declared to be a public nuisance, and the
authority having jurisdiction over the highway is empowered to remove the same or cause it to be
removed without notice.
(' 83 Code, § 8-26) Penalty, see § 10.99
Traffic Rules
§ 71.038 INTERFERENCE WITH OFF1CIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES
PROIDBITED.
21
No person shall, without lawful authority, attempt to or in fact alter, deface, injure, knock down,
or remove any official traffic~control device or any railroad sign or signal or any inscription, shield, or
insignia thereon, or any other part thereof.
('83 Code,§ 8-27) Penalty, see§ 10.99
§ 71.039 PLAY STREETS.
(A) Autlwrity to establish play street. The Board shall have authority to declare any street or part
thereof a play street and to place appropriate signs or devices in the roadway indicating and helping to
protect the same.
(' 83 Code, § 8-28)
(B) Play streets. Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating any street or part thereof as a
play street, no person shall drive a vehicle upon any street so designated or any portion thereof except
drivers of vehicles having business or whose residences are within the closed area, and then any driver
shall exercise the greatest care in driving upon any play street or portion thereof.
C 83 Code, § 8-29) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 71.040 CROSSWALKS AND SAFETY WNES; DESIGNATION AUTHORITY.
The Board is authorized to designate and maintain by appropriate devices, marks, or lines upon the
surface of the roadway crosswalks at intersections where, in its opinion, there is a particular danger to
pedestrians crossing the roadway, and at other places as it may deem necessary, and it is authorized to
establish safety zones of a kind and character and at those places as it may deem necessary for the
protection of pedestrians.
(' 83 Code, § 8-30)
§ 71.041 TRAFFIC LANES.
(A) The Board is authorized to mark traffic lanes upon the roadway of any street or highway where
a regular alignment of traffic is necessary.
(B) Where traffic lanes have been marked, it shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to
fail or refuse to keep that vehicle within the boundaries of any marked lane except when lawfully passing
another vehicle or preparatory to making a lawful turning movement.
('83 Code,§ 8-31) Penalty, see§ 10.99
22 Nappanee - Traffic Code
SPEED REGULATIONS
§ 71.055 STATE SPEED LAWS APPLICABLE.
The state traffic laws regulating the speed of vehicles shall be applicable upon all streets within this
city, except as this title, as authorized by state law, declares and determines upon the basis of traffic
investigation that certain speed regulations shall be applicable upon specified streets or in certain areas,
in which event it shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle at a speed in excess of any speed
so declared in this title when signs are in place giving notice thereof.
('83 Code,§ 8-32) Penalty, see§ 10.99
§ 71.056 DECREASE OF MAXIMUM PERMITTED SPEED.
The speed limit for all city streets shall be 25 miles per hour except state and federal highways and
such other streets as specified on Schedule I, Chapter 74 of this code.
('83 Code,§ 8-33)
§ 71.057 SPEED REGULATION BY TRAFFIC SIGNALS.
The Board is authorized to regulate the timing of traffic signals so as to permit the movement of
traffic in an orderly and safe manner, at speeds slightly at variance from the speeds otherwise applicable
within the district or at intersections, and shall erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof.
(' 83 Code, § 8-34)
§ 71.058 SPEED LIMITS ON SCHOOL PROPERTIES.
(A) The maximum speed of any and all motor vehicles in and upon any public road, way, parking
lot, or other school property within the jurisdiction of the city shall be 25 miles per hour.
(B) Appropriate signs as prescribed by the Bureau of Motor Vehicles of the state shall be posted
and displayed in and upon all public roads, ways, and parking lots in and upon school properties within
the jurisdiction of the city, and as they may advise all members of the public that the maximum speed
allowed by law is 25 miles per hour.
(C) The Police Department of the city shall patrol and enforce the speed regulations in and upon
the stated public school properties including, but not limited to, speeding regulations and other traffic
laws and statutes applicable thereto, all as prescribed by the state laws.
('83 Code,§ 8-35) Penalty, see§ 10.99
Traffic Rules 23
TURNING MOVEMENTS
§ 71.070 TURNING AT INTERSECTION; METHOD.
The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do so as follows.
(A) Right trims. Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close as
practicable to the right hand curb or edge of the roadway.
(B) Left turns on two-way roadways. At any intersection where traffic is permitted to move in both
directions on each roadway entering the intersection, an approach for a left turn shall be made in that
portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the centerline thereof and by passing to the right of that
centerline where it enters the intersection, and after entering the intersection the left turn shall be made
so as to leave the intersection to the right of the centerline of the roadway being entered. Whenever
practicable, the left turn shall be made in that portion of the intersection to the right of the center
intersection.
(C) Left turns on other than two-way roadways. At any intersection where traffic is restricted to
one direction on one or more of the roadways, the driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at the
intersection shall approach the intersection in the extreme left hand lane lawfully available to traffic
moving in the direction of travel of the vehicle, and after entering the intersection, as nearly as
practicable, in the left hand lane lawfully available to traffic moving in that direction upon the roadway
being entered.
('83 Code,§ 8-36)
§ 71.071 TURNING MARKERS AND INDICATIONS.
(A) The Board is authorized to place markers, buttons, or signs within or adjacent to intersections
indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at those intersections, and the course to be
traveled as so indicated may conform to or be other than as prescribed by law or ordinance.
(B) When authorized markers, buttons, or other indications are placed within an intersection
indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the
directions of those indications.
('83 Code,§ 8-37) Penalty, see§ 10.99
§ 71.072 RESTRICTED TURN SIGNS.
The Board is authorized to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make
a right, left, or U-turn and shall place proper signs at those intersections. The making of these turns may
24 Nappanee - Traffic Code
be prohibited between certain hours of any day and pennitted at other hours, in which event the same
shall be plainly indicated on the signs, or they may be removed when these turns are permitted.
(' 83 Code, § 8-38)
§ 71.073 COMPLIANCE WITH RESTRICTED TURN SIGNS REQUIRED.
Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right, left, or U-turn is permitted, no driver
of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of any sign so indicating.
('83 Code,§ 8-39) Penalty, see§ 10.99
ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS
§ 71.085 DESIGNATING SIGNS REQUIRED.
Whenever any ordinance of this city designates any one-way street or alley, the Board shall place
and maintain signs giving notice thereof, and no one-way regulation shall be effective unless the signs
are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every
intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited.
(' 83 Code, § 8-40)
§ 71.086 TRAFFIC DIRECTION RESTRICTED.
Upon those streets and parts of streets and in those alleys described in Chapter 74, Schedule II of
this code, vehicular traffic shall move only in the indicated direction when signs indicating the direction
of traffic are erected and maintained at every intersection where movement in the opposite direction is
prohibited.
('83 Code,§ 8-41)
§ 71.087 TEMPORARY ONE-WAY TRAFFIC DESIGNATION AUTHORIZED.
(A) The Board is authorized to detennine and designate streets, parts of streets, or specific lanes
thereon upon which vehicular traffic shall proceed in one direction during one period and the opposite
direction during another period of the day and shall place and maintain appropriate markings, signs,
barriers, or other devices to give notice thereof. The Board may erect signs temporarily designating
lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction, regardless of the centerline of the roadway.
(B) It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle in violation of the markings, signs,
barriers, or other devices so placed in accordance with this section.
(' 83 Code, § 8-42) Penalty, see§ 10.99
Traffic Rules 25
STOPS AND YIEWS
§ 71.100 DESIGNATED THROUGH STREETS; SIGNS AND SIGNALS REQUIRED.
The Board of Public Works and Safety shall place and maintain a stop sign at such street
intersections as shall be deemed necessary for purposes of safety and traffic flow.
(' 83 Code, § 8-44)
Cross~reference:
Designated Through Streets, see Chapter 74, Schedule Ill
§ 71.101 STOP SIGNS; STANDARDS.
(A) Every stop sign shall bear the word "stop" in letters not less than eight inches in height.
(B) Every stop sign shall be erected as near as practicable to the nearest line of the crosswalk on
the near side of the intersection or, if there is no crosswalk, then as near as practicable to the nearest line
of the intersecting roadway.
(' 83 Code, § 8-46)
§ 71.102 APPROACHING STOP INTERSECTION.
Except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic-control signal, every driver of a
vehicle approaching an intersection indicated by a stop sign shall stop before entering the crosswalk on
the near side of the intersection, or in the event there is no crosswalk shall stop at a clearly marked stop
line, but if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of
approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering the intersection.
(' 83 Code, § 8-47)
§ 71.103 EMERGING FROM ALLEY, DRIVEWAY, OR BUILDING.
The driver of a vehicle within a business or residence district emerging from an alley, driveway,
or building shall stop his or her vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or onto a sidewalk
area extending across any alley way or driveway, and shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian as
may be necessary to avoid collision, and upon entering the roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all
vehicles approaching on that roadway.
(' 83 Code, § 8-49)
26 Nappanee - Traffic Code
§ 71.104 STOP WHEN TRAFFIC OBSTRUCTED.
No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the
other side of the IDtersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he or she is operating without
obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic-control signal
indication to proceed.
(' 83 Code, § 8-50) Penalty, see§ 10.99
§ 71.105 APPROACHING TRAIN; STOP AT RAILROAD CROSSING.
(A) Whenever any person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad grade crossing under any Of the
circumstances stated in this section, the driver of that vehlcle shall stop within 50 feet, but not less than
15 feet from the nearest rail of the railroad, and shall not proceed until he or she can do so safely.
(B) The foregoing requirements shall apply when:
(1) A clearly visible electric or mechanical signal device gives a warning of the immediate
approach of a railroad train;
(2) A crossing gate is lowered or a human flagperson gives or continues to give a signal of the
approach or passage of a railroad train; or
(3) An approaching railroad train is plainly visible and is in hazardous proximity to the
crossing.
(C) No person shall drive any vehicle through, around, or under any crossing gate or barrier at a
railroad crossing while that gate or barrier is closed or being opened or closed.
('83 Code,§ 8-51) Peoalty, see§ 10.99
ADDITIONAL DRIVING RULES
§ 71.120 FUNERAL AND OTHER PROCESSIONS.
(A) No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral or other authorized
procession while they are in motion and when those vehicles are conspicuously designated by a funeral
flag and by operating with headlights on.
(B) This provision shall not apply at intersections where traffic is controlled by traffic-control
signals or police officers.
('83 Code,§ 8-54) Penalty, see§ 10.99
Traffic Rules 27
§ 71.121 PROCESSION DRIVING.
Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the right hand edge of the roadway
as practicable and follow the vehicle ahead as close as is practicable and safe.
C 83 Code, § 8-55)
§ 71.122 PROCESSION PERMISSION REQUIREMENT.
No procession or parade containing 25 or more persons or five or more vehicles, except the forces
of the U.S. Defense Department or the forces of the Police and Fire Departments, shall occupy, march,
or proceed along any street except in accordance with special permission of the Board of Public Works
and Safety.
('83 Code, § 8-56) Penalty, see§ 10.99
§ 71.123 DRIVING ON SIDEWALK PROHIBITED.
The driver of a vehicle shall not drive within any sidewalk area except at a permanent or temporary
driveway.
C 83 Code, § 8-57) Penalty, see § 10 .99
§ 71.124 RESTRICTIONS ON BACKING.
The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same unless tbat movement can be made with reasonable
safety and without interfering with other traffic.
('83 Code,§ 8-58) Penalty, see§ 10.99
§ 71.125 OPENING VEHICLE DOORS.
No person shall open the door of a motor vehicle on the side available to moving traffic unless and
until it is reasonably safe to do so, nor shall any person leave a door open on the side of a motor vehicle
for a period of time longer than necessary to load or unload passengers.
('83 Code,§ 8-59) Penalty, see§ 10.99
§ 71.126 RIDING ON MOTORCYCLES.
A person operating a motorcycle shall ride only upon the permanent and regular seat attached
thereto, and the operator shall not carry any other person nor shall any other person ride on a motorcycle
unless that motorcycle is designed to carry more than one person, in which event a passenger may ride
28 Nappanee ~ Traffic Code
upon the permanent and regular seat if designed for two persons, or upon another seat firmly attached
to the rear or side of the operator.
('83 Code,§ 8-60) Penalty, see§ 10.99
§ 71.127 LOAD RESTRICTIONS ON CERTAIN IITGHWAYS.
No person shall operate any vehicle with a gross weight in excess of7,000 pounds upon any street,
alley, boulevard, roadway, or highway in the city, and including all roadways, streets, or lanes in the
parks of the city, but must operate the vehicle only upon state or U.S. routes, designated and marked
as such, or a city truck route, especially designated and marked as such, excepting however, that these
vehicles may be operated on city streets for the purpose of delivering or picking up materials or
merchandise or entering or leaving a terminal in the city, and then only by entering the city street, alley,
boulevard, roadway, or highway at the intersection with a state, U.S., or city truck route nearest to the
point of designation or origination and proceeding thereon no farther than the nearest state, U.S., or city
truck intersection thereafter.
C 83 Code, § 8-98) Penalty, see § 10. 99
' '.'• !
--~":
Section
72.01
72.02
72.03
72.04
72.05
72.06
72.07
72.08
72.09
72.20
72.21
72.22
72.23
72.24
72.25
72.26
CHAPTER 72: PEDESTRIANS AND NON-MOTORIZED VEHICLES
Pedestrians
Obedience to traffic-control signals
Obedience to railroad crossing signals
Crosswalk right-of-way
Use right half of crosswalk
Crossing outside crosswalk; pedestrian to yield
Crossing in business districts restricted
Pedestrians along roadways
Soliciting rides or business restricted
Drivers to exercise due care
Non-Motorized Vehicles
Bicycles; light and license tag required
Push carts, animals, and animal drawn vehicles
Use of rallerskates, coasters, and the like restricted
Clinging to vehicle prohibited
Skateboards defined
Skateboards; prohibited areas
Skateboard violations; community service
Bicycle and Pedestrian Pathway
72.40 Application
72.41 Vehicles restricted on pathway
72.42 Littering prohibited
72.43 Alcoholic beverages prohibited
72.44 Loitering prohibited
Cross-reference:
Crosswalks and safety zones; designation authority, see§ 71.040
Pedestrian-control signals, see § 71. 036
Play streets, see § 71. 039
Traffic-control signal lights, see § 71. 034
29
30 Nappanee - Traffic Code
PEDESTRIANS
§ 72.01 OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNALS.
Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic-control signals as declared in §§ 71.034 and 71.036 of this
code, but at all other places pedestrians shall be granted those rights and be subject to the restrictions
stated in this subchapter.
C 83 Code, § 8-62)
§ 72.02 OBEDIENCE TO RAILROAD CROSSING SIGNALS.
No pedestrian shall pass through, around, over, or under any crossing gate or barrier at a railroad
grade crossing while that gate or barrier is closed or is being opened or closed.
C 83 Code, § 8-67) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 72.03 CROSSWALK RIGHT-OF-WAY.
(A) When traffic-control signals are not in place or not in operation, the driver of a vehicle shall
yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping if need be, so as to yield to a pedestrian crossing the
roadway within a crosswalk when the pedestrian is upon the half of the roadway upon which the vehicle
is traveling, or when the pedestrian is approaching so closely from the opposite half of the roadway as
to be in danger.
(B) No pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety and walk or run into the path
of a vehicle which is so close that it is impossible for the driver to yield.
(C) Division (A) above shall not apply under the conditions stated in § 72.0S(B) of this code.
(D) Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any unmarked crosswalk at an
intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from
the rear shall not overtake and pass that stopped vehicle.
('83 Code,§ 8-63) Penalty, see§ 10.99
§ 72.04 USE RIGHT HALF OF CROSSWALK.
Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right half of crosswalks.
(' 83 Code, § 8-64)
Pedestrians and Non-Motorized Vehicles 31
§ 72.05 CROSSING OUTSIDE CROSSWALK; PEDESTRIAN TO YIELD.
(A) Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a marked crosswalk or
within an urunarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the
roadway.
(B) Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a pedestrian tunnel or overhead pedestrian
crossing has been provided shall yield the right-of-way.
(C) The foregoing rules in this section have no application under the conditions stated in § 72.06
of this code when pedestrians are prohibited from crossing at certain designated places.
(" 83 Code, § 8-65)
§ 72.06 CROSSING IN BUSINESS DISTRICTS RESTRICTED.
No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than in a crosswalk in any business district.
("83 Code,§ 8-66) Penalty. see§ 10.99
§ 72.07 PEDESTRIANS ALONG ROADWAYS.
(A) Where sidewalks are provided, it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to walk along and upon
an adjacent roadway.
(B) Where sidewalks are not provided, any pedestrian walking along and upon a highway shall,
when practicable, walk only on the left side of the roadway or its shoulder facing traffic which may
approach from the opposite direction.
(" 83 Code, § 8-68) Penalty, see§ 10.99
§ 72.08 SOLICITING RIDES OR BUSINESS RESTRICTED.
(A) No person shall stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a ride, employment, or business
from the occupant of any vehicle.
(B) No person shall stand on or in proximity to a street or highway for the purpose of soliciting the
watching or guarding of any vehicle while parked on a street or highway.
('83 Code,§ 8-69) Penalty, see§ 10.99
§ 72. 09 DRIVERS TO EXERCISE DUE CARE.
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions oftbis subchapter, every driver of a vehicle shall exercise
due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon any roadway and shall give warning by sounding
32 Nappanee - Traffic Code
the horn when necessary and shall exercise proper precaution upon observing any child or any confused
or incapacitated person upon a roadway.
('83 Code,§ 8-70)
NON-MOTORIZED VEHICLES
§ 72.20 BICYCLES; LIGHT AND LICENSE TAG REQUIRED.
(A) No bicycle shall be ridden on any street, alley, or highway within the city during the period
between 30 minutes after sumet and 30 minutes before sunrise, unless that bicycle is equipped with a
lamp, which shall throw a light sufficient to light up the way at least 100 feet in the direction in which
the bicycle is proceeding.
(B) Any person or persons who violates this section shall be fined·.
(C) All bicycle owners within the city shall carry a license tag on same as shall be prescribed by
the Chief of Police, and the cost of the tag shall be as specified in § 38.15 and shall be issued by the
Chief of Police.
('83 Code.§ 8-101) Penalty, see§ 10.99
§ 72.21 PUSH CARTS, ANIMALS, AND ANIMAL DRAWN VEHICLES.
Every person propelling any push cart or riding an animal upon a roadway and every person driving
any animal drawn vehicle shall be subject to the provisions of this title applicable to the driver of any
vehicle, except those provisions of this title which by their very nature can have no application.
(' 83 Code, § 8-13)
§ 72.22 USE OF ROLLERSKATES, COASTERS, AND THE LIKE RESTRICTED.
{A) No person upon rollerskates, or riding in or by means of any coaster, toy vehicle, or similar
device, shall go upon any roadway except while crossing a street on a crosswalk, and when so crossing
that person shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to
pedestrians.
(B) This section shall not apply upon any street while set aside as a play street as authorized by
ordinance of this city.
('83 Code,§ 8-14) Penalty, see§ 10.99
'
Pedestrians and Non-Motorized Vehicles 33
§ 72.23 CLINGING TO VEIIlCLE PROIIlBITED.
No person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, rollerskates, sled, or toy vehicle shall attach the same
or himself or herself to any vehicle upon a roadway.
('83 Code,§ 8-61) Penalty, see§ 10.99
§ 72.24 SKATEBOARDS DEFINED.
For the purpose of §§ 72. 24 through 72. 26, the following definition shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
SKATEBOARDS AND OTHER SIMILAR DEVICES. Any non-motorized object which contains
wheels and is propelled by an individual for purposes of transporting that individual any distance. This
description shall include, but not be limited to, skateboards, rollerskates, cross-country skis with wheels,
and rollerblades. For purposes of§§ 72.24 through 72.26, the term shall specifically exclude bicycles,
wheelchairs, and any device propelled by an animal.
('83 Code,§ 6-51) (Ord. 1159, passed 10-5-92)
§ 72.25 SKATEBOARDS; PROIIlBITED AREAS.
The use of a skateboard or other similar device is prohibited in that area of the city which is
described in Chapter 74, Schedule IV.
('83 Code, § 6-52) (Ord. 1159, passed 10-5-92) Penalty, see§ 10.99
§ 72.26 SKATEBOARD VIOLATIONS; COMMUNITY SERVICE.
The penalty for an individual's first, second, or subsequent offense under§§ 72.24 through 72.26
shall be a fine. Alternatively, the penalty for any offense under these provisions may be a sentence to
perform community service in a form to be designated by the enforcing court, with the period of time
for that community service to be not in excess of 20 hours for any one offense.
('83 Code,§ 6-53) (Ord. 1159, passed 10-5-92) Penalty, see§ 10.99
BICYCLE AND PEDESTRIAN PATHWAY
§ 72.40 APPLICATION.
_" __ /; This subchapter shall refer and apply to the city's Bicycle and Pedestrian Pathway, a public way,
which is identified on the map that is attached to Ord. 1316 and is hereby made a part hereof.
(Ord. 1316, passed 8-6--01)
34 Nappanee - Traffic Code
§ 72.41 VEHICLES RESTRICTED ON PATHWAY.
No automobiles, trucks, all terrain vehicles, motorcycles, mopeds, snowmobiles, two-wheeled
motorized scooters, horses, or animal drawn vehicles of any kind, other than vehicles associated with
a utility or municipal purpose, shall be utilized on the Bicycle and Pedestrian Pathway.
(Ord. 1316, passed 8-6·01) Penalty, see§ 10.99
§ 72.42 LITTERING PROHIBITED.
There shall be no littering on or from the premises of the Bicycle and Pedestrian Pathway.
(Ord. 1316, passed 8·6..01) Penalty, see§ 10.99
§ 72.43 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES PROHIBITED.
There shall be no alcoholic beverages allowed on the Bicycle and Pedestrian Pathway, No
individual shall possess any alcoholic beverage in an open container an the Bicycle and Pedestrian
Pathway. Nothing in this section shall override or contradict § 97 .23 of this code which provides that
"No person shall bring dangerous drugs, beer, ale, or other alcoholic beverages into any park, or
consume, have in possession, sell, give away, or handle dangerous drugs or intoxicating or alcoholic
beverages in any park street."
(Ord. 1316. passed 8·6·01) Penalty. see§ 10.99
§ 72.44 LOITERING PROHIBITED.
(A) No loitering on the premises of the Bicycle and Pedestrian Pathway shall be allowed.
(B) For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
LOITERING. Any gathering that disrupts or could disrupt the flow of traffic on the Bicycle
and Pedestrian Pathway.
(Ord. 1316, passed 8·6·01) Penalty, see§ 10.99
Section
73.01
73.02
73.03
73.04
73.05
73.06
73.07
73.08
73.09
73.10
73.11
73.12
73.13
CHAPTER 73: PARKING REGULATIONS
General Parking Restrictions
Stopping, standing, parking; prohibited places
Parking near fire hydrants prohibited
Obstruction of street traffic prohibited
Parking in alleys; obstruction prohibited
Street parldng; 48-hour limit
Parking purposes restricted
Parking adjacent to schools
Parking on narrow streets restricted
Parking on one-way streets
Unlawful acts
Parking mobile homes, semi-trailers, and the like restricted
Parking unlicensed vehicles prohibited
Prohibited parking areas
Designated Parking Spaces and Loading Zones
73.25 Individual parking spaces; designation and use
73 .26 Designated bus stops and taxicab stands authorized
73 .27 Public off-street parking lot; restrictions
73.40
73.41
73.42
73.43
73.44
73.45
73.46
Parking Restricti'ons in Designated Areas
Application
Regulations not exclusive
Designated no parking zones
Designated no stopping zones; restricted hours
Designated no parking zones for maintenance
Designated limited time parking
Stopping in designated hazardous or congested areas prohibited
Adniinistration and Enforcement
-;' 73, 60 Payment of penalty
35
36 Nappanee - Traffic Code
73.61 Vehicle impoundment; authority; procedure
GENERAL PARKING RESTRICTIONS
§ 73.01 STOPPING, STANDING, PARKING; PROHIBITED PLACES.
No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other
traffic or in compliance with law or the directions of a police officer or traffic-control device, in any of
the following places:
(A) On a sidewalk;
(B) In front of a public or private driveway;
(C) Within an intersection;
(D) Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant;
(E) On a crosswalk;
(F) Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;
(G) Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign, or traffic-control signal
located at the side of a roadway;
(H) Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of points on the curb immediately
opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless the City Council indicates a different length by signs or
markings;
(I) Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fue station and on the side of a street opposite
the entrance to any fire station within 75 feet of that entrance; or
(J) Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing.
('83 Code,§ 8-71) Penalty, see§ 10.99
§ 73.02 PARKING NEAR FIRE HYDRANTS PROHIBITED.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to park or permit to stand any vehicle in
or on any public street in close proximity to any fire hydrant within the city, and where notice is given
to the public by appropriate signs, markings painted on the curb in the vicinity of the fire hydrant, or
by those means of notification and identification to the public of restriction and prohibition of parking
Parking Regulations 37
in these places as the Board of Public Works and Safety of the city may, from time to time, prescribe
and determine.
('83 Code,§ 8-83) Penalty, see§ 10.99
§ 73.03 OBSTRUCTION OF STREET TRAFFIC PROHIBITED.
No person shall park any vehicle upon a street, other than an alley, ina manner or under conditions
so as to leave available less than ten feet of the width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular
traffic.
('83 Code, § 8-72) Penalty, see§ 10.99
§ 73.04 PARKING IN ALLEYS; OBSTRUCTION PROIDBITED.
No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in a manner or under conditions so as to leave
available less than ten feet of the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and
no person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle within an alley in a position so as to block the driveway
entrance to any abutting property.
('83 Code,§ 8-73) Penalty, see§ 10.99
§ 73.05 STREET PARKING; 48-HOUR LIMIT.
No person shall park a vehicle on any street for a continuous period of time longer than 48 hours.
('83 Code,§ 8-74) Penalty, see§ 10.99
§ 73.06 PARKING PURPOSES RESTRICTED.
No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway for the principal purpose of displaying that vehicle
for sale or washing, greasing, or repairing the vehicle except when repairs are necessitated by an
emergency.
(' 83 Code, § 8-75) Penalty, see§ 10.99
§ 73.07 PARKING ADJACENT TO SCHOOLS.
(A) The Council is authorized to erect signs indicating no parking upon either or both sides of any
street adjacent to any school property when parking would, in its opinion, interfere with traffic or create
a hazardous situation.
(B) When official signs are erected indicating no parking upon either side of a street adjacent to any
school as authorized herein, no person shall park a vehicle in any thus designated place.
('83 Code, § 8-76) Penalty, see§ 10.99
38 Nappanee - Traffic Code
§ 73.08 PARKING ON NARROW STREETS RESTRICTED.
(A) The Council is authorized to erect signs indicating no parking upon any street when the width
of the roadway does not exceed 20 feet, or upon one side of a street as indicated by the signs when the
width of the roadway does not exceed 30 feet.
{B) When official signs prohibiting parking are erected upon narrow streets as authorized herein,
no person shall park a vehicle upon any signed street in violation of any official sign.
('83 Code,§ 8-77) Penalty, see§ 10.99
§ 73.09 PARKING ON ONE-WAY STREETS.
The Council is authorized to erect signs upon the left hand side of any one-way street to prohibit the
standing or parking of vehicles, and when these signs are in place, no person shall stand or park a
vehicle upon the left hand side in violation of any sign.
C 83 Code, § 8-78) Penalty, see§ 10.99
§ 73.10 UNLAWFUL ACTS.
(A) It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this chapter for any person to cause,
allow, permit, or suffer any vehicle registered in the name of or operated by that person to be parked
overtime or beyond the period of legal parking time established for any parking space as herein
described.
(B) It shall be unlawful for any person, persons, firm, or corporation to park or permit to stand any
vehicle in or on any public alley within the limits of the city or to park or permit to stand any vehicle
in any public street or public way or place where the parking of vehicles is prohibited and where notice
is given to the public by appropriate signs, markings painted upon the curbs in the vicinity of the
prohibited place, or by other means of notification and identification to the public of the restriction and
prohibition of that place as the Board of Public Works and Safety may from time to time prescribe and
determine.
(C) It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any person to cause, allow, permit, or
suffer any vehicle in the name of, or operated by that person, to be parked in a manner so that more than
one individual parking spaCe or parts of two or more individual parking spaces are occupied by that
vehicle. Any parking of a vehicle in a manner which causes the vehicle or any part thereof to occupy
two or more, or parts of two or more individual parldng spaces shall be prima facie evidence of the
unlawful parking of that motor vehicle by its owner and/or operator.
(' 83 Code, § 8-84) Penalty, see§ 10.99
Parking Regulations 39
§ 73.11 PARKING MOBILE HOMES, SEMI-TRAILERS, AND THE LIKE RESTRICTED.
(A) No mobile home, semi-trailer, or vehicle or combination of vehicles joined together, the overall
length of which is greater than 30 feet, and no vehicle or combination of vehicles joined together, the
overall width of which at the widest point is greater than eight feet, shall be parked or stopped upon the
public streets, roadways, or thoroughfares of the city. For the purpose of determining vehicle length
or width under this section, any cargo or equipment loaded upon or attached to the vehicle shall be
considered a part of the vehicle.
(B) Notwithstanding the provisions of division (A) of this section, the Board of Public Works and
Safety of the city may, upon proper application by the owner or proprietor of the vehicle, grant parking
privileges to or for a vehicle otherwise prohibited from parking, to park at that place on that public
street, highway, or thoroughfare in the city as may be approved by the Board.
(C) (1) Notwithstanding the provisions of division (A) of this section, this type of vehicle may be
parked or stopped on a public street, highway, or thoroughfare within the city and as may be necessary
for the purpose of making a local pickup or delivery of goods, wares, and merchandise, but for a
reasonable time only for that purpose.
(2) In the event that this type of vehicle is disabled or immobilized, the vehicle may be parked
or stopped for a reasonable time only as may be necessary until the same may be removed or until
assistance in its removal may be secured.
('83 Code,§ 8-95) Penalty, see§ 10.99
§ 73.12 PARKING UNLICENSED VEHICLES PROHIBITED.
No person shall park an unlicensed vehicle or a vehicle without a valid license plate attached thereto
at any time upon any street, highway, or roadway in the city.
(' 83 Code, § 8-96) Penalty, see § 10 .99
§ 73.13 PROHIBITED PARKING AREAS.
(A) Prohibited parking area. Except as otherwise provided in this section:
(1) It shall be unlawful to park a vehicle in a front yard, in a side yard on the street side of a
corner lot, or in a rear yard that abuts a street.
(2) It shall be unlawful to park a vehicle over any part of the sidewalk or curb that is parallel
to the public way, including the part of the sidewalk that is part of a driveway.
(B) Exceptions. For the purposes of this section, parking shall not be prohibited in the following
areas:
40 Nappanee - Traffic Code
(1) An improved area in the prohibited parking area used as a parking space before this section
is adopted, provided that the entrance to the approved area is via a driveway or curb cut, except where
adjacent to a paved street where there is no curb.
(2) Parldng in any portion of the driveway that may be located in the front yard, rear yard, or
side yard, except the portion that is part of the sidewalk.
(3) Parking within ten feet of the edge of the street where no curb is present, within the existing
right-of-way, and in an improved area.
(4) Any improved area meeting setback requirements and other applicable zoning provisions.
The Zoning Department must determine compliance with all such improved areas.
(5) Parking in a front yard, side yard or rear yard for the purpose of unloading a vehicle,
washing a vehicle or some other similar purpose. The vehicle, however, must be removed from the front
yard, side yard or rear yard once the task is completed.
(6) With regard to recreational vehicles those areas in which recreational vehicles are allowed
to park pursuant to Section 5.5 C of Unified Zoning and Subdivision Control Ordinance.
(7) Those areas in which vehicles can be placed for sale pursuant to Section 4.5 D of the
Unified Zoning and Subdivision Control Ordinance.
(8) In conjunction with special events (reunions, birthday parties, graduations, anniversaries,
or like events) an owner of the property may obtain a permit from the Zoning Administrator which may
permit parking or vehicles on yards and which would otherwise be prohibited by this section. The
permit should be valid for a period of ten hours which would allow vehicles to be parked in yards for
this period with no violation. The owner of the premise shall be entitled to six permits per calendar
year.
(C) Restrictions for parking in rear yards.
(1) Any vehicle parked or stored in the rear yard shall be screened from view of public streets
or neighboring properties.
(2) Vehicles measuring less then eight feet in height shall be screened with a minimum six-foot
high fence or approved screening material. Vehicles measuring in excess of eight feet in height shall be
screened with an eight-foot high fence or approved screening material. In cases where vehicles exceed
eight feet in height the maximum required height of a screening fence shall not exceed eight feet.
Vegetation material used for screening may exceed eight feet in height.
(D) Definitions.
CITY. City of Nappanee, Indiana.
Parking Regulations 41
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. Any employee of the city whose assigned duties include
the enforcement of one or more of the provisions of this Code.
DRIVEWAY. A passageway for vehicles, approved by the Code Enforcement Officer
composed of concrete, asphalt, or gravel that serves to connect a public street or alley to a garage or
legal parking space. Legal parking areas shall be limited to 35 % of the total front yard with a maximum
driveway width of 30 feet at the frontage with the applicable street or alley.
FRONT YARD. The horizontal space between the nearest foundation of a building to the front
lot line, extending to the side lines of the lot, and measured as the shortest distance from that foundation
to the front lot line. The front yard of a corner lot shall be that yard abutting the street upon which the
lot has its least frontage, except as deed restrictions may otherwise specify.
IMPROVED AREA. A section of the lot that bas been altered and def med by concrete, asphalt,
or gravel, with a positive boundary, for the means of providing a parking space for a vehicle. The
improved area must be entered via a driveway or curb cut, except where adjacent to a paved street or
alley where there is no curb.
REAR YARD. The horizontal space between the nearest foundation of a building to the rear
lot line and that rear lot line, extending to the side lines of the lot, and measured as the shortest distance
from the nearest foundation to the rear lot line. The rear yard of a corner lot shall be that yard at the
opposite end of the opposite end of the lot from the front yard.
SCREENING MATERIAL. Any plant material maintaining its foliage year round (exarriple
evergreens) of sufficient density determined by the Code Enforcement Officer, or approved wood, vinyl
or opaque fencing material approved by the Code Enforcement Officer. No chain link fence is a
permitted use for screening purposes.
SIDE YARD. The horizontal space between the nearest foundation of a building to the side lot
line and that side lot line, unoccupied other than by architectural appurtenances projecting not more than
24 inches into that space; steps or terraces not higher than the level of the first floor of the building; and
open lattice-enclosed frre escapes, fireproof outside stairways and balconies projecting not over 24 inches
into that space.
VEHICLE. A device in, upon, or by which a person or property is, or may be, transported or
drawn upon a street, alley or highway.
(E) Enforcement; citation; penatty.
(1) The Code Enforcement Administrator or his designee, or any officer of the Police
Department may enforce the provisions of this section. The preceding authorized persons shall be lmown
as officer for the purposes of this section.
42 Nappanee - Traffic Code
(2) An officer may issue a citation for a violation of this section, subjecting the violator to a
fine up to $250 for each violation. The citation shall be placed in a prominent place upon the vehicle.
Each day the vehlcle remains unlawfully parked shall constitute a separate violation.
(3) The citation shall be filed with the City of Nappanee Court or with any court of the
competent jurisdiction in Elkhart or Kosicusko County.
(4) For the purposes of this section, the violator shall be the person to whom the unlawfully
parked vehicle is registered.
(Ord. 1407, passed 12-4-07)
DESIGNATED PARKING SPACES AND LOADING ZONES
§ 73.25 INDIVIDUAL PARKING SPACES; DESIGNATION AND USE.
(A) The Board of Public Works and Safety is authorized, empowered, and directed to cause to be
marked off and designated those individual parking spaces as the Board shall deem proper along the
streets, designated in Chapter 75, Schedule I, in the congested area from time to time for the parking of
vehicles. At any place where individual parking spaces are marked off and designated, each vehicle shall
1lb.ereafter be parked within an individual parking space.
('83 Code,§ 8-81)
(B) Notice to the public shall be given by appropriate signs setting forth the length of time for which
parking is permitted and the conditions thereof. Any vehicle which remains in an individual parking
space after the prescribed time for parking is determined to be illegally parked.
C 83 Code, § 8-82)
Penalty, see§ 10.99
§ 73.26 DESIGNATED BUS STOPS AND TAXICAB STANDS AUTHORIZED.
The Board is authorized to establish bus stops, bus stands, and taxicab stands on public streets in
those places and numbers as it shall determine to be of the greatest benefit and convenience to the public,
and every bus stop, bus stand, or taxicab stand shall be designated by appropriate signs or markings.
C 83 Code, § 8-87)
§ 73.27 PUBLIC OFF-STREET PARKING LOT; RESTRICTIONS.
(A) The public off-street parking lot described in Chapter 75, Schedule Il is designated as a public
off-street parking lot and for use by all members of the public and for automobiles and other vehicles
from and between the hours of 5 a.m. and 9 p.m. only.
Parking Regulations 43
(B) The public off-street parking lot described in Chapter 75, Schedule II is closed and unavailable
for use by any member of the public from and between 9 p.m. and until 5 a.m. (local times prevailing),
and no automobile or other vehicle shall enter in and upon the described parking lot during those times
when use is prohibited.
(C) Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, the Board of Public Works and Safety of the city
may, upon proper application therefor, grant parking privileges or other uses to or for persons or
vehicles" as would otherwise be prohibited from parking or using the described off-street parking lot and
as may be approved by the Board.
('83 Code,§ 8-97) Penalty, see§ 10.99
PARKING RESTRICTIONS IN DESIGNATED AREAS
§ 73.40 APPLICATION.
The provisions of this chapter prohibiting the standing or parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times
or at those times herein specified or as indicated on official signs except when it is necessary to stop a
vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a police officer or
official traffic-control device.
C 83 Code. § 8-88)
§ 73.41 REGULATIONS NOT EXCLUSIVE.
The provisions of this chapter imposing a time limit on parking shall not relieve any person from
the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing,
or parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified times.
(' 83 Code, § 8-89)
§ 73.42 DESIGNATED NO PARKING ZONES.
When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any
street or portions thereof, the descriptions of which are on file in the Clerk-Treasurer's office.
(' 83 Code. § 8-90) Penalty, see§ 10.99
44 Nappanee - Traffic Code
§ 73.43 DESIGNATED NO STOPPING ZONES; RESTRICTED HOURS.
(A) When signs are erected in each block giving notice thereof, no person shall stop, stand, or park
a vehicle between the hours specified in the schedule on file in the Clerk-Treasurer's office of any day,
except as otherwise provided herein, within the district or upon any of the streets or parts thereof.
('83 Code.§ 8-91)
(B) The Board is authorized to erect signs indicating no stopping, standing, or parking during
certain hours when stopping, standing, or parking during certain hours would, in its opinion, interfere
with traffic or create a hazardous situation.
(C) When signs are erected in each block giving notice thereof, no person shall stop, stand, or park
a vehicle between the hours specified on that sign.
(' 83 Code. § 8-93) Penalty. see§ 10.99
§ 73.44 DESIGNATED NO PARKING ZONES FOR MAINTENANCE.
(A) The Board shall designate certain hours on certaill streets when parking shall be prohibited in
order that those streets may be cleaned and swept. The Board shall publicly announce through the signs
and markings not less than six hours in advance the hours and date on which parking is to be prohibited
on certain streets for the purpose of cleaning and sweeping those streets.
(B) The Board shall be authorized and empowered to prohibit parking on certain streets for the
purpose of repairing those streets, The affected streets or portions thereof shall be blocked off prior to
the initiation of work by barriers placed at all entrances thereto.
(C) No person shall park a vehicle on these streets in violation of this section.
C 83 Code, § 8-92) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 73.45 DESIGNATED LIMITED TIME PARKING.
(A) The Board is authorized to erect signs indicating the parking time limit on certain streets or
portions thereof.
(B) When signs are erected in each block giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle for
longer than the period of time designated on that sign.
(' 83 Code, § 8-94) Penalty, see§ 10.99
Parking Regulations
§ 73.46 STOPPING IN DESIGNATED HAZARDOUS OR CONGESTED AREAS
PROIDBITED.
45
(A) The Board is authorized to determine and designate areas by proper signs and/or appropriate
markings not exceeding 300 feet in length in which the stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles would
create an especially hazardous condition or would cause unusual delay to traffic.
(B) When official signs are erected at hazardous or congested places as authorized herein, no person
shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle in any thus designated place.
('83 Code,§ 8-79) Penalty, see§ 10.99
Cross~reference:
Congested traffic areas, see Chapter 75, Sch~dule I
Individual parking spaces, see§ 73.25
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 73.60 PAYMENT OF PENALTY.
(A) Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter or who aids, abets, or assists
therein, shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined.
(B) Violations shall be paid to the Ordinance Violations Bureau as addressed in Chapter 36 of this
code.
(' 83 Code, § 8-85)
(C) Any penalty not paid on the date of the violation as heretofore related shall constitute a separate
violation for each day succeeding the date of the violation.
('83 Code,§ 8-86) (Ord. 1100, passed 4-17-89) Penalty, see§ 10.99
§ 73.61 VEIIlCLE IMPOUNDMENT; AUTHORITY; PROCEDURE.
(A) Members of the Police Department are authorized to remove a vehicle from an alley, street, or
highway to the nearest garage or other place of safety, or to a garage designated or maintained by the
Police Department, or otherwise maintained by this city, at owner's expense under the circumstances
hereinafter enumerated:
(1) When any vehicle is left unattended upon any bridge, viaduct, or causeway where that
veWcle constitutes an obstruction to traffic;
46 Nappanee - Traffic Code
(2) When a vehicle upon a highway is so disabled as to constitute an obstruction to traffic and
the person or persons in charge of the vehicle are by reason of physical injury incapacitated to such an
extent as to be unable to provide for its custody or removal; or
(3) When any vehicle is left unattended upon a street and is so parked illegally as to constitute
a defmite hazard or obstruction to the normal movement of traffic.
(B) Whenever an officer removes a vehicle from a street as authorized in this section, and the
officers knows or is able to ascertain from the registration records in the vehicle the name and address
of the owner thereof, the officer shall immediately give or cause to be given notice in writing to the
owner of the fact of that removal and the reasons therefor, and of the place to which the vehicle has been
removed. In the event any removed vehicle is stored in a public garage, a copy of this notice shall be
given to the proprietor of that garage.
(C) Whenever an officer removes a vehicle from a street under this section and does not know and
is not able to ascertain the name of the owner, or for any other reason is unable to give the notice to the
owner as hereinbefore provided, and in the event the vehicle is not returned to the owner, the officer
shall immediately send or cause to be sent a written report of the removal by mail to the Bureau of Motor
Vehicles whose duty it is to register motor vehicles, and shall file a copy of that notice with the
proprietor of any public garage in which the vehicle may be stored. The notice shall include a complete
description of the vehicle, the date, time, and place from which removed, the reasons for the removal,
and the name of the garage or place where the vehicle is stored.
C 83 Code, § 8-100)
CHAPTER 74: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Schedule
I. Speed limits
II. One-way streets and alleys
ID. Designated through streets
IV. Skateboards prohibited area
SCHEDULE I. SPEED LIMITS.
(A) The maximum speed limit shall be 20 miles per hour as set forth on those streets or parts of
streets herein designated at the times herein specified when signs are erected giving notice thereof.
Street Speed Zone Boundaries
East John Street From and between Main Street and Summit Street
Indiana A venue From and between Vernon Street and Nappanee Street
Lincoln Street From and between Madison Street and Williams Street
North Main Street From and between Walnut Street and John Street
North Summit Street From and between Main Street and Nappanee Street
Park Drive From and between Main Street and Nappanee Street
South Main Street From and between Indiana A venue and the south corporate
limits of the city
West Randolph Street From and between Main Street and Nappanee Street
West Wabash Street From and between Main Street and Nappanee Street
(B) Altered speed limits are as follows:
Street Cross Streets Speed (miles per hour)
Arnott US 6 and city limit 30
47
48
Street
:heyenne
Deleware
Nappanee
Oakland
Oakland
Oakland
Tomahawk
Woodview
Wood view
C 83 Code, § 8-33)
Cross-reference:
Nappanee - Traffic Code
Cross Streets
Arnott and Tomahawk
Cheyenne and US 6
Van Buren and Park
CR 54 and US 6
US 6 and city limit
Woodview Drive and CR 54
US 6 and city limit
McCormick Drive and Oakland
SR 19 and McCormick Drive
Speed Regulations, see§§ 71.055 through 71.058
Sveed (miles ver hour)
30
30
15
30
30
40
30
40
30
Traffic Schedules 49
SCHEDULE II. ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS.
Upon those streets and parts of streets, and in those alleys hereafter described, vehicular traffic shall
move only in the indicated direction when signs indicating the direction of traffic are erected and
maintained at every intersection where movement in the opposite direction is prohibited.
Street or Alley Location Traffic Direction
First alley east of Main Street Between Lincoln Street and Market Street North
First alley west of Main Street Between Lincoln Street and Walnut Street North
100 block of North Elm Street East Market Street to Walnut Street North
100 block of South Elm Street East Market Street to Lincoln Street South
Note: The north/south alley east of Main Street has no signs. There are signs in the north/south
~11ev west of Main Street.
('83 Code,§ 8-41) Penalty, see§ 10.99
Cross-reference:
One-Way Streets and Alleys, see§§ 71.085 through 71.0137
Parking on one-way streets, see § 73. 09
50 Nappanee - Traffic Code
Traffic Schedules 51
SCHEDULE III. DESIGNATED THROUGH STREETS.
The following streets and parts of streets described below are declared to be through streets for the
purpose of this title.
Street
Main Street
Main Street
Marion Street
Marion Street
Market Street
Market Street
North Nappanee Street
North Summit Street
South Nappanee Street
West Lincoln Street
West Lincoln Street
(' 83 Code, § 8-43)
Cross-reference:
Through Street Portion
From north city limits to Market Street
From south city limits to Market Street
From North Elm Street to Summit Street
From Summit Street to Morningside Drive
From east city limits to Main Street
From west city limits to Main Street
From West Van Buren Street to West Market Street
From East Market Street to Stauffer Park Entrance
From West Market Street to Indiana A venue
From South Main Street to Nappanee Street
From Nappanee Street to Williams Street
Stops and Yields, see§§ 71.100 through 71.105
52 Nappanee - Traffic Code
Traffic Schedules 53
SCHEDULE IV. SKATEBOARDS PRO!IlBITED AREA.
(A) The use of a skateboard or other similar device is prohibited in that area of the city which is
described as being bounded as follows:
From the corner of Elm Street and Walnut Street west to the corner of Walnut Street and
Clark Street, thence south on Clark Street and Clark Street extended to the CSX Railroad rightof-
way, thence east along the CSX Railroad right-of-way to Elm Street extended, thence north
on Elm Street extended and Ehn Street to the corner of Elm Street and Walnut Street, which
is the point of beginning.
(B) For purposes of determining the specific prohibited area, the prohibited area shall include all
streets running along the boundary together with all sidewalks and public rights-of-way running along
those streets.
('83 Code,§ 6-52) (Ord. 1159, passed 10-5-92) Penalty, see§ 10.99
Cross-reference:
Clinging to vehicle prohibited, see § 72.23
Skateboards and similar devices, see §§ 72. 24 through 72. 26
Use ofrollerskates, coasters, and the like restricted, see§ 72.22
54 Nappanee ~ Traffic Code
. '
CHAPTER 75: PARKING SCHEDULES
Schedule
I. Congested traffic areas
II. Public off-street parking lot
III. Special parking conditions
IV. No parking zones
SCHEDULE I. CONGESTED TRAFFIC AREAS.
(A) For the purpose of this title, the congested traffic areas of the city are declared to be and are
as follows.
Street Congest.ed Traffic Area
Clark Street Between Walnut Street on the north and Lincoln Street on the south
Lincoln Street Between Clark Street on the west and Elm Street on the east
Main Street Between Walnut Street on the north and the Baltimore & Ohio rightof-
way on the south
Market Street Between Clark Street on the west and Elm Street on the east
Walnut Street Between Clark Street on the west and Ehn Street on the east
(B) The City Council determines, declares, and ordains that because of the flow of traffic on the
streets or portions of streets withln the above areas that parking therein shall be subject to the provisions
of this title.
C 83 Code, § 8-80)
Cross~reference:
Individual parking spaces, see § 73.25
Stopping in designated hazardous or congested areas prohibited, see§ 73.46
55
56 Nappanee M Traffic Code
•
__ /;
Parking Schedules 57
SCHEDULE II. PUBLIC OFF-STREET PARKING LOT.
The public off-street parking lot described below is designated as a public off-street parking lot and
for use by all members of the public and for automobiles and other vehicles from and between the hours
of 5 a.m. and 9 p.m. only.
Public Off-Street Parking Let
At the southwest corner of West Market
and South Clark Streets
At the northwest corner of Elm and
L..3ncoln Street
At the northwest corner of Main and Clark
Street
At the northeast corner of market and
Clark Street
The lot north of the train depot
The 100 block of West Walnut Street
behind 151 North Clark Street
The 200 block of West Lincoln Street
behind 206 West Lincoln Street
(' 83 Code, § 8-97)
Cross-reference:
Location Description
Lot Number Five as that lot is known and designated on
the plat of the original town, now city
-
-
-
-
-
-
Public off-street parking lot,· restrictions, see § 73. 27
58 Nappanee ~ Traffic Code
Parking Schedules 59
SCHEDULE III. SPECIAL PARKING CONDITIONS.
Special parking conditions are as established below:
Street Block or cross streets Side Stipulation
Elm Street Market Street to Both 10 minute parking
Walnut Street
Guise Street Market Street to Van Both No parking Monday
Buren Street through Friday
Lincoln Street 2 spaces in front of 151 South 15 minute parking
East Lincoln
Madison Street Lincoln Street to East No parking except
railroad crossing Sunday and Holidays
Intersection of U.S. 4 square block area Both Permit authorized
Highway 6 and Indiana enclosed and bounded parking location
State Road 19 by Clark Street, between 5:00 p.m. and
Lincoln Street, Elm 8:00 a.m.
Street and Walnut
Street
(Ord. 1479, passed 3-17-14)
,-, l
__ / !
60 Nappanee -Traffic Code
•
Parking Schedules 61
SCHEDULE IV. NO PARKING ZONES.
No parking zones are as established below:
Street Block or cross streets Side
Andrews Street Williams Street to dead end Both
Arnott Street Market Street to 300 block of Arnott Street Both
Centennial Street Summit Street to Elm Street South
Centennial Street Rosenberger Street to Main Street South
Clark Street Park Drive to Walnut Street West
Delaware Street Market Street to Cheyenne Street East
Elm Street Indiana Avenue to Wabash Street West
Ehu Street Wabash Street to Randolph Street East
Ehu Street Market Street to Lincoln Street East
_l : Frank1in Street M-Dee Acres Both
Hartman Street Walnut Street to Market Street West
Hartman Street Marion Street to Walnut Street West
Hartman Street Hartman Knoll to Broad Street West
Indiana A venue Williams Street to Main Street South
Indiana A venue Madison Street to Main Street South
Jackson Street Wabash Street to railroad crossing West
Jackson Street Market Street to Walnut Street West
Jackson Street M-Dee Acres Both
Jessica Court Indiana A venue to dead end East
Lincoln Street Metzler Street to Williams Street Sorith
Lincoln Street Ehu Street to 400 East Lincoin Street North
L..incoln Street Miriam Street to 500 block of East Lincoln South
62 Nappanee M Traffic Code
Street Block or cross streets Side
Lincoln Street In front of 1202 East Lincoln Street North
Locke Street In front of 155 South Locke Street East
Locke Street Market Street to Lincoln Street West
Locke Street Walnut Street to 500 block North Locke Street East
Madison Street Randolph Street to the railroad crossing East
Madison Street Indiana A venue to Randolph Street West
Madison Street Randolph Street to railroad crossing East
Madison Street John Street to 1h block north of Walnut Street West
Maple Street Heritage Parkway West
Marion Street Man Street to SUmmit Street North
Metzler Street Market Street to Lincoln Street East
Miriam Street Stahley Street to Lincoln Street East
Miriam Street Lincoln Street to Market Street Botti
Miriam Street Market Street to Derksen Drive Both
Nappanee Street Randolph Street to Lincoln Street Both
Nappanee Street Lincoln Street to Market Street West
Nappanee Street Van Buren Street to Market Street West
Park Drive Nappanee Street to Main Street South
Pleasant Acres Andrews Street to dead end West
Randolph Street Nappanee Street to Main Street South
Randolph Street In front of 207 Randolph Street North
Randolph Street Main Street to Madison Street Both
Randolph Street Williams Street to Pleasant Acres Both
Rosenberger Street Walnut Street to Van Buren Street West
Rosenberger Street Market Street to Walnut Street East
Parking Schedules 63
Street Bleck or cross streets Side
Summit Street Market Street to railroad crossing East
Summit Street Van Buren Street to Marion Street East
Summit Street Market Street to Walmtt Street Both
Van Buren Street Main Street to Madison Street South
Van Buren Street Nappanee Street to Main Street South
I/walnut Street In front of 1203 East Walnut Street South
Walnut Street Madison Street to Highland Street South
Williams Street Market Street to Lincoln Street East
Williams Street Randolph Street to Indiana A venue East
Williams Street Market Street to Walnut Street East
64 Nappanee - Traffic Code
•
_,-__ -_: ·- \
' \}
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
Chapter
90. ALARM SYSTEMS
91. FAIR HOUSING
92. FIRE PREVENTION
93. HEALTH AND SANITATION; NUISANCES
94. ABANDONED OR JUNK VEIIlCLES
95. STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
96. STREET TREE REGULATIONS
97. PARKS AND RECREATION
98. ANIMALS
1
2 Nappanee - General Regulations
' \
__ _,-
CHAPTER 90: ALARM SYSTEMS
Section
General Provisions
90.01 Definitions
90.02 Telephone numbers restricted
90.15 Permit required
90.16 Application
90.17 Approval; conditions
90.18 Annual fee
90 .19 Exemptions
Permit Requirements
Administration and Enforcement
90.30 Right of inspection
90 .31 Delinquent permit fee payment
90.32 False alarms
90.33 Violations
Cross-reference:
Fee schedule, see § 38.15
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 90.01 DEF1NITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
ALARM SYSTEM. Any mechanism, equipment, or device, including telephone dialer system,
which is designed, after being activated, to operate automatically to transmit a signal, message, or
warning to the Police Department.
3
4 Nappanee - General Regulations
ANNUAL PERMIT FEE. A fee in the amount designated in§ 38.15 of this code, to be paid by the
user between January 1 and April 1 of each calendar year.
CHIEF. The CHIEF of the Police Department or a Department member designated by him or her
to act in his or her behalf on matters pertaining to this chapter.
DELINQUENCY FEE. A fee in the amount designated in§ 38.15, to be assessed to the user in
addition to the annual permit fee for any user having failed to pay the annual permit fee within the
prescribed time at the start of each calendar year.
DEPARTMENT. The city Police Department.
DEPARTMENT MONITORING SYSTEM. The facilities and equipment used by the Department
to connect with and to monitor the user's alarm system.
FALSE ALARM. Any non-valid alarm having been activated by human means (either intentionally
or by error); improper installation; equipment misuse, malfunction, or failure; and alarm system
maintenance work without having first notified the Department of same. Non-valid alarms exempted
from the preceding definitions shall be telephone line interruptions occurring outside of the premises
where the alann is located, alarms triggered by severe weather conditions, alarm trouble indications, and
prearranged alarm systems tests.
FIREWORKS FUND. A special fund designated to be used to supply the Fourth of July celebration
within the city. These funds are used to buy fireworks and miscellaneous supplies and to offset expenses
incurred by this citywide celebration.
INSTALLATION APPLICATION FEE. A one-time fee in the amount designated in§ 38.15, to
be paid by the user upon connection with, or in participation with, the Department monitoring system.
MASTER BOX. The part of the alarm system of an owner's or occupant's premises which, from
the standpoint of electrical circuitry, is the interface between the owner's system and the city system.
NONUSER. Any person having either an independent on-premises only type of alarm or an alarm
through a ·Second party alarm monitoring agency.
NONUSER FALSE ALARM SERVICE CHARGE. An incremental service charge to be charged
to any person using either the services of a second party alarm monitoring agency or having an
independent on-premises only type of alarm, and any person having a telephone dialer system, for
exceeding the prescribed number of false alarms as provided in this chapter. The service charge for the
first excess instance shall be in the amount specified in§ 38.15 of this code. The fee for any subsequent
instance(s) shall be a sum computed by multiplying the amount specified in§ 38.15 by the number of
false alarms attributable to the nonuser within the prior one-year period. All monies collected from
NONUSER FALSE ALARM SERVICE CHARGES shall be receipted into the Fireworks Fund.
.. ; .,
. __ /
Alarm Systems 5
PERSON. Any corporation, agency, business, partnership, or individual.
RECONNECTION FEE. An incremental fee to be charged to any user having had an alarm system
disconnected for exceeding the prescribed number of false alarim as provided in this chapter. The fee
for the frrst reconnection shall be in the amount specified in § 38.15 of this code. The fee for any
subsequent reconnection shall be an additional amount, as specified in§ 38.15, higher than the most
recent prior RECONNECTION FEE charged to that user during the previous six-month period of time.
SECOND PARTY ALARM MONITORING AGENCY. Any private business providing an alarm
monitoring service to another person which, in the event of an alarm being triggered, would in tum
telephone the Department to report the alarm.
USER. Any person having an alarm system connected with the Department monitoring system, or
a telephone dialer alarm.
('83 Code.§§ 4-25 and 4-34) (Ord. 1081, passed 5-16-88)
§ 90.02 TELEPHONE NUMBERS RESTRICTED.
It shall be unlawful for any person to install, operate, or maintain an alarm system over any
Department telephone line, except to the telephone number or numbers as designated by the permit
issued under the provisions of this chapter.
('83 Code,§ 4-28) (Ord. 1081. passed5-16-88) Penalty, see§ 10.99
PERMIT REQUIREMENTS
§ 90.15 PERMIT REQUIRED.
No person shall operate or maintain an alarm system without first obtaining a permit as required by
this chapter.
(' 83 Code, § 4-26) (Ord. 1081, passed 5-16-88) Penalty. see§ 10.99
§ 90.16 APPLICATION.
(A) Applications for permits to install, maintain, or operate an alarm system shall be filed with the
Department on a form supplied by the Department, together with an installation application fee, plus an
annual permit fee; these fees shall be required to be receipted into the General Fund.
(B) The annual permit fee for a fractional year shall be prorated and based on the number of full
calendar months remaining in that calendar year, and shall be paid upon connection to the Department
monitoring system.
6 Nappanee - General Regulations
(C) The application shall set forth the name, address, and telephone number of both the installer of
the system and the person or business on whose premises the system will be insta1led, as well as a
description of the system and the location where it is proposed to be installed.
('83 Code,§ 4-26) (Ord. 1081, passed 5-16-88)
§ 90.17 APPROVAL; CONDITIONS.
(A) Approvals. The Chief shall approve the permit application if he or she finds that:
(1) The use of the alarm system will not interfere with the orderly conduct of city and
Department business; and
(2) The person installing the system maintains an adequate service organization to repair,
maintain, and otherwise service the alarm systems sold or leased by him or her.
(B) Conditions. The Chief may impose reasonable conditions on the exercise of the permit.
('83 Code,§ 4-26) (Ord. 1081, passed 5-16-88)
§ 90.18 ANNUAL FEE.
Each user shall pay to the city an annual permit fee to be receipted into the General Fund with the
receipts of that fund to be used as needed to offset the expenses of the city.
('83 Code,§ 4-29) (Ord. 1081, passed 5-16-88)
§ 90.19 EXEMPTIONS.
Alarm systems in non-profit hospitals, government buildings, public and parochial grade schools,
junior high schools, and high schools are exempt from the installation application fee and the annual
permit fee as set forth herein.
(' 83 Code, § 4-30) (Ord. 1081, passed 5-16-88)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 90.30 RIGHT OF INSPECTION.
The Chief shall have the right to inspect any alarm system on the premises where it is intended to
function prior to issuance of any permit for its operation; and he or she may cause an inspection of that
Alarm Systems 7
system to be made at any time after issuance of permit, to determine whether it is being used in
conformity with the terms of the permit and the provisions of this chapter.
('83 Code,§ 4-27) (Ord. 1081, passed 5-16-88)
§ 90.31 DELINQUENT PERMIT FEE PAYMENT.
(A) Any user allowing the annual permit fee to remain unpaid past April 30 of any calendar year
shall have its alarm system disconnected from the Department monitoring system.
(B) Once any alarm system is disconnected as a result of nonpayment of the annual pennit fee and
prior to any reconnection to the Department monitoring system, the past due annual permit fee plus a
delinquency fee ·shall be required to have been paid to the city and receipted into the Fireworks Fund.
(C) (1) Prior to the disconnection of any user's alarm system from the Department monitoring
system, a person responsible for the control of the system shall be notified by the Chief and advised that
a disconnection will be effected. The person(s) responsible for the control of any user's alarm system
shall be indicated on the alarm pennit form, which will be on file with the Department.
(2) In the event that any user, upon being advised of disconnection, should pay the delinquent
annual permit fee prior to the disconnection being completed, the user shall not be exempted from having
to pay the delinquency fee.
('83 Code,§ 4-31) (Ord. 1081, passed 5-16-88)
§ 90.32 FALSE ALARMS.
(A) Any person having an alarm system, including a telephone dialer alarm, or being a client of a
second party alarm monitoring agency, or having an on-premises only alarm, shall be allowed one false
alarm for each alarm device in any one-year period.
(B) Any false alarm(s) in excess of this number during any one-year period will result in one of the
following provisions being implemented:
(1) The user shall be assessed an incremental service charge for exceeding the prescribed
number of false alarms as provided in this chapter. The service charge for the first instance shall be as
specified in § 38.15 of thls code. The fee for any subsequent instance(s) shall be a S1ll1l computed by
multiplying the amount specified in § 3 8.15 by the number of false alarms attributable to the user within
the prior one-year period. Provided that upon the fifth false alarm in any one-year period, the user shall
be assessed an incremental service charge as provided above and the user's alarm system shall be
disconnected from the Department monitoring system. The user shall be assessed and have to pay a
reconnection fee, as provided in§§ 90.01 and 38.15, prior to being allowed to reconnect with the
1 1 Department monitoring system;
8 Nappanee - General Regulations
(2) If the user has a telephone dialer alarm, a nonuser false alarm service charge as provided
in division (B)(l) above shall be assessed against the user; or
(3) If the false alarms are from a client of a second party alarm monitoring agency or from an
on-premises only type alarm, a nonuser false alarm service charge, as provided in division (B)(l), shall
be assessed against the person responsible for the property being monitored by the alarm.
(C) Prior to the disconnection of any user's alarm system from the Department monitoring system,
a person responsible for the control of the system shall be notified by the Department that a
disconnection will be effected. The person(s) responsible for the control of any user's alarm system shall
be indicated on the alarm permit form, which will be on ftle with the Department.
(D) With the exception of emergency situations, where time is of the essence, no user's alann
system shall be disconnected without the authorization of the Chief.
C 83 Code, § 4-32) (Ord. 1081, passed 5-16-88)
§ 90.33 VIOLATIONS.
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, or refuses to comply with or who resists the
enforcement of any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be fined.
('83 Code,§ 4-33) (Ord. 1081, passed 5-16-88) Penalty, see§ 10.99
.<)
'; i
'r \
Section
91.01 Policy
91.02 Definitions
91.03 Application
91.04 Exemptions
CHAPTER 91: FAIR HOUSING
General Provisions
Unlawful Practices
91.15
91.16
91.17
91.18
Discrimination in sale or rental of hous:ing prohibited
Discrimination in residential real estate related transactions prohibited
Discrimination in provision of brokerage services prolnbited
Interference, coercion, and intimidation prohibited
Administratlon and Enforcement
91.30 Violations
91. 31 Enforcement authority
91.32 City organizations to provide support
91.33 Information on remedies
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 91,01 POLICY.
rt shall be the policy of the city to provide, withln constitutional limitation, for fair housing
throughout its corporate limits as provided for under the federal Civil Rights Act of 1968, as amended,
the federal Housing and Community Development Act of 1974 (42 USC 5301), as amended, and LC.
22-9.5-1 et seq.
('83 Code, § 6-60) (Ord. 1168, passed 4-19-93)
9
10 Nappanee ~ General Regulations
§ 91.02 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following defrnitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
AGGRIEVED PERSON. Includes any person who:
(1) Claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing practice; or
(2) Believes that the person will be injured by a discriminatory housing practice that is about
to occur.
(LC. 22-9.5-2-2)
COMMISSION. The state Civil Rights Commission created pursuant to I.C. 22-9-1-4 et seq.
(I.C. 22-9.5-2-3)
COMPLAINANT. A person, including the Commission, who files a complaint under I. C. 22-9 .5-6.
(I.C. 22-9.5-2-4)
DISABLED.
(1) With respect to a person:
(a) A physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more of the person's
major life activities;
(b) A record of having an impairment described in subsection (a) above; or
(c) Being regarded as having an impairment described in subsection (a) above.
(2) The tenn does not include current illegal use of or addiction to a controlled substance (as
defined in Section 102 of the Controlled Substances Act (21 USC 802)).
(3) The term does not include an individual solely because that individual is a transvestite.
DISCRIMINATORY HOUSING PRACTICE. An act that is unlawful under §§ 91.15 through
91.18 or 91.30 of this code, or LC. 22-9.5-5.
DWEUJNG. Any building, structure, or part of a building or structure that is occupied as, or
designed or intended for occupancy as, a residence by one or more families; or any vacant land which
is offered for sale or lease for the construction or location of a building, structure, or part of a building
or structure that is occupied as, or designed or intended far occupancy as a residence by one or more
families.
(I.C. 22-9.5-2-8)
.,,
l
. I
Fair Housing 11
FAM.ILIAL STATUS. One or more individuals (who have not attained the age of 18 years) being
domiciled with a parent or other person having legal custody of that individual or the written permission
of the parent or other person. The protections afforded against discrimination on this basis of
FAMILIAL STATUS shall apply to any person who is pregnant or is in the process of securing lega1
custody of any individual who has not attained the age of 18 years.
FAMILY. Includes a single individual, with the status of the FAMILY being further defined in the
definition of familial status above.
(J.C. 22-9.5-2-9)
PERSON. One or more individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations, labor organizations,
legal representatives, mutual companies,joint-stock companies, trusts, non-incorporated organizations,
trustees, trustees in cases under Title 11 of the United States Code, receivers, and fiduciaries.
(J.C. 22-9.5-2-11)
TO RENT. To lease, to sublease, to let, and otherwise to grant for a consideration the right to
occupy the premises owned by the occupant.
(J.C. 22-9.5-2-13) ('83 Code,§ 6-61) (Ord. 1168, passed 4-19-93)
··~ § 91.03 APPLICATION.
(A) Subject to the provisions of division (B) of this section, § 91.04 of this code, andl.C. 22-9.5-3,
the prohibitions against discrimination in the sale or rental of housing set forth in I.C. 22-9.5-5-2 and
in § 91.15 of this code shall apply to all dwellings except as exempted by division (B) below and I.C.
22-9.5-3.
(B) Other than the provisions of division (C) of this section, nothing in § 91.15 shall apply to:
(1) Any single-family house sold or rented by an owner where the private individual owner
does not own more than three single-family houses at any one time; provided that in the sale of a singlefamily
house by a private individual owner not residing in the house at the time of sale or who was not
the most recent resident of that house prior to the sale, the exemption shall apply only to one sale within
any 24-month period. The private individual owner may not own any interest in, nor have owned or
reserved on his or her behalf, title to or any right to all or a portion of the proceeds from the sale or
rental of more than three single-family houses at any one time. The sale or rental of any single-family
house shall be excepted from application of this section only if that house is sold or rented:
{a) Without the use in any manner of the sales or rental facilities or services of any real
estate broker, agent, or salesperson, or any person in the business of selling or renting dwellings, or of
any employee or agent of any so de.scribed broker, agent, or salesperson, or person; and
12 Nappanee ~ General Regulations
(b) Without the publication, posting, or mailing, after notice of advertisement or written
notice in violation of§ 91.15 of this code, but nothing in this proviso shall prohibit the use of attorneys,
escrow agents, abstracters, title companies, and other professional assistance as necessary to perfect or
transfer this title.
(2) Rooms or units in dwellings contailling living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied
by no more than four families living independently of each other, if the owner actually maintains and
occupies one of these living quarters as his or her residence.
(C) For the purposes of division (B) above, a person shall be deemed to be in the business of selling
or renting dwellings if:
(1) He or she has, within the preceding 12 months, participated as principal in three or more
transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein;
(2) He or she has, within the preceding 12 months, participated as an agent, other than in the
sale of his or her own personal residence, in providing sales or rental facilities or services in two or more
transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interests therein; or
(3) He or she is the owner of any dwelling unit designed or intended for occupancy, or
occupied by, five or more families.
('83 Code,§ 6-62) (Ord. 1168, passed4-19-93)
§ 91.04 EXEMPTIONS.
(A) Exemptions defmed or set forth under I. C. 22-9 .5-3 et seq, shall be exempt from the provisions
of this chapter to include those activities or organizations set forth under divisions (B) and (C) of this
section.
(B) (1) Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a religious organization, association, or society, or
any non-profit institution or organization operated, supervised, or controlled by or in conjunction with
a religious organization, association, or society, from limiting the sale, rental, or occupancy of dwellings
which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to persons of the same religion, or from
giving preference to those persons, unless membership in the religion is restricted on account of sex,
color, or national origin.
(2) Nor shall anything in this chapter prohibit a private club not in fact open to the public,
which as an incident to its primary purpose or purposes provides lodgings which it owns or operates for
other than a commercial purpose, from limiting the rental or occupancy of those lodgings to its members
or from giving preference to its members.
(C) Nothing in this chapter regarding familial starus shall apply with respect to housing for older
persons.
Fair Housing 13
(D) For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
HOUSING FOR OWER PERSONS. Housing which is:
(a) Provided under any state or federal program that the Secretary of the Federal
Department of Housing and Urban Development or the state Civil Rights Commission determines is
specifically designed and operated to assist elderly persons (as defined in the state or federal program);
(b) Intended for, and solely occupied by, persons 62 years of age or older; or
(c) Intended and operated for occupancy by at least one person 55 years of age or older
per unit.
('83 Code, § 6-68) (Ord. 1168, passed 4-19-93)
UNLAWFUL PRACTICES
§ 91.15 DISCRIMINATION IN SALE OR RENTAL OF HOUSING PROIDBITED.
As made applicable by § 91. 03 and except as exempted by §§ 91.03 and 91.04, it shall be unlawful:
(A) To refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer, or to refuse to negotiate for the
sale or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any person because of race, color,
religion, sex, familial status, or national origin;
(B) To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or privileges of sale or rental of
a dwelling, or in the provision of services or facilities in connection therewith, because of race, color,
religion, sex, familial status, or national origin;
(C) To make, print, or publish, or cause to be made, printed, or published any notice, statement,
or advertisement with respect to the sale or rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation,
or discrimination based on race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin, or an
intention to make any such preference, limitation, or discrimination;
(D) To represent to any person because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or
national origin that any dwelling is not available for inspection, sale, or rental when that dwelling is in
fact so available;
(E) For profit, to induce or attempt to induce any person to sell or rent any dwelling by
representatives regarding the entry or prospective entry into the neighborhood of a person or persons of
-~/ a particular race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin;
14 Nappanee - General Regulations
(F) (1) To discriminate in the sale or rental, or to otherwise make unavailable or deny a dwelling
to any buyer or renter because of a handicap of:
(a) That buyer or renter;
(b) A person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling after it is so sold, rented,
or made available; or
(c) Any person associated with that person.
(2) To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or privileges of sale or rental
of a dwelling, or in the provision of services or facilities in connection with a dwelling, because of a
handicap of:
(a) That person; or
(b) A person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling after it is so sold, rented,
or made available; or
(c) Any person associated with that person.
(G) For the purpose of division (F) above, the following definition shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
DISCRIMINATION. Any of the following:
(a) A refusal to permit, at the expense of the handicapped person, reasonable modifications
of existing premises occupied or to be occupied by that person if modifications may be necessary to
afford that person full enjoyment of the premises except that, in the case of a rental, the landlord may
where it is reasonable to do so condition permission for a modification on the renter agreeing to restore
the interior of the premises to the condition that existed before the modification, reasonable wear and
tear excepted;
(b) A refusal to make reasonable accommodations to the handicapped, in rules, policies,
practices, or services, when accommodations may be necessary to afford the person equal opportunity
to use and enjoy a dwelling; or
( c) In connection with the design and construction of covered multi-family dwellings for
frrst occupancy after the date that is 30 months after September 13, 1988, a failure to design and
construct these dwellings in such a manner that:
1. The public use and common use portions of the dwellings are readily accessible
to and usable by handicapped persons;
Fair Housing 15
2. All the doors designed to allow passage into and within all premises within the
dwellings are sufficiently wide to allow passage by handicapped persons in wheelchairs; and
3. All premises within the dwellings contain the following fearures of adaptive design:
a. An accessible route into and through the dwelling;
b. Light switches, electrical outlets, thermostats, and other environmental
controls in accessible locations;
c. Reinforcements in bathroom walls to allow later installation of grab bars; and
d. Usable kitchens and bathrooms so that an individual in a wheelchair can
maneuver about the space.
(H) Compliance with the appropriate requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990
(42 USC 12101 et seq.) and of the American National Standard for buildings and facilities providing
accessibility and usability for physically handicapped people (commonly cited as ANSI Al 17, 1) suffices
to satisfy the requirements of division (G)(c)3.
(I) Nothing in this section requires that a dwelling be made available to an individual whose
tenancy would constitute a direct threat to the health or safety of other individuals or whose tenancy
would result in substantial physical damage to the property of others.
('83 Code,§ 6-63) (Ord. 1168, paased 4-19-93) Penalty, see§ 10.99
§ 91.16 DISCRIMINATION IN RESIDENTIAL REAL ESTATE RELATED
TRANSACTIONS PROIDBITED.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person or other entity whose business includes engaging in
residential real estate related transactions to discriminate against any person in making available this type
of transaction, or in the terms or conditions of a transaction, because of race, color, religion, sex,
handicap, familial status, or national origin.
(B) For the purpose of this section, the following defmition shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
RESIDENTIAL REAL ESTATE RELATED TRANSACTION. Any of the following:
(a) The making or purchasing of loans or providing other financial assistance:
1. For purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing, or maintaining a dwelling;
or
2. Secured by residential real estate.
16 Nappanee ~ General Regulations
(b) The selling, brokering, or appraising of residential i:eal property.
(C) Nothing in this chapter prohibits a person engaged in the business of furnishing appraisals of
real property to take into consideration factors other than race, color, religion, national origin, sex,
handicap, or familial status.
('83 Code,§ 6-64) (Ord. 1168, passed 4-19-93) Penalty, see§ l0.99
§ 91.17 DISCRIMINATION IN PROVISION OF BROKERAGE SERVICES PROIDBITED.
It shall be unlawful to deny any person access to or membership or participation in any multiplelisting
service, real estate brokers' organization, or other service, organization, or facility relating to the
business of selling or renting dwellings, or to discriminate against him or her in the terms or conditions
of access, membership, or participation, on account of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial
status, or national origin.
('83 Code,§ 6-65) (Ord. 1168, passed 4-19-93) Penalty, see§ l0.99
§ 91.18 INTERFERENCE, COERCION, AND INTIMIDATION PROIDBITED.
It shall be unlawful to coerce, intimidate, threaten, or interfere with any person in the exercise or
enjoyment of, or on account of his or her having exercised or enjoyed, or on account of his or her having
aided or encouraged any other person in the exercise or enjoyment of, any right granted or protected by
§§ 91.03 or 91.15 through 91.17 of this code.
("83 Code,§ 6-66) (Ord. 1168, passed 4-19-93) Penalty, see§ 10.99
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 91.30 VIOLATIONS.
Whoever, whether or not acting under color of law, by force or threat of force willfully injures,
intimidates, or interferes with, or attempts to injure, intimidate, or interfere with any of the following
shall be fmed;
(A) Any person because of his or her race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national
origin and because he or she is or has been selling, purchasing, renting, financing, occupying, or
contracting or negotiating for the sale, purchase, rental, fmancing, or occupation of any dwelling, or
applying for or participating in any service, organization, or facility relating to the business of selling
or renting dwellings;
(B) Any person because he or she is or has been, or in order to intimidate that person or any other
person or any class of persons from:
•
i .
Fair Housing 17
(1) Participating, without discrimination on account of race, color, religion, sex, handicap,
familial status, or national origin, in any of the activities, services, organizations, or facilities described
in division (A) above; or
(2) Affording another person or class of persons opportunity or protection so to participate.
(C) Any citizen because he or she is or has been, or in order to discourage that citizen or any other
citizen from lawfully aiding or encouraging other persons to participate, without discrimination on
account of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin, in any of the activities,
services, organizations, or facilities described in division (A), or participating lawfully in speech or
peaceful assembly opposing any denial of the opportunity to participate.
(' 83 Code, § 6-67) (Ord. 1168, passed 4-19-93) Penalty, see§ 10.99
§ 91.31 ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY.
(A) The authority and responsibility for properly administering this chapter and referral of
complaints hereunder to the Commission as set forth in division (B) below shall be vested in the chief
executive officer of the city.
(B) Notwithstanding the provisions of I.e. 22-9.5-4-8, the city, because of a lack of financial and
other resources necessary to fully administer enforcement proceedings and possible civil actions under
this chapter, herein elects to refer all formal complaints of violation of the provisions of this chapter by
complainants to the state Civil Rights Commission ("Commission") for administrative enforcement
actions pursuant to I.C. 22-9. 5-6, and the chief elected officer of the city shall refer all complaints to the
Commission as provided for under division (A) of this section for purposes of investigation, resolution,
and appropriate relief as provided for under I. C. 22-9. 5-6.
('83 Code,§ 6-69) (Ord. 1168, passed 4-19-93)
§ 91.32 CITY ORGANIZATIONS TO PROVIDE SUPPORT.
All executive departments and agencies of the city shall administer their departments, programs, and
activities relating to housing and urban development in a manner affirmatively to further the purposes
of this chapter and shall cooperate with the chief executive officer and the Commission to further those
purposes.
('83 Code, § 6-69) (Ord. 1168, passed 4-19-93)
§ 91.33 INFORMATION ON REMEDIES.
The chief executive officer of the city, or the chief executive officer's designee, shall provide
information on remedies available to any aggrieved person or complainant requesting that information.
C 83 Code, § 6-69) (Ord. 1168, passed 4-19-93)
18 Nappanee - General Regulations
CHAPTER 92: FIRE PREVENTION
Section
Fire Limits
92.01 Fire limits boundaries
92.02 Construction in fire limits; materials restricted
92.03 Removal of frame buildings
Unlawful Acts
92.15 Leaf burning on public property prohibited
92.16 Storage of gasoline, naphtha, and benzine restricted
92.17 Burning of combustible substances prohibited
92. 30 Definition
92.31 Permit requirements
92.32 Violations; remedies
92.33 Application
Inci1terators
Administration and Enforcement
92.45 Authority; Chief of Fire Department
92.46 Inspections
92.47 No frre inspection fee
92.48 Violations
Fireworks
92.60 Use, discharge or ignition prohibited
92 . 61 Permits
92 .62 Enforcement; penalty
Cross-reference:
Accumulation of junk or dangerous or obnoxious matter prohibited, see § 93. 07
Electrical Installation Regulations, see Chapter 151
19
20 Nappanee ~ General Regulations
FIRE LIMITS
§ 92.01 FIRE LIMITS BOUNDARIES.
The following described boundaries shall be the fire limits of the city: Beginning where the 'west
line of Madison Street intersects the south line of the Baltimore & Ohio railway grounds; thence westerly
along the south line of the railway grounds to the west line of Locke Street; thence north to the north line
of Lincoln Street; thence east to the intersection of Clark Street; thence north to the intersection of
Walnut Street; thence east to the intersection of Elm Street; thence south to the north line of the railway
grounds; thence easterly along the railway grounds to the intersection of Madison Street; thence south
to the place of beginning.
('83 Code, § 6-16)
§ 92.02 CONSTRUCTION IN FIRE LIMITS; MATERIALS RESTRICTED.
No person shall erect or cause to be erected on any lot or part of lot within the space enclosed within
the above-described fire limits, any building or addition to any building before erected, unless the outer
wall thereof be composed of brick, stone, or cement with mortar, and the roof of all buildings within
these limits shall be composed of slate, metal, or what is known as gravel, or other fireproof material.
Any person or persons convicted of having violated any provision of this section shall be fined, and in
an additional fine for each day's continuation of the violation after the first conviction.
C 83 Code, § 6-17) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 92.03 REMOVAL OF FRAME BUILDINGS.
Whenever any frame or wooden building heretofore erected within the fire limits shall be removed,
the same shall not be relocated within these limits, but shall be removed to without the same, and any
person convicted of having relocated this type of building within these limits shall be fined therefor
equally as for the first erection of this type of building, and the building shall be removed as provided
for in this section.
('83 Code,§ 6-18) Penalty, see§ 10.99
UNLAWFUL ACTS
§ 92.15 LEAF BURNING ON PUBLIC PROPERTY PROHIBITED.
No person shall initiate, cause, or allow to be fired or burned any form of leaf, rubbish, straw, or
other combustible substance on public property at any time within the city.
C 83 Code, § 6-47) Penalty, see§ 10.99
'·, \
!' l
Fire Prevention 21
§ 92.16 STORAGE OF GASOLINE, NAPHTHA, AND BENZINE RESTRICTED.
It shall be unlawful for any person.(s), firm, or corporation to keep or store within any residential
district of the city any gasoline, naphtha, or benzine, other than in underground storage tanks, in any
greater quantity than five gallons.
(' 83 Code, § 6-55) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 92.17 BURNING OF COMBUSTIBLE SUBSTANCES PRO!IlBITED.
(A) No individual, firm or entity may condone, initiate or otherwise possess a fire on private
property within the city other than for cooking purposes in approved grill containers or recreational fires
which recreational fires shall utilize only wood or paper products as combustible materials and which
shall be located in such a manner that they do not pose a fire hazard to any existing structures. For the
purposes of this chapter, leaves are not included among permissible combustible materials.
(B) All cooking and recreational fires must be attended by an adult, of legal age, at all times, and
must be fully and completely extinguished prior to the fire site being vacated.
(C) A violation fa this chapter may result in the imposition of a fine not to exceed the sum of $300
s : per violation. Each frre in violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate violation.
(Ord. 1366, passed 8-2-04)
INCINERATORS
§ 92.30 DEFINITION.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following defmition shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
COMMERCIAL OR INDUSTRIAL INCINERATOR. A combustion apparatus designed for high
temperanrre operation in which solid, semi-solid, liquid, or gaseous combustible wastes are ignited and
burned efficiently and from which the solid residues contain little or no combustible material.
(' 83 Code, § 6-31)
§ 92.31 PERMIT REQWREMENTS.
(A) Any person, firm, or corporation desiring to install or use a commercial or industrial incinerator
for elimination of solid or liquid material, rubbish, or other refuse including, but not limited to, garbage,
22 Nappanee ~ General Regulations
ashes, dead animals, offal, and other commercial, industrial, or instirutional waste shall ftle a written
application therefor upon forms provided by the city and in the office of the duly acting Zoning
Administrator of the city.
(B) The fee to be paid upon submission of this application is specified in § 38 .15 of this code.
(C) No incinerator permit shall be issued or granted by the Zoning Administrator of the city unless
and until all reports, plans, and specifications of the incinerator shall have been approved by the Air
Pollution Control Board of the state, its administrative agencies, or other boards, and upon proof of
compliance with all starutes and regulations of the state Environmental Management Board, the Air
Pollution Control Board, or the successors thereof, of the state.
{D) A commercial or industrial incinerator may be constructed and installed only in a B District or
an M District as defined by the Zoning Ordinance adopted by Title XV of this code, fOr which a permit
is issued in manner and form hereinafter provided.
(E) No permit for the installation of a commercial or industrial incinerator shall be granted if the
same is located less than 100 feet from any part of any R Districts as defmed by the Zoning Ordinance.
The Zoning Administrator is ordered and directed, prior to the issuance of the permit, to investigate and
inspect the proposed premises and to insure the compliance with the provisions hereof prior to, during,
and subsequent to the installation of the incinerator.
(' 83 Code, § 6-32)
§ 92.32 VIOLATIONS; REMEDIES.
The city Plan Commission is authorized and empowered to institute any suits for injunctive or other
equitable procedures and for removal of any structure or incinerators erected in violation of any of the
provisions of this subchapter or the requirements hereof. In addition to this remedy, any person, firm,
or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of this subchapter or fail to comply therewith
without first procuring a permit shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined.
(' 83 Code, § 6-33) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 92.33 APPLICATION.
The terms and provisions of this subchapter shall have application only for industrial or commercial
uses and shall have no application with respect to domestic or residential burning, incineration, or
disposition of household wastes.
(' 83 Code, § 6-34)
Fire Prevention 23
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 92.45 AUTHORITY; CHIEF OF FIRE DEPARTMENT.
The Chief of the Fire Department is authorized, empowered, and directed to regulate and determine
the placing of materials, paper, and waste materials in the buildings of the city, so as to prevent fires.
C 83 Code, § 6-19)
§ 92.46 INSPECTIONS.
The Chief of the Fire Department shall appoint or designate four different members of the Fire
Department to inspect all buildings and basements within the fire limits of the city on an annual basis
and report their investigations to the Mayor and City Council.
C 83 Code, § 6-20)
§ 92.47 NO FIRE INSPECTION FEE.
\ There shall be no inspection fee for services rendered pursuant to § 92.46 above.
\ '
('83 Code,§ 6-21)
§ 92.48 VIOLATIONS.
The owner, lessor, or occupant of a building who shall violate any provision of thi.s chapter, or fail,
neglect, or refuse to comply with any order of the Chief of the Fire Department or competent person
delegated by him or her in pursuance of and by authority of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of an
infraction and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined.
C 83 Code, § 6-22) Penalty, see§ 10.99
FIREWORKS
§ 92.60 USE, DISCHARGE OR IGNITION PROHIBITED.
(A) The use, discharge or ignition of consumer fireworks by any person or other entity is prohibited
in the city except during the following periods (all local time):
(1) Between the hours of 5:00 p.m. and two hours after sunset on June 25, June 26, June 27,
June 28, June 29, June 30, July 1, July 2, July 3, July 5, July 6, July 7, July 8, July 9, July 10, July 11,
July 12 and July 13;
24 Nappanee - General Regulations
(2) Between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight on July 4; and
(3) Between the hours of 10:00 a.m, on December 31and1:00 a.m. on January 1;
(4) Between the hours of !O:OOa.m. and 12:00midnighton the Saturday, Sunday and Monday
of Memorial Day Weekend;
(5) Between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight on the Saturday, Sunday and Monday
of Labor Day Weekend.
(B) For purposes of this subchapter, CONSUMER FIREWORK shall have the same defmition of
"Consumer Firework" as set forth in I.e. 22-11-14-1, as currently in effect, or as from time to time
hereafter adopted or amended. For purposes of clarity in reading and implementing this sub chapter, the
definition of "Consumer Firework" under I.C. 22-11-14-1, as currently in force and effect, is herewith
set forth in division (C) below, though changes or amendments to such definition as set forth with I.C.
22-11-14-1 shall supersede the definition herein reproduced.
(C) Consumer firework means a small frrework that is designated primarily to produce visible
effects by combustion, and that is required to comply with the construction, chemical composition, and
labeling regulations promulgated by the United States Consumer Product Safety Commission under 16
CPR 1507. The term also includes some small device designed to produce an audible effect, such as
whistling device, ground devices containing 50 milligrams or less of explosive composition, and aerial
devices containing 130 milligrams or less of explosive composition. Propelling or expelling charges
consisting of a mixture of charcoal, sulfur, and potassium nitrate are not considered as designed to
produce an audible effect.
(1) Consumer fireworks include:
(a) Aerial devices, which include sky rockets, missile type rockets, helicopter or aerial
spinners, roman candles, mines and shells;
(b) Ground audible devices, which include firecrackers, salutes, and chasers; and
( c) Firework devices containing combinations of the effects described in divisions (a) and
(b) above.
(2) Consumer fireworks do not include:
(a) Dipped sticks or wire sparklers. However, totally pyrotechnic composition may not
exceed 100 grams per item. Devices containing chlorate or perchlorate salts may not exceed five grams
in total composition per item;
(b) Cylindrical fountains;
(c) Cone fountains;
Fire Prevention 25
(d) Illuminating torches;
(e) Wheels;
(!) Ground spinners;
(g) Flitter sparklers;
(h) Snakes or glow works;
(i) Smoke devices; and
(j) Trick noisemakers, which include party poppers, booby traps, snappers, trick matches,
cigarette loads, and auto burglar alarms.
(D) The use, discharge or ignition of all other frreworks, as FIREWORK(S) is defmed with l.C.
22-11-14-1, is governed by applicable Indiana law, to include I.C. 22-11-14-1 et seq., and not by this
subchapter.
(Ord. 1472, passed 10-21-13)
§ 92. 61 PERMITS.
Notwithstanding § 92.60, the use, discharge or ignition of consumer fireworks may be permitted
with the written approval of the Board of Public Works and Safety on real estate owned by the
governmental entity. The approval shall specify the real estate upon which the use, discharge or ignition
will be pennitted and the date(s) and time(s) on which the use, discharge or ignition will be permitted
which may not exceed 72 hours.
(Ord. 1472, passed 10-21-13)
§ 92.62 ENFORCEMENT; PENALTY.
This subchapter shall be enforced consistent with the standards of applicable Indiana law and the
City of Nappanee Code, as the code may be amended from time to time hereafter. Any person or other
entity violating the provisions of this subchapter may be fined up to $500 for each such violations, and
be responsible for all applicable court costs.
(Ord. 1472, passed 10-21-13)
26 Nappanee - General Regulations •
._/
CHAPTER 93: HEALTII AND SANITATION; NUISANCES
Section
93 .01 Nuisances prohibited
93.02 Violations; abatement
Nuisances
93.03 Sidewalks; snow, ice, dirt, and garbage removal
93.04 Streets and sidewalks; animals and animal drawn vehicles restricted
93.05 Weeds
93.06 Carrying trash into city prohibited
93.07 Accumulation of junk or dangerous or obnoxious matter prohibited
Noise Control
!: 93.20 Defmitions
93.21 Community noise level standards; measurement
93.22 Noise level standards; motor vehicles and sound amplification systems
93 .23 Exemptions
93.24 Undue hardship; temporary permit
93 .25 Violations
93.26 Specific prohibited noises
Cross-reference:
Abandoned or Junk Vehicles, see Chapter 94
Advertisements and handbills, see § 130. 02
Firearms, see§ 130.01
Leaf burning on public property, see § 92.15
Loitering, see § 130. 03
Skateboards, see§§ 72.24 through 72.26
Storage of gasoline, naphtha, and benzine, see§ 92.16
Statutory reference:
Authority to regulate the generation of sound, see I. C. 36-8-2-8
Authority to require removal of weeds and other rank vegetation, see I. C. 36-7-10. 1
27
28 Nappanee~ General Regulations
NUISANCES
§ 93.01 NUISANCES PROHIBITED.
It shall be unlawful and it shall be a nuisance for any person, persons, company, or corporation to
erect, construct, cause, permit, keep, or maintain within the city limits, anything whatsoever which is
injurious to health, safety, and welfare of the citizens or which is an obstacle to the free use of property
by the inhabitants. Any person or persons maintaining any nuisance is declared to be in violation of this
chapter.
C 83 Code, § 6-45) Penalty, see§ 10.99
§ 93.02 VIOLATIONS; ABATEMENT.
(A) Any person, persons, firm, or corporation violating any sections of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be fined, unless otherwise provided in this chapter.
(B) (1) The city shall have the right to cause proper notice to abate any public nuisance within a
reasonable period of time.
(2) If the person notified to abate a nuisance neglects or fails to abate as directed, the city may
perform the action necessary to abate. The city may recover costs of the abatement by following the
procedure set forth in § 93 .05 of this code.
C 83 Code, § 6-49) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 93 .03 SIDEWALKS; SNOW, ICE, DIRT, AND GARBAGE REMOVAL.
(A) Snow and ice removal. Every owner, tenant, or occupant of any premises abutting or bordering
on any street in the city shall remove, or cause to be removed, all snow and ice from the sidewalks in
front of those premises to the full paved width of the sidewalks. If the snow and/or ice shall freeze so
hard that it cannot be removed, then the sidewalk must be made safe by sprinkling it with salt, sand,
ashes, or other material.
(B) Garbage or dirt. No person shall throw or cause any garbage, dirt, or stones to be thrown upon
any sidewalk. SUch an action shall be a public nuisance.
(C) Violations. Persons violating this section shall be fined an amount payable through the
Ordinance Violations Bureau, as discussed in Chapter 36 of this code.
C 83 Code, § 6-42) (Am. Ord. 1100, passed 4-17-89) Penalty, see§ 10.99
Health and Sanitation; Nuisances
§ 93.04 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS; ANIMALS AND ANIMAL DRAWN VEIIlCLES
RESTRICTED.
29
(A) All horses and other. animals attached to a wagon, sleigh, or vehicle in any street, alley, or
enclosed lot shall be securely fastened or tied when left by its owner.
(B) No horse or other animal, or animal attached to a wagon, sleigh, or vehicle shall be left which
would obstruct in whole or in part any crossing or sidewalk.
(C) No animal attached to any vehicle shall be led or driven across any sidewalk at a point where
there is no crossing.
(D) No automobiles, trucks, all terrain vehicles, motorcycles, mopeds, snowmobiles, two-wheeled
motorized scooters, horses, or animal drawn vehicles of any kind, other than vehicles associated with
a utility or municipal purpose, shall be utilized upon and along any sidewalk in the city.
('83 Code, § 6-43) Penalty, see§ 10.99
§ 93.05 WEEDS.
(A) Title. This section shall be known and cited as the City of Nappanee Weed Control Ordinance.
(B) Definition.
(1) For the purpose of this section, WEEDS shall include any grass and/or uncared for
vegetation growing to a height in excess of eight inches on property located within the city and not
owned by the city or any Board or Commission thereof, except as set forth in subsection (2).
(2) The following vegetation is exempt from the provisions of this section:
(a) Agricultural crops;
(b) Cultivated trees;
(c) Cultivated shrubs;
(d) Flowers or other decorative ornamental plants under cultivation;
(e) Wildflowers;
(f) Vegetation in woodlands or wetlands;
(g) Cultivated meadows;
30 Nappanee - General Regulations
(h) Meadows in agriculhrral zones,
(C) Enforcement. It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer or in his or her absence a
police officer or authorized representative to enforce the provisions of this chapter, and upon a
determination that a violation of thls chapter exists, shall ascertain the name and mailing address of the
owner of the property and the description of the property where the violation exists. Written notice of
violation shall be served upon the owner directing that the weeds and/or rank vegetation shall be cut and
removed from the premises within five days or the following action shall be taken: The city shall cause
the weeds and/or rank vegetation to be removed, with the cost thereof to be charged against the owner.
(D) Violation-notice procedure. Notice of violation shall be made by either:
(1) Posting a copy of the notice on the property; or
(2) Mailing a copy of the notice to the owner by United States Postal Service Certified
Mail/Return Receipt Requested. The notice shall be deemed complete on the day the notice is posted
and/or mailed.
(E) Failure to comply. Should any person who has been provided written notice fail, neglect or
refuse to cut or remove the weeks and/or rank vegetation within five days as required by notice, a
representative of the city may enter upon the premises and cause the weeds and/or rank vegetation to be
cut or removed.
(F) Bill issued to owner. In the event that the city is forced to. cut or remove weeds and/or rank
vegetation, the City Clerk-Treasurer shall issue a bill to the owner of the property for a minimum of
$100 per hour including manpower, labor and equipment, or the actual costs of the abatement, whichever
is greater. The Clerk-Treasurer shall keep record of the billing and collect the same as the ClerkTreasurer
does other charges of the city, Payment shall be due to the Clerk-Treasurer's Office ten days
after the bill is mailed to the owner.
(G) Failure to pay. If the owner fails to pay the bill within 30 days, the city may collect the bill in
any manner available by law. The Clerk-Treasurer may also certify to the Elkhart County Auditor the
amount of the bill plus any additional administrative costs incurred in the certification. The Auditor shall
place the total amount certified on the tax duplicate for the property affected, and the total amount,
including any accrued interest, shall be collected as.delinquent taxes and shall be disbursed to the general
fund of the city as provided by l.C. 36-7-10.1-4.
(H) Appeals.
(1) A person receiving a notice of violation issued pursuant to this section or a bill issued
pursuant to this section may request, in writing, a hearing before the Nappanee Board of Public Works
and Safety to dispute the existence of a violation on his or her property or dispute the accuracy of a bill
issued. To the extent an individual desires to dispute the existence of a violation of this section, the
request must be received by the Clerk-Treasurer's Office within five days after service of notice of such
violation. To the extent an individual desires to dispute the accuracy of a bill received from the city, the
Health and Sanitation; Nuisances 31
request must be received by the Clerk-Treasurer's Office with ten days of the date that the bill was first
issued. A hearing will be held within 14 days of the city's receipt of a written request for such hearing.
(2) At the hearing before the Board of Public Works and Safety, the person receiving a notice
of violation will be given the opportunity to appear, with or without counsel, to present evidence to the
Board of Public Works and Safety. Each person appearing shall have the opportunity to cross-examine
those persons establishing the violation for the city, and testify on their own behalf.
(3) At the hearing the Board of Public Works and Safety shall enter a finding determining
whether the party notified is the owner of the property; and depending upon the nature of the appeal,
whether the condition of the property is in violation of this section and/or whether the bill issued is
accurate. The Board may affirm or modify the noticie of violation consistent with the Board's findings.
(4) Any appeal from the findings and order of the Board of Public Works and Safety sbnll be
taken in accordance with the provisions of I.C. 36-1-6-9.
('83 Code,§ 6-46) (Ord. 997, passed 7-15-85; Am. Ord. 1331, passed 7-1-02)
§ 93.06 CARRYING TRASH INTO CITY PROHIBITED.
, ~ It shall be unlawful to carry into the city from areas outside the city limits any domestic garbage,
trash, refuse, or odd-sized trash to be picked up by the city Department of Streets and Sanitation or a
contracted refuse collector.
('83 Code, § 6-48) Penalty, see§ 10.99
§ 93.07 ACCUMULATION OF JUNK OR DANGEROUS OR OBNOXIOUS MATTER
PROHIBITED.
(A) Except for premises permitted for that use under the terms of the city Zoning Ordinance, it shall
be unlawful to accumulate or allow the accumulation, upon any premises within the corporate limits of
the city, of garbage, ashes, refuse, rubbish, manure, carcasses, junk, automobile parts and bodies, tires,
junk appliances, bedding, junk ftnniture, junk machinery, clippings from growth, old newspapers, and
all other kinds and types of organic or inorganic materials generally classified as junk or refuse;
provided, however, that nothing herein contained shall prevent the accumulation and storage of items
of value which are stored in a secured building out of the sight of the public and the occupiers of
adjoining property when that storage does not constitute a health or fire hazard, and provided further that
this section shall not prevent the accumulation and storage in the manner provided by law of items to be
picked up by the Department of Streets and Sanitation of the city.
(B) It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police or his or her designee to notify the owners and
occupying tenants of any property found to have accumulations in violation of division (A) to remove
any such accumulations from the premises within a reasonable time not less than ten days but not to
exceed 30 days. In the event the accumulation has not been removed within the period designated by
the Chief of Police, the Department of Streets and Sanitation is authorized to enter upon the premises
32 Nappanee - General Regulations
and remove the unlawful accumulations. The cost of removal of the unlawful accumulations shall be a
lien upon the real estate from which those accumulations are removed, and the Streets and Sanitation
Commissioner shall certify the costs of the removal to the City Clerk-Treasurer, who shall in hlrn certify
the costs to the Treasurer of the county in question for collection in the same manner as real estate taxes
are collected upon the premises,
(C) Any person, firm, or corporation violating the provisions of division (A) hereof or failing to
comply with the order of the Chief of Police for the removal of any unlawful accumulation as provided
in division (B) hereof shall, upon being found guilty, be fined, which fine shall be in addition to the
imposition of any liens in the manner provided by this section.
('83 Code,§ 6-56) Penalty, see§ 10.99
NOISE CONTROL
§ 93.20 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this sub chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or req_uires a different meaning.
COMMERCIAL AREA. Any parcel of land zoned as B-1, B-2, or PD-B under the Zoning
Ordinance.
dB(A). The intensity of a sound expressed in decibels read from a calibrated sound level meter
using the A-level weighting scale and the slow meter response, as specified by the American National
Standard Institute.
DECIBEL. A unit measure of sound level. The symbol is dB.
DOMESTIC POWER EQUIPMENT. Any equipment or device rated at 20 horsepower or less and
used for home or building repairs and grounds maintenance.
EMERGENCY WORK. Any activities performed for the purpose of preventing or alleviating the
physical trauma or property damage threatened or caused by existing or imminent peril.
INDUSTRIAL AREA. Any parcel of land zoned as I-1 or PD-I under the Zonlllg Ordinance.
PERSON. Any individual, association, partnership, or corporation.
PROPERTY LINE. The real or imaginary line and its vertical extension, which separates the real
property owned, leased, or occupied by any person from contiguous real property owned, leased, or
occupied by any other person.
Health and Sanitation; Nuisances 33
PUBLIC PROPERTY. All real property which is owned or controlled by a goverrunental entity,
and shall include any public rights-of-way, public buildings, parks, and waterways.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. Any street, avenue, boulevard, highway, road, thoroughfare, sidewalk,
alley, or any other property, which is owned or controlled by a governmental entity.
RESIDENTIAL AREA. Any parcel of land zoned as R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, or PD-R under the
Zoning Ordinance.
SOUND AMPLIFICATION SYSTEM. Any apparatus used for the amplification of soonds from
any radio, tape player, cassette player, compact disk player, loudspeaker, sound amplifier, alarm, or
other sound-generating device, including any apparatus for the amplification of the human voice.
(Ord. 1317, passed 9-6-01)
§ 93.21 COMMUNITY NOISE LEVEL STANDARDS; MEASUREMENT.
(A) Sound levels by receiving land use.
(1) No person shall create, cause to be created, permit to be created, or otherwise generate any
source of sound in a manner that creates a sound level which exceeds the following limits for the
receiving land use category when measured at or within the property line of the receiving land use.
Sound Level Limits by Receiving Land Use
Receiving Land Use Category Tune Sound Level Limit
Residential area 7 a.m. to 10 p.m. 65 dB(A)
Residential area 10 p.m. to 7 a.m. 55 dB(A)
Commercial area 7 a.m. to 10 p.m. 75 dB(A)
Commercial area 10 p .m. to 7 a.m. 65 dB(A)
Industrial area All times 75 dB(A)
(2) When a noise source can be identified and its sound measured in more than one land use
category, the sound level limit of the most restrictive land use category shall apply.
(B) Measurement procedure. The sound level meter shall be operated according to the instrument
manufacturer's instructions and as follows.
(1) Microphone orientation. The microphone shall be pointed toward the allegedly offensive
noise source, unless the instrument manufacturer's instructions specifically indicate otherwise,
(2) Meter setting. The meter shall be set for the A-weighted network and slow response mode.
34 Nappanee - General Regulations
(3) Calibration. An external calibration check and battery check shall be made before and after
each use.
(4) Meter readings. The recorded reading shall be the highest sound level obtained with the
allegedly offensive noise source in operation, disregarding unrelated peaks due to extraneous ambient
noises.
(5) Ambient conditions. Measurements shall be made only when the A-weighted ambient sound
level, including wind effects and all sources other than the noise source being measured, is at least 10
dB(A) lower than the sound level of the noise source being measured; provided, however, that no source
shall emit noise in excess of 86 dB(A) when measured 25 feet or more from the source.
(6) Location. Sound levels shall be measured at the approximate location of the property line
or the boundary of the public property, at a height at least four feet above the immediate surrounding
surface.
(7) Operator location. In no case shall the operator or observer be closer than two feet from
the system's microphone, nor shall he or she locate himself or herself between the microphone and the
noise source being measured.
(C) Specifically excluded. This section does not apply to motor vehicles or sound amplification
systems operated on public property.
(Ord. 1317, passed 9-6-01) Penalty, see§ 10.99
§ 93.22 NOISE LEVEL STANDARDS; MOTOR VEHICLES AND SOUND AMPLIFICATION
SYSTEMS.
(A) Sound levels by sormd amplification system. No person shall play, use, operate, or permit to
be played, used, or operated any sound amplification system if it is located in or on any of the following,
and if the sound generated is plainly audible to any other person measured at a distance at least 100 feet
from the sound amplification system:
(1) Any public property, including but not limited to any street, alley, highway, sidewalk,
park, or other public property; or
(2) Any motor vehicle on a public street, alley, highway, park, or other public property.
(B) Sound levels by motor vehicles.
(1) No person shall operate any motor vehicle on a public street, alley, highway, park, or other
public property in which the engine, muffler, exhaust, and/or other noise control equipment has been
altered, removed, or maintained in disrepair so as to generate a sound plainly audible to any other person
measured at a distance at least 100 feet from the motor vehicle.
Health and Sanitation; Nuisances 35
(2) No person operating a motor vehicle containing a jak:e brake shall apply the jake brake
within the city limits.
{C) Measurement procedures. Measurement of the audilile sound shall be by the auditory senses
and based upon direct line of sight
(Ord. 1317, passed 9-6-01) Penalty, see§ 10.99
§ 93.23 EXEMPTIONS.
The sound levels in§§ 93.21 and 93.22 shall not apply to sounds emitted from;
{A) Authorized emergency vehicles, public safety vehicles, or from public safety officials acting in
the scope of their authority;
(B) Vehicle horns, sirens, or other devices used as a warning of danger or an emergency;
(C) Passing trains;
(D) Properly operating building alarms or vehicle alarms;
(E) Stationary emergency signaling devices, such as severe weather sirens;
(F) Any emergency work;
(G) Communication of any message in any public forum between the hours of 8 a.m. and 8 p.m.;
(H) Any activity authorized by the Board of Public Works and Safety, Board of ParkS and
Recreation, or any other governmental body having jurisdiction and control over the property, including
parades, festivals, sporting events, concerts, or fireworks displays;
(I) Any recreational and educational activity including, but not limited to, school bands and
neighborhood ball games. Any recreational and educational activity taking place between the hours of
11 p.m. and 6 a.m. shall not exceed the maximum sound levels specified in §§ 93.21 and 93.22;
(J) Any construction equipment operated during the time period between 6:30 a.m. and 8 p.m.,
provided that this equipment shall be equipped with a properly installed muffler in good working order,
Construction equipment operated between the hours of 6:30 a.m. and 8 a.m. to the extent allowed by
federal, state, or local ordinance shall not exceed the maximum sound levels specifie.d in§§ 93.21 and
93.22;
(K) Any detonation of explosives used to fragment rock for mining, quarrying, excavation, and
construction;
36 Nappanee - General Regulations
(L) Any domestic power equipment operated during the time period between 6 a.m. and 10 p.m.,
provided that this equipment does not exceed a sound level of 80 dB(A) when measured at a minimum
of 25 feet from the noise source. Domestic power equipment operated between the hours of 10 p.m. and
6 a.m. shall not exceed the maximum sound levels specified in§§ 93.21 and 93.22;
(M) Licensed refuse collection vehicles operated during the time period between 7 a.m. and 10 p.m.
Sounds emitted from licensed refuse collection vehicles opeiated between the hours of 10 p.m. and 7
a.m. shall not exceed the maximum sound levels specified in§§ 93.21and93.22;
(N) Aircraft; and
(0) Noise sources with multi-family dwellings, offices, apartment complexes, condominiums, and
similar structures occupied by more than one tenant, which impact only those persons within the same
dwelling, office, complex, or building,
(Ord. 1317, passed 9-6-01)
§ 93.24 UNDUE HARDSHIP; TEMPORARY PERMIT.
(A) Applications for a permit for relief from the sound level limits designated in this subchapter
may, on the basis of undue hardship, be made to the Board of Public Works and Safety. Any permit
granted by the Board of Public Works and Safety hereunder shall contain all conditions upon which the
permit has been granted and shall specify a reasonable time that the permit shall be effective.
(B) The Board of Public Works and Safety may grant the relief as applied for only if it is found that;
(1) Additional time is reasonably necessary for the applicant to alter or modify his or her
activity or operation to comply with this subchapter;
(2) The activity, operation, or noise source will be of a temporary duration, and cannot be done
in a manner that would comply with this subchapter;
(3) No other reasonable alternative is available to the applicant; and
(4) The applicant~represents and the Board of Public Works and Safety finds that the noise
source as permitted will not violate recognized safety standards. The Board of Public Works and Safety
may prescribe any reasonable conditions or requirements it deems necessary to minimize adverse effects
upon the community or the surrounding neighborhood.
(5) The above provisions contained in this division {B) shall be separate from and shall not limit
in any way those specific provisions for relief referenced at § 93.26(H) below.
(Ord. 1317, passed 9-6-01)
Health and Sanitation; Nuisances 37
§ 93.25 VIOLATIONS.
(A) A citation may be issued for a violation under this subchapter, subjecting the violator to a fme.
The citation shall be flied with the City Court or with any other court of competent jurisdiction in the
counties.
(B) For the purposes of this subchapter, the violator shall be the person or persons who created,
caused to be created, permitted to be created, or otherwise generated any source of sound in a manner
that creates a sound level exceeding the limits for the receiving land use category as established by this
subchapter; the person or persons in possession of a sound amplification system played, used, or
operated in violation of this subchapter; or the person in control of a motor vehicle operating in violation
of this subchapter.
(Ord. 1317, passed 9-6-01) Penalty, see§ 10.99
§ 93.26 SPECIFIC PROHIBITED NOISES.
The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing, and unnecessary noises in
violation of this chapter, but this enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive, namely:
(A) The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle, or other vehicle
on any street or public place of the city, except as a danger warning; the creation by means of a vehicle
signaling device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound, and the sounding of such a device for an
unnecessary and unreasonable period of time; or the use of any signaling device except one operated by
hand or electricity, the use of any horn, whistle, or other device operated by engine exhaust, and the use
of any such signaling device when traffic for any reason is held up;
(B) The using, operating, or permitting to be played, used, or operated any radio receiving set,
musical instrument, phonograph, or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound
in a manner so as to disturb the peace, quiet, and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants or at any time
with louder volume than is necessary for convenient hearing of the person or persons who are in the
room, vehicle, or chamber in which the device is operated and who are voluntary listeners thereto. The
operation of this type of set, instrument, phonograph, machine, or device between the hours of 11 p.m.
and 7 a.m. in a manner so as to be plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet from the building, structure,
or vehicle in which it is located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section;
(C) The using, operating, or permitting to be played, used, or operated any radio, receiving set,
musical instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier, or other machine or device for the
producing or reproducing of sound which is cast upon the public streets for the purpose of commercial
advertising or attracting the attention of the public to any building or structure; provided, however, that
any person or organization upon petition to the Chief of Police or Acting Chief of Police of the city may
secure a permit to operate a loudspeaker for a temporary time and under conditions as approved by the
Police Department, provided the proposed use is determined by the police to be in the public interest of
the citizens of the city;
38 Nappanee - General Regulations
(D) The keeping of any animal or bird which, by causing frequent or long continued noise, shall
disturb the comfort or repose of any persons in the vicinity;
(E) The blowing of any locomotive steam whistle or air horn or steam whistle attached to any
stationary boiler, except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of fire or
danger, or upon the request of the proper city authorities;
(F) The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal
combustion engine, or motor vehicle, except through a muffler or other device which will effectively
prevent loud, vibrating, or explosive noises therefrom;
(G) The erection, including excavation, demolition, alteration, or repair of any building other than
between the hours of 6:30 a.m. and 8 p.m. Monday through and including Saturday, and 10 a.m. and
8 p.m. on Sunday, except in cases urgently necessary in the interest of public health and safety, and then
only with a permit to be issued by the Building Commissioner of the city;
(H) The operation between the hours of 10 p.m. and 7 a.m. of any pile driven steam shovel,
pneumatic hammer, derrick steam or electric hoist, power lawn mower, or other appliances, the use of
which is attended by loud or unusual noises, unless any specific use is specifically found by the city's
Board of Public Works and Safety after petition thereto by any requesting party:
(1) To be in the public interest;
(2) To be in the best interests of the public benefit or welfare; or
(3) To be otherwise necessary for economic or other business interest or by reason that the
prohibition of the use during that time period would provide an undue or unreasonable hardship on the
party requesting the use, so long as that use shall not provide an undue and unreasonable hardship on
any other party.
(I) The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, church, hospital, or
nursing home while same are in use, which unreasonably interferes with the working of those institutions
or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospital or nursing home, provided signs are displayed
in those streets;
(J) The operation of any automobile, truck, or truck-tractor over the streets of the city so as to
create unreasonable, loud, explosive, or vibrating noises which unreasonably prohibit the enjoyment of
private property abutting the streets; or
(K) The running of any motor or permitting the running of any motor in an automobile, truck,
tractor, or refrigerated trailer while the same is parked in any street, public way, or private parking lot
within 100 feet of any residence within the city.
('83 Code,§ 6-35) (Am. Ord. 1106, passed 9-11-89; Am. Ord. 1226, passed 11-18-96) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
CHAPI'ER 94: ABANDONED AND JUNK VEIDCLES
Section
94.01 Abandoned or junk vehicles; removal
Statutory reference:
Abandoned vehicle diefined, see I. C. 9-13-2-1
Abandoned vehicle regulations, see I. C. 9-22-1-1 through 9-22-1-32
§ 94.01 ABANDONED OR JUNK VEIDCLES; REMOVAL.·
(A) For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
ABANDONED VEHICLE. A vehicle, as used in this chapter, is a device in, upon, or by which
a person or property is, or may be, transported or drawn upon a highway. ABANDONED VEHICLE
would have that definition given by I.C. 9-13-2-1.
JUNK CAR. Any motor vehicle, motorcycle, truck-tractor, truck trailer, semi-trailer, mobile
home, or other vehicle for which a certificate of title and registration plate is necessary by virtue of the
laws of the state, which JUNK CAR does not bear a current valid registration or license plate and/or is
inoperable and is not ID a garage or other buildillg.
(B) Because of the danger to health from vennin and insects and to children attracted by abandoned
and junk cars, abandoned vehicles and junk cars are declared to be nuisances except in a lawfully
operated junk yard, or yards, or enclosures lawfully operated for vehicles awaiting permission for
junking from the Bureau of Motor Vehicles, or lawfully licensed automobile dealers at their legally
recognized places of business or other lots properly zoned for this purpose.
(C) The Chief of the Police Department shall tag any abandoned vehicle pursuant to the provisions
of l.C. 9-22-1-11 and shall cause any such abandoned vehicle not removed within 72 hours of the
placement of such tag to be taken to and stored in a suitable place, and the Chief of Police or his or her
designee shall report that fact in writing to the BMV within 72 hours after the discovery of the
abandoned vehicle.
(D) The Chief of the Police Department may order any junk car removed by causing a notice, iii
writing, to remove the same to be served upon the owner thereof, if known, and if not known, then upon
the owner of occupant of the real estate upon which the junk car is situated. If no owner or occupant
39
40 Nappanee - General Regulations
of the real estate upon which the junk car is situated can be found, then a notice affixed to any building
on the real estate shall constirute notice to the owner or occupant of the real estate and to the owner of
the junk car. This notice shall state that the junk car shall be removed within ten days after the date of
service of the notice.
(E) If a junk car is not thus removed within the time thus fixed, then the Chief of the Police
Department may cause that motor vehicle to be removed at the expense of the owner thereof, or the
owner of the real estate upon which the same is situated, which expense, together with the storage
charges of the owner of the storage yard, if any, shall constitute a lien on the junk car. The junk car may
be towed either by employees of the city or by commercial towing frrms and shall be held for a period
of not less than 60 days, during which time the owner or owners of the junk'. car may repossess the same
by paying all expenses of towing, storage, and other expenses. The towing expenses shall be based upon
the current rate of towing through commercial agencies within the city, but within the range specified
in§ 38.15 of this code. All vehicles stored in accordance with this section shall be charged for every
day stored, at a daily rate as specified in§ 38.15 of this code.
(F) In the event that the junk car is not thus repossessed within the 60 days as hereinabove related,
the Chief of the Police Department shall be authorized to cause the junk car to be advertised for sale and
to sell the same after two advertisements, once each week, in some newspaper of general circulation
printed and published in the English language in the city, which advertisement shall describe the junk
car and shall state the amount of the lien. In addition to this advertisement, the Chief of the Police
Department shall notify the owner thereof at his or her last known address, if the owner is known or
ownership can be ascertained, by registered mail, that the junk car will be sold at public auction to
satisfy the lien thereon, within 15 days after the notice is mailed. If the owner of the junk car does not
claim the same and satisfy the lien thereon, the junk car may then be sold at public auction to the highest
and best bidder for cash, and any owner or lien holder may become the purchaser thereof, and the
proceeds from the sale shall be used to pay the lien and storage charges and other expenses, including
expenses for advertising, mailing of notices, and other expenses.
(G) Any person or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of this section or fail to
comply therewith or with any of the requirements hereof shall, for each and every violation or noncompliance,
upon conviction, be fined.
C 83 Code, § 6-57) (Am. Ord. 1070, passed 10-19-87; Am. Ord. 1115, passed 12-18-89) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
\\_
CHAPTER 95: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Section
Driveways; Curb and Gutter Modification
95.01 Definition
95. 02 CompJiance required
95.03 Permit required for construction
95.04 Permit review
95.05 Bond requirement
95.06 Damages and violations; liability
Streets and Alleys; Excavations
95.20 Unauthorized excavations prohibited
95.21 Excavation permit required; emergency exception
95.22 Excavation petition procedure
95.23 Continuing bond
95.24 Backfill; notice and inspection required
95.25 Barricades and lights required
95 .26 Rerouting of traffic
95 .27 Records
95 .28 Violations
95.40 Required sidewalks
95.41 Exceptions
95.42 Construction specifications
95.43 Construction deadline
Sidewalks
95.44 Role of Streets and Sanitation Superintendent
95.45 Violations
95.46 Variances
Cross--reference:
Private sewers prohibited, see§ 51.15
SideHJalks,- snow, ice, dirt, and garbage removal, see § 93. 03
41
42 Nappanee - General Regulations
DRlVEWAYS; CURB AND GUTTER MODIFICATION
§ 95.01 DEFINITION.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
DRIVEWAY. A private thoroughfare for vehicular travel affording access between a public
thoroughfare, street, alley, or public ground and providing ingress to and egress from the private
property.
C 83 Code, § 7-1)
§ 95.02 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
No person, firm, corporation, or other entity shall create or construct a driveway, nor cut or modify
a curb, gutter, street, or any appurtenance thereto except in accordance with the provisions hereinafter
provided.
('83 Code,§ 7-2) Penalty, see§ 10.99
§ 95.03 PERMIT REQUIRED FOR CONSTRUCTION.
(A) Any person, furn, corporation, or other entity desiring to create or construct a driveway shall
first obtain a permit therefor issued by the Board of Public Works and Safety of the city through the
Superintendent of its Department of Streets and Sanitation.
(B) In the event of any emergency wherein the life or lives of citizens or their property is
endangered or in jeopardy by reason of any unforeseen or violent breaking, leaking, or eruption of
existing utility facilities, the repair of which necessitates immediate digging, cutting, or excavation, then
and in that event, the acquisition of the permit may be deferred until a reasonable time after the repair
or other construction activity has been accomplished, but in any event, the permit shall be obtained prior
to completion of the work or prior to completion of backfilling, cementing, or installation of other hard
surface materials.
(C) The person desiring to construct or create a driveway or otherwise construct, alter, or
reconstruct a curb or gutter shall first submit written application therefor on forms provided by the city
and including a sketch showing the location, width, thickness, and slope of the proposed driveway, and
types of materials to be used in the construction.
('83 Code, § 7-3)
·'' :\
Streets and Sidewalks 43
§ 95. 04 PERMIT REVIEW.
The Superintendent of the Streets and Sanitation Department of the city shall review each permit
application and shall inspect the site of the proposed work. The Superintendent may, on behalf of the
Board of Public Works and Safety of the city, approve, disapprove, or approve as modified, the
application.
('83 Code,§ 7-4)
§ 95.05 BOND REQUIREMENT.
{A) The Board of Public Works and Safety may require an applicant granted permission to cut or
modify any curb, gutter, or street for driveway purposes to post bond in an amount in cash or with that
surety as may be approved by the Board in an amount not more than $3,000.
(B) The condition of the bond shall be that the work to be done is thus done and performed in
conformity with the permit granted and that the principal shall properly repair any damage to the curb,
gutter, street, or to the appurtenance, caused by or arising from the construction of the driveway, within
a time to be fixed by the Board.
('83 Code, § 7-5)
§ 95.06 DAMAGES AND VIOLATIONS; LIABILITY.
(A) Any person, firm, or corporation who, in the construction of a driveway or for other deliberate
purposes, damages, destroys, or modifies any curb, gutter, or street without prior written permission
of the Board as hereinabove related, or who does so not in conformity with the permit granted by the
Board, shall pay to the city the cost of the repairs necessary to place the curb, gutter, street, or other
public grounds in as good condition as that which existed prior to the construction activity plus a service
charge equal to 25 % of the cost.
(B) Any person who constructs a driveway or who purposely cuts a curb or gutter without
adherence to the provisions hereof shall be fined.
('83 Code,§ 7-6) Penalty, see§ 10.99
STREETS AND ALLEYS; EXCAVATIONS
§ 95.20 UNAUTHORIZED EXCAVATIONS PROIDBITED.
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this subchapter for any person, firm, or corporation to cause,
---/ allow, suffer, or permit any digging, cutting, or excavating into or upon any public street, alley, or
44 Nappanee - General Regulations
public place or into or through any pavement thereon for any purpose whatsoever within the corporate
limits of the city except in accordance with the provisions hereinafter provided.
(' 83 Code, § 7-33) Penalty, see § 10.99
! 95.21 EXCAVATION PERMIT REQUIRED; EMERGENCY EXCEPTION.
(A) No excavation as described above shall be made until a permit therefor shall be issued by the
Board of Public Works and Safety through the Superintendent of the Department of Streets and Sanitation
of the city.
(B) In the event of any emergency wherein the life or lives of citizens or their property is
endangered or in jeopardy by reason of any unforeseen and violent breaking, leaking, or eruption of
existing utility facilities, the repair of which necessitates immediate digging, cutting, or excavation by
the franchise utility company, then and in that event the acquisition of permits may be deferred until a
reasonable time after the digging or excavation has been accomplished, but in any event, the permit shall
be obtained prior to backfilling; provided, however, that in the event that work or services are contracted
for by the Board of Public Works and Safety, by the nature of which a performance and maintenance
bond is submitted by the contractor, then and in that event the terms and specifications of this subchapter
shall be inapplicable to and for this work and services.
(' 83 Code, § 7-34)
§ 95.22 EXCAVATION PETITION PROCEDURE.
(A) Filing procedure for repairs, maintenance, or connecting existing works.
(1) Any person, frrm, or corporation desiring to make an opening or excavation for the purpose
of repairing, maintaining, or tapping existing pipes, sewers, telephone cables and wires, or conduits shall
file with the Superintendent of the Department of Streets and Sanitation a petition for the same which
shall state the location of the proposed openbtg and the purpose thereof and the date and hour for the
commencement of the work.
(2) A bond may also be required which is payable to the city in a sum of not less than $300
and/or in an amount as the Board of Public Works and Safety deems necessary.
(' 83 Code, § 7-35)
(B) Filing procedure for new work.
(1) Any person, firm, or corporation desir.iilg to make an opening or excavation for the purpose
of extending or constructing new water, gas, underground telephone or electric lines, or sewers shall file
with the Board of Public Works and Safety acting by and through tb.e Superintendent of the Department
of Streets and Sanitation a petition for the same complying with all of the conditions and requirements
set forth in this subchapter.
'· '
·--- _/
Streets and Sidewalks 45
(2) In addition thereto, a scale map or drawing indicating the location of the works, and in the
case of sewers, the size, materials, and constructing specifications, shall be submitted for approval by
the Boaxd of Public Works and Safety.
C 83 Code, § 7-36)
§ 95.23 CONTINUING BOND.
A single or continuing bond may be given to embrace all the work of the petitioner for the period
of time of one year after the execution of the same which bond shall be in the sum set by the Board of
Public Works and Safety.
C 83 Code, § 7-37)
§ 95.24 BACKFILL; NOTICE AND INSPECTION REQUIRED.
(A) Any person having received a permit under the provisions of this subchapter, whether for
repairs, maintenance, or new installations, shall notify the Superintendent of the Department of Streets
and Sanitation before backfilling any excavation.
(B) The Superintendent of the Department of Streets and Sanitation shall thereupon inspect that
work, and if the same be completed in good and workmanlike manner to the satisfaction of the
Superintendent, the excavation may be backfilled with materials as are designated and directed to be used
for this backftlling by the Superintendent. The earth and materials which were excavated shall be used
and exploited in the backfilling; provided, however, that if any part of the excavation, digging, or cutting
was made through any type of pavement or is in any way within the traveled portion of any street, alley,
or public way, no more than a depth of the first 12 inches of the backfill shall contain that earth and
materials, and the balance of the backfill shall be with gravel or other materials as may be directed to
be used by the Superintendent, all of which backfill, whether with the same earth and materials or gravel,
shall be thoroughly tamped. All excess earth and materials not used in backfilling shall be hauled away.
(C) For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply unless the context clearly
IDdicates or requires a different meaning.
TRAVELED PORTION. Includes those areas of land used for public vehicular traffic,
approaches to drives on public property, and public sidewalks.
('83 Code, § 7-38)
§ 95.25 BARRICADES AND LIGHTS REQUIRED.
Proper barricades and danger lights shall be maintained by the petitioner to whom a permit is issued
until the excavation has been properly filled and all pavements and walks repaired as herein provided.
(' 83 Code, § 7-39)
46 Nappanee - General Regulations
§ 95.26 REROUTING OF TRAFFIC.
If, in the interest of public safety and convenience, traffic must be rerouted to permit the work of
a petitioner, the Superintendent of the Department of Streets and Sanitation shall assist the petitioner in
the placing of signs and markings which will aid in the orderly rerouting of traffic. The Superintendent
shall thereupon immediately notify the Chief of Police and the Chief of the Fire Department that a certain
street or alley is temporarily closed.
C 83 Code, § 7-40)
§ 95.27 RECORDS.
The Superintendent of the Department of Streets and Sanitation shall retain all petitions received and
copies of all permits granted under the provisions of this subchapter in the permanent files of his or her
office. He or she shall, however, tum over all maps, drawings, and specifications referred to in
§ 95.22(B) of this code to the city's Civil Engineer when the work is completed.
C 83 Code, § 7-42)
§ 95.28 VIOLATIONS.
Any person who violates any of the provisions of any of the sections of this subchapter shall be
frned.
('83 Code, § 7-43) Penalty, see§ 10.99
SIDEWALKS
§ 95.40 REQUIRED SIDEWALKS.
(A) The owner(s) of any lot(s) or part(s) of lots, or parcel(s) of land abutting on any street in the
city or any addition to or extension of the city shall be required to construct, maintain, and keep in repair
a sidewallc(s) along those lots or parcels of land, when so ordered and directed by the City Council as
hereinafter provided.
C 83 Code, § 7-45)
(B) It shall be mandatory that a sidewalk be constructed along the side of any public streets where
a building permit has been issued for any type of new residential, commercial, or public structure on any
parcel of real estate which is contiguous to the street. The sidewalk shall run the entire length of the
frontage owned by the individual or entity requiring the building permit. In the event the real property
is immediately contiguous to more than one street, then a sidewalk must be constructed along the entire
length of each property where that property abuts a public street.
('83 Code,§ 7-51) (Ord. 1160, passed 11-16-92)
: .1
Sir.ets and Sidewalks 47
§ 95.41 EXCEPTIONS.
This subchapter shall not require the construction of sidewalks on any real estate located in an
industrial district, as shown in the city zoning map.
('83 Code,§ 7-53) (Ord. 1160, passed 11-16-92)
§ 95.42 CONSTRUCTION SPECIFICATIONS.
(A) All of the sidewalks hereafter constructed within the city or within any extension or addition
to the city shall be constructed of first class cement material of proper mixture, laid down on proper
gravel substructure and in accordance with specifications to be furnished by the City Council, whether
the same is ordered by the City Council, or done voluntarily by the owner of the property benefitted,
without previous order.
(B) The surface of all sidewalks hereafter constructed shall be finished with a wooden float or
wooden trowel in a manner so as to leave a rough surface, and no sidewalk shall be given a smooth
surface by use of a steel trowel or any other means whatsoever.
C 83 Code, § 7-46)
(C) The width of all sidewalks hereafter constructed shall be commensurate with the walks already
constructed unless otherwise ordered by the City Council.
C 83 Code, § 7-47)
(D) All sidewalks constructed pursuant to this subchapter shall meet the following specifications fur
sidewalks within the city.
(1) Sidewalks must have a minimum width of four feet.
(2) Sidewalks shall be six inches thick at drives and at least four inches thick in all other
locations. Sidewalks shall be Portland Cement type in accordance with the Standard Specifications of
the state Department of Transportation, latest edition, with expansion joints every 48 feet and control
joints every six feet.
(3) Below all sidewalks there shall be a compacted sand base at least two inches deep.
(4) ADA-compliant ramps for wheelchairs and bicycles shall be provided on all sidewalks.
Ramps are to be located at all intersections and other transition access points.
(Ord. 1260, passed 10-5-98)
48 Nappanee - General Regulations
§ 95.43 CONSTRUCTION DEADLINE.
Any sidewalk required to be constructed pursuant to this subchapter must be completed within 60
days after the completion of the structure for which the building permit referenced in § 95 .40(B) of this
code is required.
(' 83 Code, § 7-54) (Ord. 1160, passed 11-16-92)
§ 95.44 ROLE OF STREETS AND SANITATION SUPERINTENDENT.
The Superintendent of Streets and Sanitation under the direction of the City Council shall
superintend the construction and repair of all sidewalks within the city limits.
('83 Code, § 7-48)
§ 95.45 VIOLATIONS.
The penalty for a violation of this subchapter shall be a fine for each day that the sidewalk is not
constructed. For purposes of assessing a penalty under this subchapter, there shall be no penalty charged
for any day that construction of the sidewalk is not completed which is within 60 days after the
completion of the structure for which the building permit referenced in § 95 .40(B) hereof was required.
('83 Code,§ 7-54a) (Ord. 1160, passed 11-16-92) Penalty, see§ 10.99
§ 95.46 VARIANCES.
(A) Any party wishing to obtain a variance to·stay the application of this subchapter must file a
petition for variance pursuant to the terms of this code of ordinances within 60 days after the completion
of the structure or other improvements referenced in§ 95.40(B) hereof.
(B) If a timely petition for variance has been made, then enforcement of this subchapter shall be
stayed until there has been a decision rendered by the Board of Zoning Appeals and all remedies from
the application of that decision, including any judicial review, have been exhausted.
('83 Code, § 7-54a) (Ord. 1160, passed 11-16-92)
" '
CHAPfER 96: STREET TREE REGULATIONS
Section
General. Provisions
96.01 Definitions
96.02 Arborists; license and bond required
96.03 Review by City Council; right of appeal
96.04 Violations
City Tree Board
96.15 Establishment; organization
96.16 Members; term of office
96. 17 Compensation
96.18 Duties and responsibilities
96.19 Operation
Tree Planting Regulations
96.30 Desirable and undesirable tree species; size classes
96.31 Spacing
96. 32 Distance from curb and sidewalk
96.33 Distance from street corner and fireplug
96.34 Distance from utility wires
Tree Care and Maintenance
96.45 City authority to plant, maintain, or remove
96.46 Unlawful acts
96.47 Pruning; clearance requirements
96.48 Dead or diseased tree removal on private property
96.49 Removal of stumps
96.50 Interference with city agents unlawful
49
50 Nappanee - General Regulations
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 96.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
PARK TREES. Trees, shrubs, bushes, and all other woody vegetation in public parks having
individual names and all areas owned by the city, or to which the public has free access as a park.
STREET TREES. Trees, shrubs, bushes, and all other woody vegetation on land lying between
property lines on either side of all streets, avenues, or ways within the city.
('83 Code,§ 6-75) (Ord. 1166, passed 1-25-93)
§ 96.02 ARBORISTS; LICENSE AND BOND REQUIRED.
It shall be unlawful for any person or firm to engage in the business or occupation of pruning,
treating, or removing street or park trees within the city without frrst applying for and procuring a
license. The license fee shall be in the amount specified in§ 38.15, paid annually in advance; provided.,
however, that no license shall be required of any public service company, including electric utilities and
their agents and contractors, or city employees doing this work in the pursuit of their public service
endeavors. Before any license shall be issued, each applicant shall first file evidence of possession of
liability insurance in the minimum amounts of $300,000 for bodily injury and $50,000 for property
damage, indemnifying the city or any person injured or damaged resulting from the pursuit of endeavors
as herein described.
C 83 Code, § 6-92) (Ord. 1168, passed 4-19-93) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 96.03 REVIEW BY CITY COUNCIL; RIGHT OF APPEAL,
The City Council shall have the right to review the conduct, acts, and decisions of the City Tree
Board. Any person may appeal from any ruling or order of the City Tree Board to the City Council,
who may hear the matter and make final decisions.
C 83 Code, § 6-93) (Ord. 1168, passed 4-19-93)
§ 96,04 VIOLATIONS.
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be, upon conviction or a plea of guilty,
subject to a fine.
C 83 Code, § 6-94) (Ord. 1168, passed 4-19-93) Penalty, see § 10.99
Street Tree Regulations 51
CITY TREE BOARD
§ 96.15 ESTABLISHMENT; ORGANIZATION.
There is created and established a City Tree Board for the city which shall consist of three members,
citizens and residents of this city, who shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the City
Council. Any application for permit or approval from the Tree Board shall be directed to the office of
the City Clerk-Treasurer.
('83 Code, § 6-76) (Ord. 1166, passed 1-25-93)
§ 96.16 MEMBERS; TERM OF OFFICE.
The terms of the three persons to be appointed by the Mayor shall be three years. In the event that
a vacancy shall occur during the term of any member, his or her successor shall be appointed for the
unexpired portion of the term.
('83 Code,§ 6-77) (Ord. 1166, passed 1-25-93)
§ 96.17 COMPENSATION.
Members of the Board shall serve without compensation.
('83 Code,§ 6-78) (Ord. 1166, passed 1-25-93)
§ 96.18 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES,
(A) It shall be the responsibility of the Board to study, investigate, counsel, and develop andfor
update annually, and administer a written plan for the care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting,
removal, or disposition of trees and shrubs in parks, along streets, and in other public areas. The plan
will be presented annually to the City Council and upon their acceptance and approval shall constitute
the official comprehensive city tree plan for the city.
(B) The Board, when requested by the City Council, shall consider, investigate, make findings,
report, and recommend upon any special matter or question coming within the scope of its work.
C 83 Code, § 6-79) (Ord. 1168, passed 4-19-93)
§ 96.19 OPERATION.
The Board shall choose its own officers, make its own rules and regulations, and keep a journal of
its proceedings. A majority of the members shall be a quorum for the transaction of business .
. ../ ('83 Code,§ 6-80) (Ord. 1168, passed 4-19-93)
52 Nappanee - General Regulations
TREE PLANTING REGULATIONS
§ 96.30 DESIRABLE AND UNDESIRABLE TREE SPECIES; SIZE CLASSES.
(A) The City Tree Board develops and maintains a list of desirable trees for planting along streets
in three size classes based on mature height:
(1) Small trees: Under 20 feet:
(2) Medium trees: 20 to 40 feet; and
(3) Large trees: Over 40 feet.
(B) Lists of trees not suitable for planting will also be created by the Tree Board.
C 83 Code, § 6-81) (Ord. 1168, passed 4-19-93)
§ 96.31 SPACING.
The spacing of street trees will be in accordance with the three species size classes listed in§ 96.30
above, and no trees may be planted closer together than the following, except in special plantings
designed or approved by a landscape architect:
(A) Small trees: 30 feet;
(B) Medium trees: 40 feet; and
(C) Large trees: 50 feet.
('83 Code,§ 6-82) (Ord. 1168, passed4-19-93) Penalty, see§ 10.99
§ 96.32 DISTANCE FROM CURB AND SIDEWALK.
The distance trees may be planted from curbs or curblines and sidewalks will be in accordance with
the three species size classes listed in§ 96.30 of this code, and no trees may be planted closer to any
curb or sidewalk than the following:
(A) Small trees: Two feet;
(B) Medium trees: Three feet; and
(C) Large trees: Four feet.
C 83 Code, § 6-83) (Ord. 1168, passed 4-19-93) Penalty, see § 10.99
Street Tree Regulations 53
§ 96.33 DISTANCE FROM STREET CORNER AND FIREPLUG.
No street tree shall be planted within 35 feet of any street corner, measured from the point of nearest
intersecting curbs or curblines. No street tree shall be planted within ten feet of any fireplug.
('83 Code,§ 6-84) (Ord. 1168, passed4-19-93) Penalty, see§ 10.99
§ 96.34 DISTANCE FROM UTILITY WIRES.
No street trees other than those species listed as small trees in§ 96.30 of this code may be planted
under or within ten feet of any overhead utility wire.
(' 83 Code, § 6-85) (Ord. 1168, passed 4-19-93) Penalty, see§ 10.99
TREE CARE AND MAINTENANCE
§ 96.45 CITY AUTHORITY TO PLANT, MAINTAIN, OR REMOVE.
(A) The city shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain, and remove trees, plants, and shrubs
within the lines of all streets, alleys, avenues, lanes, squares, and public grounds, as may be necessary
to insure public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of public grounds.
(B) The City Tree Board may remove or cause or order to be removed, any tree or part thereof
which is in unsafe condition or which by reason of its nature is injurious to sewers, electric power lines,
gas lines, water lines, or other public improvements, or is infected with any injurious fungus, insect, or
other pest. This section does not prohibit the planting of street trees by adjacent property owners,
providing that the selection and location of those trees is in accordance with§§ 96.30 through 96.34 of
this code and with approval from the City Tree Board as to species and location of the tree.
('83 Code,§ 6-86) (Ord. 1168, passed4-19-93)
§ 96.46 UNLAWFUL ACTS.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person other than a person appointed by the city or the Tree Board
to fasten or attach, in any way, to any street tree, park tree, or other tree on public property, any rope,
wire, sign, poster, handbill, or other object. It shall further be unlawful for any person or firm, other
than as appointed by the city or the Tree Board, to prune, spray, treat, top, or remove any street tree,
park tree, or other tree on public property, except that the pruning, spraying, treating, topping or
removal of vegetation utilized as a hedge shall not be prohibited.
(B) For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
54 Nappanee - General Regulations
TOPPING. The severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three inches in diameter
within the tree's crown to a degree so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree.
(C) Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes, or certain trees under utility wires or other
obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical may be exempted from this chapter at the
determination of the City Tree Board.
('83 Code,§ 6-87) (Ord. 1168, passed 4-19-93) Penalty, see§ 10.99
§ 96.47 PRUNING; CLEARANCE REQUIREMENTS.
Every owner of any tree overhanging any street or right-of-way within the city shall prune the
branches so that the branches shall not (severely) obstruct the light from any street lamp or obstruct the
view of any street intersection and so that there shall be a clear space of 13 feet above the street surface
or eight feet above the sidewalk surface. The owners shall remove all dead, diseased, or dangerous
trees, or broken or decayed limbs which constitute a menace to the safety oftbe public. The city shall
have the right to prune any tree or shrub on private property when it interferes with the proper spread
of light along the street from a street light or interferes with visibility of any traffic-control device or sign
or sight triangle at intersections. Tree limbs that grow near high voltage electrical conductors shall be
maintained clear of those conductors by the electric utility company in compliance with any applicable
franchise agreements. A utility tree trimming policy must be reviewed by the utility company and City
Tree Board prior to any trimming by the utility company,
('83 Code,§ 6-88) (Ord. 1168, passed 4-19-93)
§ 96.48 DEAD OR DISEASED TREE REMOVAL ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
The city shall have the right to cause the removal of any dead or diseased trees on private property
within the city, when those trees constitute a hazard to life and property, or harbor insects or disease
which constitute a potential threat to other trees within the city. The City Tree Board will notify in
writing the owners of these trees. Removal shall be done by the owners at their own expense within 60
days after the date of service of notice. In the event of failure of the owners to comply with these
provisions, the city shall have the authority to remove the trees and charge the cost of removal on the
owners' property tax notice.
(' 83 Code, § 6-89) (Ord. 1168, passed 4-19-93)
§ 96.49 REMOVAL OF STUMPS.
All stumps of street and park trees shall be removed below the surface of the ground so that the top
of the stump shall not project above the surface of the ground.
(' 83 Code, § 6-90) (Ord. 1168, passed 4-19-93)
'
Street Tree Regulations 55
§ 96.50 INTERFERENCE WITH CITY AGENTS UNLAWFUL.
It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay, or interfere with the City Tree Board, or any
of its agents, while engaging in and about the planting, cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying, or
removing of any street trees, park trees, or trees on private grounds, as authorized in this chapter.
(' 83 Code, § 6·91) (Ord. 1168, passed 4·19·93) Penalty, see § 10.99
56 Nappanee - General Regulations
: i
CHAPTER 97: PARKS AND RECREATION
Section
Protection of Park Facilities, Plants, and Wildlife
97 .01 Damage or removal of parks property prohibited
97. 02 Damage or removal of trees and plants prohibited
97.03 Littering, dumping, and pollution prohibited
97 .04 Injury, disturbance, or removal of animals prohibited
Park Usage and Conduct Regulations
97 .15 Park hours restricted
97 .16 Advertising restricted
97 .17 Disorderly conduct prohibited
97 .18 Explosives, weapons, and missiles prohibited
97 .19 Camping restricted
97 .20 Swim.ming restricted
97 .21 Kites and toy airplanes, boats, and automobiles restricted
97 .22 Animals at large prohibited
97 .23 Alcoholic beverages and dangerous drugs prohibited
Traffic Regulations
97 .35 Obedience to police and traffic-control devices required
97 .36 Restricted vehicles
97 .37 Careless driving prohibited
97. 38 Driving off roadways prohibited
97 .39 Soliciting on roadways prohibited
97.40 Speed limit
Cross-reference:
Bicycle and Pedestrian Pathway, see §§ 72.40 through 72.44
Department of Parks and Recreation; organization, see § 35.16
Public officials,· surety bonds, see§ 32.01
57
58 Nappanee - General Regulations
PROTECTION OF PARK FACILITIES, PLANTS, AND WIWLIFE
§ 97.01 DAMAGE OR REMOVAL OF PARKS PROPERTY PROHIBITED.
No person shall injure, deface, displace, remove, fill in, raise, destroy, or tamper with any drive,
path, walk, bridge, or approach thereto; take up, remove, or carry away any asphalt, curb, flagstone,
rock, stone, gravel, sand, clay, or earth; make any excavation of any kind; or harvest, cut, injure, or
remove, or injure, mutilate, deface, displace, remove, or destroy any wall, fence, shelter, seat, statue,
monument, or other structure, building, post, railing, bench, seat-platform, stand, tree guard, telephone,
pipe, or main for conducting gas, water, or wires, fuses, fuse box, or switch boxes, or any hydrant,
sewer, drain, pipe, main, receiving basin, covering, manholes, or vent forming a part thereof, or any
appurtenances or appendage conforming therewith; or injure, deface, destroy, or mutilate, or remove
or carry away, or displace, or tamper with any property or equipment, real or personal, owned by the
city or under the jurisdiction, control, or supervision of the Board, or appertaining to the creation,
control, government, use, or maintenance, of any park or park street; or injure, deface, displace,
remove, or destroy any sign, notice, inscription, post, or monument, erected or marked for any purpose,
or any milestone, danger sign or signal, guide sign or post, or any signaling device, sanctioned,
installed, or placed by the Board or its duly authorized agent, or by the Police Department of the city
within any park or upon any park street for the purpose of directing, restricting, or regulating traffic,
establishing zones, or giving information or directions to the public; or interfere with any lamp,
lamppost, or gas or electric light apparatus, or light or extinguish the light therein; or attach, string,
adjust, or suspend any wires or similar object in, on, or over, any part of any park or park street.
('83 Code,§ 5-1) Penalty, see§ 10.99
§ 97.02 DAMAGE OR REMOVAL OF TREES AND PLANTS PROHIBITED.
No person shall in any park or park street destroy, cut, break, deface, mutilate, injure, disturb, sever
from the ground, or remove any growing thing, including, but not limited to, any plant, flower, flower
bed, shrub, tree, or growth, or any branch, stem, fruit, or leaf thereof; nor set fire to any timber, tree,
shrubs, plants, flowers, grass, or plant growth, or suffer any fire upon other land to extend into park
land; nor hitch any horse or other animal to, or leave the same standing near enough to injure any tree,
shrub, lawn, or grass plot.
(' 83 Code, § 5-2) Penalty, see§ 10.99
§ 97.03 LITTERING, DUMPING, AND POLLUTION PROHIBITED.
(A) No person shall take into, carry through, leave in, or throw, cast, lay, drop, or discharge :into
or on, or suffer or permit any servant, agent, employee, person, or animal in his or her charge to take
into, carry through, leave in, throw, cast, lay, drop, or discharge into or on any park or park street any
rubbish of any sort. The leaving, except in receptacles provided for refuse, or the leaving or littering
•
>. i
Parks and Recreation 59
of newspapers, or other papers, in a park is prohibited. No person shall throw, cast, lay, or deposit any
bottle or piece of crockery or any glass or glassware or any part thereof, or metallic or other substance
with sharp edges or projections in any park.
(B} No person shall throw, cast, lay, drop, or discharge into or leave in the waters used for
swimming or water in any park or in any storm sewer, or drain flowing into those waters, any substance,
matter, or thing, liquid or solid, which may or shall result in the pollution of the waters.
C 83 Code, § 5-3) Penalty, see§ 10.99
§ 97.04 INJURY, DISTURBANCE, OR REMOVAL OF ANJMAl.S PROIDBITED.
No person shall, within any park, molest, kill, wound, trap, hunt, take, chase, shoot, throw missiles
at, remove, or have in his or her possession any animal, bird, bird's nest, or squirrel's nest, or remove
the young of any animal or the eggs or young of any bird.
C 83 Code, § 5-8) Penalty, see§ 10.99
PARK USAGE AND CONDUCT REGULATIONS
§ 97.15 PARK HOURS RESTRICTED.
It shall be unlawful for any person to remain in any park, golf course, playground, picnic,
swimming area, or pavilion, either on foot or in vehicles of any type, between 11 p.m. and 6 a.m. unless
otherwise posted, except by permit.
('83 Code,§ 5-18) Penalty, see§ 10.99
§ 97.16 ADVERTISING RESTRICTED.
No person without written permission from the Board or its duly authorized agent shall distribute
or display any flag, banner, sign, or other matter for advertising purposes within any park or park street.
No person shall display, by means of aircraft, kite, balloon, aerial bomb, or any other device, any flag,
banner, sign, or any other matter for advertising purposes above the surface of any park street. No
person shall operate any musical instrument, or drum, or loudspeaker, amplifier, or siren, or cause any
noise to be made within any park or upon any park street for advertising purposes or for the purpose of
attracting to any exhibition, performance, show, or other spectacle.
('83 Code,§ 5-4) Penalty, see§ 10.99
§ 97.17 DISORDERLY CONDUCT PROHIBITED.
No person shall do the following in any park or park street:
60 Nappanee - General Regulations
(A) Disobey an order of a police officer or any park employee designated by the Board to give
orders, or disobey or disregard the notices, prohibitions, instructions, or directions on any park sign,
including rules and regulations of golf courses, swimming pools, playground areas, recreation centers,
or shelter houses posted on the grounds or buildings or structures connected with or used for any purpose
under jurisdiction, control, operation, or supervision of the Board;
(B) Use threatening, abusive, or insuJting language;
(C) Do, engage in, or aid or abet any obscene or indecent act;
(D) Throw, cast, or propel stones or other missiles;
(E) Solicit alms, subscriptions, or contributions for any purpose;
(F) Molest or annoy any persons;
(G) Interfere with, encumber, obstruct, or render dangerous, any part of a park or park street;
(H) Climb or lie upon any wall, fence, shelter, seat, or other structure;
(I) Do any act tending to or amounting to a breach of peace;
(J) Enter or leave any park except at established entrance ways or exits, at established times; use,
or gain admittance to, or attempt to use or gain admittance to, any facilities or event in any park for the
use of which, or admittance to which, a charge is made, without paying the charge or price fixed by the
Board or its duly authorized agent or officer;
(K) Engage in, instigate, or encourage a contention or fight;
(L) Do, aid, abet, or assist in doing any act injurious to any person, animal, or property within any
park or park street;
(M) Dress or undress behind shrubs or other structures, or in any place not designated by the Board
-for those purposes;
(N) Act as crier, or advertiser, through the media of voice, public address system, amplifier,
loudspeaker, or other mechanical device in parks or park streets; or
(0) Appear in or upon any park or park street white intoxicated or under the influence of
intoxicating liquor or narcotics.
(' 83 Code, § 5-5) Penalty, see§ 10.99
Parks and Recreation 61
§ 97.18 EXPLOSIVES, WEAPONS, AND MISSILES PROIDBITED.
(A) No person shall bring into or have in his or her possession in any park or park street any
firearms, slingshots, firecrackers, torpedoes, fireworks, or other missile propelling instruments or
explosives.
(B) Shooting or propulsion of any missile, pellet, shot, arrow, dart, or other thing by means of any
firearm, compressed air or gas propulsion device, bow, slingshot, or propelling device of any kind,
nature, or description, into, upon, across, through, or against any lands, the air above same, or the
waters, or any ways, walks, buildings, structures, swimming pools, or the interior of any structures,
shelters, buildings, or facilities, owned or under the control, operation, supervision., or management of
the Board, is prohibited, unless done under a permit granted by the Board within a regularly conducted
event authorized by or conducted by the Board.
('83 Code,§ 5-6) Penalty, see§ 10.99
§ 97.19 CAMPING RESTRICTED.
No person shall tent or maintain a tent, shelter, or camp in any park without a permit from the Board
or its duly authorized agents.
(' 83 Code, § 5-7) Penalty, see § 10. 99
§ 97.20 SWIMMING RESTRICTED.
No persons shall swim, wade, or bathe in any waters under the jurisdiction, control, operation, or
supervision of the Board except at those times and in those places as the Board may designate or maintain
as swimming areas. No person shall bathe, wade, or swim, or appear, in any designated bathing area
unless covered with a swimming suit. No person shall dress or undress in any park except in places as
may be designated or maintained for that purpose.
('83 Code,§ 5-9) Penalty, see§ 10.99
§ 97 .21 KITES AND TOY AIRPLANES, BOATS, AND AUTOMOBILES RESTRICTED.
No person shall, in any park, engage in toy aviation, model boating, model automobiling, or model
airplane flying, except at places designated or maintained therefor.
('83 Code,§ 5-10) Penalty, see§ 10.99
§ 97.22 ANIMALS AT LARGE PROHIBITED.
No person owning or being custodian or having control of any animal shall cause or permit the
animal to go at large in any park or park street. A dog may be brought into a park or park street
provided that the dog is continuously restrained by a leash not exceeding six feet in length. Any animal
62 Nappanee - General Regulations
found at large may be seized and impounded or disposed of pursuant to the laws or ordinances of the
state or of the city, in relation to the disposal of stray animals on the highways or other public places.
('83 Code,§ 5-11) Penalty, see§ 10.99
§ 97.23 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES AND DANGEROUS DRUGS PROHIBITED.
No person shall bring dangerous drugs, beer, ale, or other alcoholic beverages into any park, or
consume, have in possession, sell, give away, or handle dangerous drugs or intoxicating or alcoholic
beverages in any park street.
('83 Code,§ 5-12) Penalty, see§ 10.99
TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
§ 97.35 OBEDIENCE TO POLICE AND TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES REQUIRED.
All persons shall, at all times, heed and comply with directions of the police officers indicated by
gesture or otherwise in using parks or park streets and shall further comply with speed limits and
directions on traffic signs along the routes in the parks and along park streets. Directions on these tr.i.ffic
signs may be disregarded only on an order of a police officer.
(' 83 Code, § 5-13) Penalty, see§ 10.99
§ 97 .36 RESTRICTED VEHICLES.
(A) Commercial vehicles. Vehicles constructed or adapted for or engaged in the carrying of
merchandise and trucks and trailers are prohibited from using any park except where necessary to make
deliveries in that park.
(B) Motorcycles and the like. Motorcycles, motor bikes, mini-bikes, snowmobiles, or any other
motor-powered bikes or vehicles are prohibited in any area under the control of the Board, except areas
that may be designated by the Board for that use.
('83 Code,§ 5-14) Penalty, see§ 10.99
§ 97.37 CARELESS DRIVING PROHIBITED.
No person shall in any park operate, drive, or propel, or cause or permit to be operated, driven, or
propelled, any vehicle recklessly or negligently or at a speed or in a manner so as to endanger the life,
limb, safety, comfort, or property of any person or persons.
C 83 Code, § 5-15) Penalty, see§ 10.99
-··'
Parks and Recreation 63
§ 97.38 DRIVING OFF ROADWAYS PROHIBITED.
No vehicles shall be operated or driven off the improved or paved roadways of any park. Disabled
vehicles may be driven off the roadway so as to prevent obstruction of traffic, but no disabled vehicle
shall be permitted to remain in a park for a longer period than two hours except in designated parking
areas.
('83 Code,§ 5-16) Penalty, see§ 10.99
§ 97.39 SOLICITING ON ROADWAYS PROIDBITED.
No peddler, vendor, hawker, or huckster shall stop or remain on any part of the right~of-way or
service roads or entrances.
('83 Code,§ 5-17) Penalty, see§ 10.99
§ 97.40 SPEED LIMIT.
No person operating, driving, or propelling any vehicle shall proceed at a speed greater than the
maximum speed :indicated by signs, but in no case shall the maximum speed exceed 20 miles per hour.
,. · ('83 Code,§ 5-17) Penalty, see§ 10.99
64 Nappanee~ General Regulations
Section
98.01
98.02
98.03
98.04
98.05
98.06
98.07
98.08
98.09
98.10
98.11
98.12
98.13
98.14
98.15
CHAPTER 98: ANIMALS
Definitions
General airima1 care requirements
Actions by animals affecting circumstances off the owner's property
Motor vehicle accidents involving animals
Animals in motor vehicle
Poisoning of animals
Maximum number of dogs or cats, which may be located on a premises
Owners or agents responsible for removing animal wastes
Animal bites
Vaccination of dogs, cats and ferrets required
Interference with the Police Department or animal control officer prohibited
Confinement by other than city officials; notice required
Animal handling procedures
Dangerous animal requirements
Requirements to possess a dangerous animal
98. 99 Penalty
Statutory reference:
Authority to impose restrictions such as immunization, see J.C. 36-8-2-5
§ 98.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
ABANDON. As set forth in I.C. 35-46-3--0.5 "means to desert an animal or to leave the animal
permanently in a place without making provision for adequate long term care of the animal. The term
does not include leaving an animal in a place that is temporarily vacated for the protection of human life
during a disaster."
AGENT. Any person 18 years of age or older, who is authorized by the animal's owner to act on
such owner's behalf.
65
66 Nappanee - General Regulations
ALTERED ANIMAL. Any animal that has been physically altered to prevent it from procreating.
ANIMAL. As set forth in Indiana Code "anllnal does not include a human being."
ANIMAL CONTROL AGENCY. Any governmental or private entity charged with or subcontracted
with for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter for and on behalf of the city.
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER. A civilian person employed or appointed by a governmental
agency, an animal shelter or animal control facility for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this
chapter.
ANIMAL PERFORMANCE OR EXHIBITION. Any spectacle, performance, clisplay, act,
exhibition, or event in which an animal or animals are used.
ANIMAL SHELTER. A facility or vehicle operated by a governmental or private entity for the
purpose of providing or promoting animal welfare and humane treatment of animals. This shall include
not-for-profit businesses incorporated for the purpose of promoting animal welfare.
AT LARGE. An animal that is:
(1) Not on a leash and is off the property of its owner, its owner's agent, or its keeper;
(2) On a leash or tether that does not adequately confme the animal to the property of its
owner, its owner's agent, or keeper; or
(3) On a leash that is not otherwise under the immediate control of a person physically capable
of restraining the animal.
AT LARGE EXEMPT. An animal that is engaged in legal hunting activities and is under the direct
control and supervision of its owner or agent.
ATTACK DOG. Any dog that is trained to attack upon command or has attacked a human being,
This defmition excludes K-9 dog corps in use by law enforcement agencies.
AUCTION. Any place or facility where animals are regularly bought, sold, or traded by any means,
except for those facilities otherwise defined in the chapter and animal shelters. This definition shall also
include the groups that sponsor such events,
BITE. To seize, tear, wound, or cut with teeth, resulting in a break in the skin.
CIRCUS. Any performances, which are given for a fee by traveling companies on vacant lots, using
tents, or some other kind of temporary enclosure, for sheltering the public.
i ; '
Animals 67
DANGEROUS ANIMALS.
(I) Any animal which:
(a) Has killed a person;
(b) Has seriously injured a human being;
(c) Has without provocation, attacked, attempted to attack, bitten or belligerently pursued
any hum.an being whether on or off the property of its owner, its owner's agent, or its keeper;
(d) Has attacked or bitten another owned domestic animal while off the property of its
owner, its owner 1s agent, or its keeper;
(e) Has a history, documented with a public agency or its designee, of attacking or biting
humans; and
(f) Has been found to be at-large and has been documented to be at-large by an animal
control officer or police officer on three or more separate occasions in a 12 month period and has been
documented to show aggressive behaviors, including those listed above,
(2) No animal shall be considered a dangerous animal if the animal causes injury or damage
to a person while that person was:
(a) Committing or attempting to commit, at that time a willful trespass or other tort upon
the premises lawfully occupied by the owner of the dog;
(b) Provoking, tormenting, abusing or assaulting the dog or who can be shown to have
repeatedly, in the past, provoked, tormented, abused or assaulted the dog; or
(c) Was committing or attempting to commit a crime.
(3) The animal was:
(a) Responding to pain or injury, or was protecting itself, or its offspring; or
(b) Protecting or defending a human being within the immediate vicinity of the dog from
an attack or assault.
(4) No K-9 patrol dogs or police dogs owned, or kept by, a law enforcement agency shall be
considered a dangerous animal when used in the line of duty or for law enforcement purposes.
(5) If a conflict arises between tb.e provision of this section and oilier sections of this chapter,
the provisions of this section shall prevail due to the public health and safety concerns.
68 Nappanee - General Regulations
DESIGNEE. A person, organization, or entity selected, appointed, or nominated for a particular
purpose or duty.
DOMESTIC ANIMAL. Any animal that is a member of one of the following species:
(!) Dog (Canis Familiarls);
(2) Cat (Fells cattus or Fells domesticus);
(3) Rabbit (Oryctolagus Ouniculus);
(4) Mouse (Mus musculus);
(5) Rat (Tattus);
(6) Guinea pig (Cavis procallus);
(7) Hamster (Mesocriecetus aumtus);
(8) Gerbil (Gerbillus);
(9) Pigeon, homing or racing;
(10) Ferrets.
DOMESTIC COMPANION ANIMAL. Non-wild, non-livestock animal commonly kept as a
household pet.
ESCAPE-PROOF ENCLOSURE. The dangerous animal/attack dog shall be confined, at all times,
within a habitable escape-proof dwelling or an escape-proof kennel. The kennel or cage, by latch, lock,
or bolt, must be a contained enclosure. If chain link fencing is used, it must be a minimum of 11112
gauge. If other fencing is used, it must be of such material that the animal cannot chew, dig, or
otherwise free itself from inside the enclosure. The kennel must be six-sided including the roof and floor.
The bottom must be chain link, concrete, or brick floor and the sides must be buried at least two feet into
the ground or secured to the floor. The top must be chain-link or of an engineered roofing form which
an animal cannot escape. This enclosure must be a minimum of 10' x 10', and must include adequate
structure to protect the animal from all elements. In addition, the enclosure must be kept locked at all
times to prevent both escape and accidental entry. This escape-proof dwelling and/or enclosure must be
approved by the Police Department or its designee prior to use by a dangerous dog or animal.
EXOTIC ANIMAL. Any animal whose normal native habitat is not indigenous to the continental
United States, excluding Alaska and Hawaii. This definition does not include fish, fur bearing animals
commercially bred for the furrier trade, and birds protected under federal laws and regulations.
•
Animals 69
EXPOSED TO RABIES. Any human or non-human, warm-blooded mammal that has been bitten
or exposed to any other animal known or reasonably suspected to have been infected with rabies.
FIGHT. A conflict between two or more animals that is intentionally organized for such purpose.
FOl'VL. Any kind of wild or domestic bird, excluding homing or racing pigeons, canaries, parrots,
or similar types of birds normally kept in cages.
HARBORING. The actions of any person that require an animal to habitually remain, to be lodged
or to be within one's home, store, enclosure, or place of business or any premises on which such person
resides or controls. An animal shall be presumed harbored if it is sheltered for six consecutive days or
more.
HEALTH CARE PROVIDER. Any clinic, physician, veterinarian, nurse, E.M.T. paramedic, first
responder, hospital, emergency room, urgent care clinic, or veterinary clinic, or hospital.
KEEPER. Any person, other than the owner, who has actual or constructive possession of an
animal for the purpose of managing, controlling or caring of such animal.
KENNEL. Any premises wherein any person engages in the business of boarding, breeding,
buying, letting or keeping more than four dogs for the purpose of hire, training for a fee, or selling.
LEASH. A cord, chain, tether, rope, strap, or other such physical restraint.
LIVESTOCK. Non-wild, domestic animals and their kinds, co=nly kept as farm animals,
including those kept for commercial purposes such as:
(!) Cattle-bison, cows or ox;
(2) Sheep;
(3) Llamas;
(4) Goats;
(5) Chicken, turkey, goose, duck;
(6) Swine;
(7) Horse; and
(8) Dookey.
MICROCHIP. A tiny computer chip, implanted underneath the skin of an animal that contains
identification information relating to that animal.
70 Nappanee - General Regulations
MUZZLE. A device constructed of strong, soft material or metal, designed to fasten over the mouth
of an animal, without interfering with its vision or respiration or causing injury to the animal, to prevent
the animaI from biting any person or other animal.
NIP OR SCRATCH. To pinch or squeeze with the teeth or claws, not necessarily brealcing the skin
or damaging any tissue.
OFF PROPERTY. Beyond the legal boundaries of the real property on which the owner, agent,
or keeper resides.
OWNER. Any person 18 years of age or older having temporary or permanent custody of sheltering
or having charge of, harboring, exercising control over, or having property rights to any animal covered
by tbis chapter.
PERFORMING ANIMAL EXHIBIT/ON. Any spectacle, display, act, exhibit or event, other than
a circus, in which performing animals are used.
PET. Any animal kept for pleasure rather than utility.
PET SHOP. Any person, group of persons, partnership, or corporation, whether operated separately
or in connection with another business enterprise, which sells or barters animals.
POLICE DOGS or K-9 PATROL DOGS. A professionally trained dog used by public safety
officers for law enforcement or investigative purposes and activities.
PROVOKED. To deliberately arouse, incite or excite.
QUARANTINE. If the operation of this chapter allows an animal to be quarantined and left in the
charge of the owner, then the animal must be kept in an enclosure which satisfies the requirements of
an enclosure described at§ 98.15(B). To the extent that an animal to be quarantined is not left in the
charge of the owner by the Police Department or an animal control officer, than it shall be kept in an
animal shelter or veterinary hospital as designated by the Police Department.
RABIES VACCINATION. An injection, licensed by the U.S.D.A. and approved by the Indiana
State Board of Health, given to a dog, cat, or other animal by a licensed veterinarian to prevent the
spread of rabies.
RESTllAINT. The securing of an animal by leash or lead, or confining it within the real property
limits of its owner or agent.
RODEO. A performance featuring bronco riding, steer wrestling, calf roping, greased pig contest
or bull riding.
Animals 71
SERIOUS INJURY OR DEATH.
{l) Any bodily injury, which is caused by an animal and is medically documented that:
(a) Causes death to a person;
(b) Creates a substantial risk of death to a person;
(c) Causes serious permanent disfigurement, or unconsciousness; or
(d) Results in a permanent or protracted loss or impairment of a bodily member or organ.
(2) This definition shall not include any nip from an animal.
SERVICE ANIMAL. Any animal that is to assist a disabled person.
STRAY. Any animal that is not under restraint, and/or upon reasonable inquiry by a police or
animal control officer, does not appear to have an owner.
UNPROVOKED. Without incitement or stimulation.
U.S.D.A. The United States Department of Agriculture.
VETERINARIAN. Any person licensed and accredited to practice veterinary medicine in the state.
WILD ANIMAL Any animal, not a domestic, exotic, or livestock animal, with the exception of
small, non-poisonous aquatic or amphibious animals and small cage birds, which are normally found in
the wild state.
ZOOLOGICAL PARK. Any facility, other than a pet shop or kennel, displaying or exhibiting one
or more species of non-domesticated animals, which is operated by a person, partnership, corporation,
or governmental agency that is established for educational purposes and is properly zoned for such use,
and which possesses valid licenses and perlnits as required under federal or state law.
(Ord. 1438, passed 5-17-10)
§ 98.02 GENERAL ANIMAL CARE REQUIREMENTS.
(A) Every owner, or his agent, residing within the city shall be responsible that at all times each
animal of which he or she is the owner or agent:
(1) Is kept in a clean, sanitary, and healthy manner and is not confined so as to be forced to
stand, sit, lie, or eat in its own excrement;
72 Nappanee - General Regulations
(2) Has sufficient and wholesome food and water, which is proper and nutritional for that
species of animal;
(3) If ill, diseased, or injured, receives proper veterinary care as necessary to promote the good
health of the animal and prevent the transmittal of a disease to other animals or human beings;
(4) Is not beaten, ill-treated, overloaded, over-worked, tormented, or otherwise abused or
neglected, or involved in any dog fight, cock fight, bull fight, or other combat between animals or
between animals and humans;
(5) Is not physically altered in any manner by anyone other than a veterinarian, except for
grooming;
(6) Is not abandoned, neglected, or tortured;
(7) Does not become a dangerous animal;
(8) In the case of a dog, cat or ferret over the age of 12 weeks, is properly vaccinated against
rabies by a licensed veterinarian upon which frequency as is specified by state law;
(9) Is properly restrained and not at large;
(10) Is not induced or encouraged to perform through the use of chemical, mechanical,
electrical, or manual devices in a situation which will cause, or is likely to cause, excessive physical
injury or suffering;
(11) Domestic companion animals must live in, or have access to structure, which will protect
that animal from all elements of the weather and will allow that animal to stand, sit and lie down without
restriction, and which is kept in a sanitary manner;
(12) Livestock must have demonstrable protection from the elements to include: windbreaks and
shade; and
(13) Any animal in heat must be restrained or confined so as to prevent unintentional breeding.
(B) Wild or exotic animals may not be kept, except as permitted by applicable federal or state law.
(C) Any police officer shall have the right to enter upon a premises and any building or structure
thereon if he or she shall have a good faith belief that animals are located on such premises and are
endangered, in order to provide care for such animals and to provide for the safety of the public with
regard to any such endangered animal. Unless an emergency exists, such police officer shall first attempt
to contact any known owner of the premises and to gain access tlrrough such owner before entering upon
such premises.
(Ord. 1438, passed 5-17-10) Pemlty, see§ 98.99
Animals
§ 98.03 ACTIONS BY ANIMALS AFFECTING CIRCUMSTANCES OFF THE OWNER'S
PROPERTY.
73
The following actions by animals affecting circumstances off the owner's property shall constitute
violations of this chapter:
(A) Running at-large;
(B) The molestation, attack or other interference by any animal with the freedom of movement of
persons in a public right-of-way by any which occurs without provocation, whether or not on the
property of its owner;
(C) Chasing or interfering with motor vehicles in a public right-of-way;
(D) The attack by any animal of any other owned domestic anbnals while off its' owner's property;
and
(E) Damaging, soiling, defiling, destroying or defecating on any property other than that of its
owner except that it shall not be a violation of this chapter if an act of defecation occurs on a paved
public right-of-way other than a sidewalk or; on private property, on a sidewalk within a public
right-of-way or, on a non-paved portion of a public right-of-way and the requirements of§ 98.08 are
satisfied.
(Ord. 1438, passed 5-17-10) Penalty, see§ 98.99
§ 98.04 MOTOR VEfilCLE ACCIDENTS INVOLVING ANIMALS.
Any person operating a motor vehicle, who knowingly hits, runs over, or causes injury 'to an animal
reasonably thought to be an owned, domestic animal shall immediately notify the Police Department.
Such notice shall include the motorists name, address, phone number, type of animal hit, and the location
of the animal.
(Ord. 1438, passed 5-17-10)
§ 98.05 ANIMALS IN MOTOR VEHICLE.
No animal shall be left in a motor vehicle when the conditions in that vehicle would constitute a
health hazard to that animal, or when the weather would constitute a health hazard to such animal
conimed in said motor vehicle; nor shall any person transport any animal in an unenclosed truck bed or
open section of any vehicle unless the animal is enclosed in a cage which is securely fastened to the
vehicle. A law enforcement officer may act to remedy the hazard by any means, including gaining entry
to impound the endangered animal.
(Ord. 1438, passed 5-17-10) Penalty, see§ 98.99
74 Nappanee - General Regulations
§ 98.06 POISONING OF ANJMALS.
(A) No person shall deposit, dispose or place any poisonous substance on any public or private
property within the unincorporated limits of the city, if a human or owned domestic animal is reasonably
likely to consume or come into contact with such substance.
(B) A person shall not be liable under division (A) in this section for leaving common rat or mouse
poisons or insecticides, in any form, on his or her propert:Y, if the person exercised reasonable care in
restricting a domestic animal's access to such poisons so that only the targeted rodents or insects are
exposed to said poisons.
(Ord. 1438, passed 5-17-10) Penalty, see§ 98.99
§ 98.07 MAX1MUM NUMBER OF DOGS OR CATS, WHICH MAY BE LOCATED ON A
PREMISES.
The maximum number of dogs or cats which may be located upon a premises within the city is
governed by the operation of the city's Unified Subdivision Control Ordinance.
(Ord. 1438, passed 5-17-10) Penalty, see§ 98.99
§ 98.08 OWNERS OR AGENTS RESPONSIBLE FOR REMOVING ANlMAL WASTES.
Any owner or his agent taking the owner's dog or cat outside of the owner's real property limits
must inunediately remove any excrement deposited by the animal on any public or private property,
except in the case of a guide dog for a blind person or service dog for a deaf or physically disabled
person.
(Ord. 1438, passed 5-17-10) Penalty, see§ 98.99
§ 98.09 ANlMAL BITES.
(A) If any person is a victim of an animal bite, he or she shall immediately notify the Police
Department of the incident, and provide a description of the animal and identify, if possible, the owner.
When an animal is determined to have bitten a person, the animal shall be confined in quarantine for a
period of not less than ten days from the date of the bite,
(B) A biting animal may be left in the charge of the owner, under quarantine, unless, in the
judgment of the animal control officer or police officer and based upon considerations of public safety,
the officer determines it should be removed to an animal shelter or veterinary hospital for the period of
observation.
(C) In addition to any other legal obligation prescribed by law, the owner shall pay for all costs
incurred in the quarantine and/or impoundrnent of the animal before such animal will be released. If the
owner is unable or unwilling to pay for said costs, the animal may be humanely euthanized, and the
\
Animals 75
owner shall still remain liable to the animal shelter for any costs incurred in said quarantine and/or
irnpoundment.
(D) If the owner of the quarantined animal cannot be determined, the animal shall be impounded
under the authority and discretion of the Police Department and confined in an animal control facility
or an approved animal care facility designated by the Police Department for a period of observation of
not fewer than ten days.
(E) Unless otherwise provided the city and any of its agents shall comply with the standards set
forth in LC. 15-2.1-6-1throughl.C.15-2.1-6-13, entitled "Rabies".
(Ord. 1438, passed 5-17-10)
§ 98.10 VACCINATION OF DOGS, CATS AND FERRETS REQUIRED.
(A) No animal owner or his agent shall keep or harbor a dog, cat or ferret over the age of 12 weeks
unless it has been vaccinated by a licensed veterinarian with anti-rabies vaccine.
(B) The owner shall maintain proof of an animal's vaccination so that it can be presented to the
Police Department or its agent upon request.
(C) Failure to comply with the provision of this section shall subject the owner of said unvaccinated
dog, cat or ferret to be issued an ordinance or state law (whichever is applicable) citation fur the
violation, subjecting the owner to a fine as set forth in§ 98.16.
(Ord. 1438, passed 5-17-10) Penalty, see§ 98.99
§ 98.11 INTERFERENCE WITH THE POLICE DEPARTMENT OR ANIMAL CONTROL
OFFICER PROHIBITED.
No person shall interfere with or impede a city police officer or an animal control officer in the
performance of his or her duties as set forth in this chapter.
(Ord. 1438, passed5-17-10) Penalty, see§ 98.99
§ 98.12 CONFINEMENT BY OTHER THAN CITY OFFICIALS; NOTICE REQUIRED.
Unless authorized by the owner of an animal, no person shall hold or retain possession of any animal
of which he is not the owner for more than 24 hours without first reporting the possession of the animal
to a police officer, or an animal control agency, or its designee. When reporting possession of an animal,
such person shall give his or her name and address, a description of the animal, a true and complete
statement of the circumstances under which he took possession of the animal, and the precise location
where the animal is confmed.
(Ord. 1438, passed 5-17-10)
76 Nappanee - General Regulations
§ 98.13 ANIMAL HANDLING PROCEDURES.
(A) Any police officer, or animal control officer, may immediately pick up and confine any of the
following animals:
(!) Any animal running at large;
(2) Any unattended animal that is ill, injured, or otherwise in need of emergency care;
(3) Any animal that is reasonably suspected of having rabies; and
(4) Any unattended animal that is exhibiting aggressive or dangerous behavior and is not
sufficiently confined to its own property.
(B) Any police officer may impound the following animals under I.C. 35-46-3-6:
(1) Any animal which has bitten a person pursuant to I.C. 15-20 (Animal Control: dog bites
& livestock-killing dogs);
(2) Any animal that is considered unattended, abused or abandoned under I.C. 35-46-3; and
(3) Any unattended animal for which there is probable cause to believe has been abused or
neglected.
(C) If any dangerous, ferocious, or vicious animal is found at large and cannot be safely captured,
said animal may be tranquilized, slain, or humanely euthanized to prevent harm or undue suffering, by
a police officer or animal control officer to prevent harm.
(D) If stray animals are picked up by, or turned in to, an animal control agency, they shall be
scanned for an identifying microchip unless doing so presents an unnecessary hazard to animalRhandling
personnel. The animal's owner shall be notified immediately.
(E) If an animal is bearing identification containing the owner's address and/or phone number, the
agency shall notify the animal's owner immediately.
(F) If an animal bearing no identification tag or microchip is picked up or turned in to the animal
control facility, and the owner's information is contained in the animal control agency's records, an
attempt shall be made by that agency or the humane officer to return the animal to it's owner as soon as
ill practical after it is picked up or turned in. If the attempt to return the animal is impossible or without
success, the animal control agency shall send a written notice to the control agency and/or the microchip
company (if known). Such notice shall include the information that this agency has the animal and that
unless the animal is claimed by the owner within seven days from the date of notification, the animal may
be placed for adoption or humanely euthanized. This process shall only apply for first time violation.
\
Animals 77
On any subsequent violation, the impounded animals shall be kept for not fewer than five days to permit
their owner's to claim them. After the fifth day, if their owners have not claimed the animal and paid
the required fees, the animal may be placed for adoption or humanely euthanized.
(G) Stray animals will be held at the animal control facility a minimum of five days in order to
pennit their owner's adequate time to reclaim them.
(H) The animal control agency shall have authority to take whatever action is reasonably necessary,
including humane euthanization, to deal with a sick or injured animal, to prevent unnecessary suffering
of the animal.
(I) Nothing contained herein shall limit the animal shelters ability to take whatever action is
reasonably necessary to provide veterinary care by a licensed veterinarian for a sick or injured animal.
(J) Any animal taken into an animal control facility, if not reclaimed by its owner as provided for
herein, shall thereby become the property of the animal control agency and, if not adopted by the public,
may be humanely euthanized.
(K) A police officer may, impound any animal in violation of this section, pursuant to I.C.
35-46-3-6.
(Ord. 1438, passed 5-17-10)
§ 98.14 DANGEROUS ANIMAL REQUIREMENTS.
If an animal kills a person or causes a person serious injury, or meets any of the provisions set forth
in the definitions, the animal may be deemed a dangerous animal. The animal may be impounded until
the requirements of this section are fulfilled. If, in the opinion of the Police Department or its designee,
the animal is too dangerous to keep in any home, dwel1ing, or enclosure, they may request an emergency
court order to have the animal humanely euthanized.
(A) The owner shall be responsible for the costs of caring for the animal during the period of
impoundment, including the costs of boarding and veterinary treatment, if necessary. If the owner
institutes an appeal and the animal is ultimately determined not to be a dangerous animal, the owner shal1
not be charged the costs of boarding the animal.
(B) Upon the impoundment of the animal pursuant to this section, the owner shall be given 48 hours
to show proof of, or apply for, a dangerous dog permit.
(C) If the owner fails to show proof of, or apply for, a dangerous dog permit within 48 hours of
impoundment; or ifthe owner waives, in writing, all ownership and interest in the animal, the owners
right to possession, title, custody, and care of said animal shall be forfeited, and the animal may be
humanely euthanized.
78 Nappanee - General Regulations
(D) The owner of an animal, which kills or causes serious injury to a person who has committed
criminal trespass (or a crime in which trespass is a lesser included offense) as heretofore described shall
not be subject to the violation provisions set forth herein.
(E) If a conflict arises between the provisions of this section and other sections of this chapter, the
provisions of this section shall prevail due to the public health and safety concerns.
(Ord. 1438, passed 5-17-10) Penalty, see§ 98.99
§ 98.15 REQUIREMENTS TO POSSESS A DANGEROUS ANIMAL.
(A) A person wishing to own, harbor, possess, or keep a dangerous animal shall be required to
provide:
(1) A valid driver's license or state issued picture identification showing the owners name and
current address;
(2) Proof that the applicant owns said animal and is 18 years of age or older;
(3) One copy of the current immunization and health records for said animal showing that the
anllnal received a current rabies vaccination by a licensed veterinarian;
(4) Proof that the applicant has insurance coverage for not less than $300,000 for any injury,
damage or loss caused by said animal;
(5) Four photographs of said animal from four different sides taken not more than one month
before the date of the application, Such photographs shall consist of a front, back, left and right side
view of the animal;
(6) The name, address, and phone number of the animal's previous owner, if applicable; and
(7) The animal must be spayed or neutered, or otherwise altered to prevent procreation.
(B) Dangerous dog enclosure.
(1) The dangerous dog shall be confined, at all times, witllln a habitable escape-proof dwelling
and/or an escape-proof kennel. Prior to use, they must be inspected by the Police Department or its
designee.
(a) If chain~link fencing is used for the kennel, it must be made of at least ll-1h gauge
chain-link wire. Other fencing must be of such material that the animal cannot chew, dig, or otherwise
free itself from inside the enclosure. Fencing must be at least six feet high, the length and width a
minimum of 10' x 10'. J
Animals 79
(b) The top must be chain-link or of an engineered roofing from which an animal cannot
escape.
(c) The floor must be chain-link, cement, or brick.
(d) Sides of the enclosure must be buried at least two feet into the ground or securely
fastened to the floor.
(e) An outdoor enclosure must include adequate structure to protect the animal from all
elements, such as a doghouse.
(t) The enclosure must be kept locked at all times to prevent both escape and accidental
entry.
(g) The enclosure must be approved by the Police Department or its designee prior to use
by a dangerous dog or animal.
(2) Prior to use, habitable dwellings such as a house or garage must be inspected to ensure that
it is escape-proof. Such dwellings may be required to be modified on a case-by-case basis to ensure the
dangerous animal cannot exit the dwelling of its own volition, such as when a door or window screen
are the only obstacles that prevent the dog from exiting.
(C) The enclosure for a non-dog dangerous animal must be adequate to contain the species of animal
kept. It will be inspected on a case-by-case basis to ensure that it is indeed escape-proof, as well as a
humane method for the type of animal to be kept. This inspection will be made by or with a person
competent to evaluate the type of animal involved.
(D) Except for medical treatment or examination, the owner will maintain the dangerous animal
exclusively on the owner's property.
(E) If the animal is lost or escapes, the owner or owner's agent shall report said incident
immediately to the Police Department or animal control agency.
(F) The owner of a dangerous animal/attack dog shall post signs on his or her property where such
animal will be kept, clearly visible from the public roadway or 50 feet, whichever is less. These signs
shall advise the general public about such animal1s presence on the premises.
(G) The Police Department or its designee shall visually inspect the premises where the animal is
kept. The inspection will consist of the kennel, or if there is no kennel, the officer will inspect the
escape-proof habitat dwelling, doors, widows, and screen opening to determine if in fact, they are
escape-proof. Also, the inspection will consist of the placement of warning signs, the animal leash, the
muzzle, and the padlock for the cage. The Police Department or its designee must be satisfied that the
owner has met all dangerous dog requirements before permitting a dangerous dog to be kept on the
property.
80 Nappanee - General Regulations
(H) Duly authorized members of the Police Departtnent or other law enforcement agencies,
including but not limited to game wardens, conservation officers, and other law enforcement officers
shall be exempt from the provisions of this section if the animal is used for law enforcement duties.
(I) The owner shall have 14 days to meet the attack dog/dangerous animal requirements. If the
requirements are not met within the 14 days, the animal may be impounded and subsequently euthanized.
(J) If the owner of a dangerous animal/attack dog violates any provisions of this chapter, the animal
may be impounded and held until a hearing is held. At such hearing, the court shall determine whether,
in fact, a violation of this chapter has occurred. If the court determines that a violation of this chapter
has occurred, it shall have the authority to impose a fine and/or order the animal euthanized. A
dangerous animal/attack dog shall not be euthanized untU after the court has rendered a final decision.
(K) In the event that an attack dog/dangerous animal changes owner, the new owner must meet the
dangerous dog requirements. The original owner shall notify the animal control agency that the animal
bas been sold or given away.
(L) The owner of an attack dog/dangerous animal shall notify the animal control agency if the
address changes where the animal is being kept. The owner must report the new address so an inspection
can be made of the premises. Tbe animal may not be moved until the new premises have passed
inspection.
(M) The owner, or owner's agent, of an animal deemed dangerous under this chapter shall notify
the Police Department and animal control agency immediately if said animal is running at large, has been
stolen, or has attacked a person or a domestic animal.
(Ord. 1438, passed 5-17-10) Penalty, see§ 98.99
§ 98.99 PENALTY.
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor, and shall be punished by a fine of not less that $100 and no more than $500, together with
the court costs or other assessments imposed by a court of competent jurisdiction. Any person convicted
of a subsequent violation or violations of this chapter, within one year after a conviction, shall be
punished by a fine of not less than$200, and no more than $1,000, together with the court costs or other
assessments imposed by a court of competent jurisdiction. For purposes of this chapter, each day's
violation of any of the terms or provisions hereof shall be deemed a separate offense.
(Ord. 1438, passed 5-17-10)
)
•
'
; )
_____)
i I
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULA TIO NS
Chapter
110. GENERAL LICENSING PROCEDURES
111. BUSINESS LICENSING
I
2 Nappanee - Business Regulations
CHAPTER 110: GENERAL LICENSING PROCEDURES
Section
110.01 License issuance and inspection
110.02 Complaints; license suspension and revocation
Cross-reference:
License fees authorized, see§ 38.01
Statutory reference:
Authority of Clerk-Treasurer to issue licenses, see I. C. 36-4-10-5(10)
Authority of Police Department to inspect, see J.C. 36-8-3-10
State law governing complaint procedures, see LC. 36-4-5-5
§ 110.01 LICENSE ISSUANCE AND INSPECTION.
(A) The Clerk-Treasurer shall issue licenses upon payment of the license fees and compliance with
the applicable provisions of this code.
(B) The Police Department shall inspect all places of business under license or required to have a
license.
C 83 Code, § 4-2)
§ 110.02 COMPLAINTS; LICENSE SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.
(A) The Mayor shall hear any complaint against a person to whom the city has issued a license.
(B) The Mayor may revoke or suspend any license if he or she finds, after proper notice and
hearing, that the person has willfully violated a term or condition of the license, or has willfully done
or permitted to be done an act in violation of a statute or provision of this code.
(C) The Mayor shall file a copy of his or her fmdings and determination with the Clerk-Treasurer
within 24 hours at'ter it is made.
(' 83 Code, § 4-3)
3
4 Nappanee - Business Regulations
CHAPTER 111: BUSINESS LICENSING
Section
Garage and Yard Sales
111.01 Definitions
111.02 Policy
111.03 Three-day limit
111.04 Signs; display restrictions
111.05 Permit requirements
111.06 License display required
111.07 Violations
Junk Stores and Junk Yards
111.20 Definition
111.21 License required
111.22 License application and fee
111.23 Standards and restrictions
111.24 Records required
111.25 Hours restricted
111.26 Violations a nuisance; remedies
Liquor Retailers
111.40 Permits; state regulations applicable
111.50 Definitions
111.51 License required
111.52 License application; inspection
Taxicabs
Food Concessions
111.60 Permit required
111.61 Permit application
111.62 Permit fee
5
6 Nappanee - Business Regulations
111. 63 Location of concession
111. 64 Restrictions for locations
111. 65 Operation of concessions
111. 66 Termination and expiration of permit
111. 67 Notice of permit failure
111. 68 Operation during Apple Festival
111. 99 Penalty
Cross-reference:
Bus stops and taxicab stands authorized, see § 73. 26
Fees, see Chapter 38
Statutory reference:
Authority to regulate taxicabs, see I. C. 36-9-2-4
GARAGE AND YARD SALES
§ 111.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following defmitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
GARAGE, PORCH, PATIO, OR YARD SALE. Any formal or informal solicitation of members
of the public to purchase household goods, furniture, or other personal property at a residential location,
or any location in the city and under circumstances wherein the household goods, furniture, or other
personal property is displayed in a garage, in the yard, or adjacent to a dwelling house or other building
primarily used for residential purposes and not primarily used as a retail or wholesale establishment or
facility, and including auction sales.
YARD SALE SIGN or GARAGE SALE SIGN. Any outdoor display, plaque, cardboard, wooden,
or other structure as is constructed or used, or is attached to any tree, post, or pillar, or is otherwise
attachf(d to the ground, temporarily or permanently, and which sign contains printed or other writing
inducing members of the public to go to a particular residential location for the purpose of purchasing
household goods, furniture, or other personal property at a garage or yard sale.
(' 83 Code, § 4-11)
§ 111.02 POLICY.
It is the policy of the city that the operation and maintenance of a yard, garage, or other sale as
hereinabove defined and the installation or attachment of signs as hereinabove defined, constitutes a
nuisance and/or trespass unless properly administered, organized, and regulated.
(' 83 Code, § 4-11)
Business Licensing 7
§ 111.03 THREE-DAY LIMIT.
No person, firm, corporation, or group or groups of persons shall organize, operate, and maintain
a yard or garage sale in any residential area or on any premises primarily used for residential purposes
for any period or tenn exceeding three days, and no person, firm, corporation, group, or groups of
persons may thus organize, operate, or maintain a yard or garage sale more than two times during any
calendar year.
('83 Code.§ 4-11) Penalty, see§ 10.99
§ 111.04 SIGNS; DISPLAY RESTRICTIONS.
(A) Displaying of signs. No person, frrm, corporation, or group or groups of persons shall
construct, attach, or otherwise display any yard or garage sale sign as hereinabove defined on any public
street or right-of~way within the limits of the city, nor attach a sign to any stop sign. street sign,
telephone or utility pole, or other permanent installation of any utilities company.
(B) Consent. No person, firm, corporation, or group or groups of persons shall construct, attach,
or otherwise install any yard or garage sale sign as hereinabove defined on any private property of any
third person without frrst obtaining the consent of the owner or occupant of the real estate upon which
the sign is constructed, attached, or installed.
('83 Code,§ 4-11) Penalty, see§ 10.99
§ 111.05 PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
(A) Application. Any person desiring to organize, operate, or maintain a yard or garage sale in any
residential area shall make application at the office of the Clerk-Treasurer for a permit for the operation
and maintenance of the sale. The person shall state, in detail, the full name and address of the persons,
firm, or group who shall operate the same, the address thereof, the term or duration of the sale, a general
description of the items and articles offered for sale, and other information and data as may be pertinent.
One copy of each application shall be forwarded, forthwith, to the Chief of Police of the city Police
Department of to the officer who may be delegated by the Chief to receive the application. It shall be
the duty and responsibility of the Chief or the officer to investigate the parking, traffic flow, and similar
or other health and safety aspects of the proposed yard or garage sale, and to make any reasonable
recommendations or orders as are in the best interest of the public safety of the citizens and the peace
and dignity of the residential area. The Chief or officer shall approve, disapprove, or approve as
modified the application, all of which investigation and activity shall be done and accomplished within
48 hours of the receipt of the application.
(B) Fee. The fee for each permit application shall be the sum specified in§ 38.15 of this code,
which sum shall be paid to the Clerk-Treasurer upon submission of the application.
(' 83 Code, § 4-11)
8 Nappanee - Business Regulations
§ 111.06 LICENSE DISPLAY REQUIRED.
Upon approval of the permit application, the Chief of Police or other designated officer shall execute
the same and issue the license or other certificate to the applicant. The license or certificate shall be
attached to or displayed on the residential premises at which the garage or yard sale is being operated
or maintained and in clear view for public inspection thereof at aII times during the sale.
(' 83 Code, § 4-11)
§ 111.07 VIOLATIONS.
Any person, firm, corporation, or group(s) of persons who violates any of the provisions of this
subchapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall be fined.
(' 83 Code, § 4-11) (Am. Ord. 1100, passed 4-17-89) Penalty, see § 10.99
JUNK STORES AND JUNK YARDS
§ 111.20 DEFINITION.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
JUNK STORE. Defined by its usual legal definition, and shall include junk yards or any
establishment that buys and stores for resale, junk, junk parts, paper, boxes, rags, hides, furs,
automobiles, or machinery from which parts are sold.
C 83 Code, § 4-13)
§ lll.21 LICENSE REQUIRED.
It shall be unlawful to operate and/or maintain within the corporate limits of the city a junk store
without having first obtained from the City Council a license to do so.
('83 Code,§ 4-13) Penalty, see§ 10.99
§ 111.22 LICENSE APPLICATION AND FEE.
(A) Application. The application for a license shall be made in writing accompanied with the license
fee and giving the name of the person, firm, or corporation making the application and the address of
where the business is to be carried on. The license if issued shall not be transferable either to another
party or to another location.
;' I
Business Licensing 9
(B) license fee. The license shall be issued by the Clerk-Treasurer of the city upon payment of the
sum specified in § 38.15 of this code and complying with all requirements of this subchapter regulating
the operation of junk stores. The license shall be for one calendar year, provided that all licenses,
irrespective of the time purchased, shall expire on December 31 of the year for which they are issued.
(' 83 Code, § 4-13)
§ 111.23 STANDARDS AND RESTRICTIONS.
(A) No person, firm, corporation, or any other entity shall maintain and/or operate a junk store
within the corporate limits of the city unless the junk stored in or on the premises of the junk store is
completely enclosed by a solid board fence. The fence shall not exceed 15 feet in height, and it shall
be as high as the junk is piled in order tbat the junk will not be unsightly to the public. It shall be
unlawful to pile junk higher than the fence mallitained by any junk store.
(B) In the event the junk store is within 100 feet of any residence, then that junk store shall store
its junk within a substantial building so that the odors therefrom will not be offensive to any residence(s)
and will not be as likely to harbor rodents, rabbits, and other animals not conducive to the health,
convenience, and well-being of the public. It is also provided that any junk store shall be so operated
as to keep odors emanating from the store from becoming offensive to the public.
('83 Code,§ 4-13) Penalty, see§ 10.99
§ 111.24 RECORDS REQUIRED.
(A) Every junk store shall keep at its place of business a substantial and well-bound book in which
shall be entered in writing with ink a minute description of all junk purchased and particularly
mentioning any prominent or descriptive marks that may be on that property. It shall also include the
name and residence of the person(s) by which it was sold and the date on which it was purchased. This
book shall be kept clean and legible, and no entry therein shall be obliterated or defaced.
(B) Every junk dealer shall, during the ordinary hours of business, submit and exlnbit the book as
provided above and also any article or property sold to him or her to any police officer.
('83 Code,§ 4-13)
§ 111.25 HOURS RESTRICTED.
No person licensed under th.is subchapter shall receive or purchase any junk whatever between the
hours of 8 p.m. and 7 a.m.
('83 Code,§ 4-13) Penalty, see§ 10.99
10 Nappanee - Business Regulations
§ 111.26 VIOLATIONS A NUISANCE; REMEDIBS.
(A) (1) Any junk store which is operated and/or maintained in violation of any of the provisions
of§ 111.23 above is declared to be a nuisance.
(2) The City Council or any citizen of the city may maintain an action to abate the same in a
court of competent jurisdiction. If the court shall frnd that the junk store is and/or was being operated
and/or maintained in violation of§ 111.23, then the court shall abate the nuisance.
(B) Any person, firm, corporation, or other legal entity violating any of the provisions of this
subchapter shall, in addition to other penalties herein, upon conviction thereof, be fined, and may have
his or her license revoked.
('83 Code,§ 4-13) Penalty, see§ 10.99
UQUOR RETAILERS
§ 111.40 PERMITS; STATE REGULATIONS APPLICABLE.
Liquor retailer permits may be issued to applicants otherwise duly qualified and as defined by the
applicable laws of the state in relation thereto, and consent to their issuance by the appropriate agencies,
bureaus, and departments of the state shall be and the same is granted in respect to premises located
within the boundaries of the city.
(' 83 Code, § 4-12)
TAXICABS
§ 111.50 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
TAXICAB. Every automobile or motor propelled vehicle used for the transportation of passengers
over the public streets of the city for pay or biie, irrespective of whether these operations extend beyond
the limits of the city, the trip of which vehicle and/or its destination are fixed by the person or persons
hiring same.
Business Licensing 11
TAXICAB LICENSE. A written perm.it granted by the city through its Clerk-Treasurer to any
person, firm, partnership, or corporation to own, operate, and keep for hire any taxicab in the city,
issued pursuant to the provisions of this code.
(' 83 Code, § 4-16)
§ 111. 51 LICENSE REQUIRED.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, partnership, or corporation to own, operate, keep, or drive
for pay or hire within the limits of the city any taxicab without complying in all particulars with the
terms and provisions of this subchapter.
('83 Code,§ 4·17) Penalty, see§ 10.99
§ 111.52 LICENSE APPLICATION; INSPECTION.
(A) No person, firm, partnership, or corporation shall operate or permit to be operated any taxicab
within the city over which he, she, or it has control without first having obtained therefor a taxicab
license from the Clerk-Treasurer.
(B) Each applicant must comply with the following conditions and obligations:
(1) Obtain a license for each and every taxicab vehicle operated;
(2) Give the Clerk-Treasurer a complete description of each vehicle to be licensed, including
the name and address of the owner, and the make, motor number, age, and capacity of the vehicle for
which a license is desired; and
(3) Provide the Clerk~Treasurer with notice of approved police inspection of the applicant's
brakes, lights, and mechanical operation of each vehicle for which a license is desired, and to submit to
periodic police inspections at least once in every three-month period.
('83 Code,§ 4-17) Penalty, see§ 10.99
FOOD CONCESSIONS
§ 111.60 PERMIT REQUIRED.
Any person or entity desiring to sell food concessions of any kind in the area of the city's Bid
District, as that area is defined by City of Nappanee Ordinance No. 1359 as amended from time to time,
must first obtain a permit for same by making application to the City Clerk-Treasurer's office.
(Ord. 1449, passed4-4·11) Penalty, see§ 111.99
12 Nappanee - Business Regulations
§ 111.61 PERMIT APPLICATION.
When making such application, the person or entity applying shall utilize the form prescribed for
same from time to time by the City Clerk-Treasurer's office. In making such application, the applicant
shall:
(A) Provide the names and addresses of all individuals and entities having any ownership in the
proposed concession;
(B) Identify all food products, which the applicant plans to sell;
(C) Provide proof of insurance that the applicant is insured for at least $100,000 per individual and
$300,000 in the aggregate for public liability claims, including any claims arising from the sale of food
products to the general public and provide that the city shall have at least 30 days advance notice of the
cancellation of any such insurance;
(D) Provide proof of a permit or other form of permission from the Elkhart County Health
Department for the operation of the proposed concession, if such permit or permission is required by
law; and
(E) Provide proof of a permit or other form of permission from any other governmental entity
where same is required by law.
(Ord. 1449, passed 4-4-11)
§ 111.62 PERMIT FEE.
Provided that the applicant satisfies all requirements of the application provided in§ 111.61, the
City's Clerk-Treasurer shall issue a permit for food concessions within the Bid District to the applicant
upon the applicant1s payment of the permit fee of $10 to the office of the City's Clerk-Treasurer. Each
such permit shall have a term of one year after which term it shall expire and the privileges granted by
such permit shall terminate unless the permit holder obtains a new permit.
(Ord. 1449, passed 4-4-11)
§ 111.63 LOCATION OF CONCESSION.
Any .individual or entity possessing a permit from the city to sell food concessions within the area
specified by§ 111.60 may locate their concession in the following areas:
(A) In the city 1s Leadership Lot or Rotary Lot; or
(B) On the sidewalk within the Bid District.
(Ord. 1449, passed 4-4-11)
Business Licensing 13
§ 111.64 RESTRICTIONS FOR LOCATIONS.
Any individual or entity desiring to locate their food concessiou in the area defined in § 111.63(B)
shall be subject to the following restrictions:
(A) The concession shall not impede traffic on the sidewalk and must:
(1) Be located between the planters and the curb; and
(2) Allow for pedestrians to exit motorized vehicles at curbside.
(B) The individual or entity desiring to locate their concession on the sidewalk within the Bid
District must have prior written permission from the owner of the building adjacent to the area where
the concession is to be located and must provide a copy of such written permission to the City 1s ClerkTreasurer'
s Office prior to commencing operation of the concession.
(Ord. 1449, passed 4-4-11) Penalty, see§ 111.99
§ 111.65 OPERATION OF CONCESSIONS.
Food concessions in the city 1s Bid District operated pursuant to a permit issued by the city may
operate any day of the week between dusk and dawn. Operators of such a food concession must
completely clean up the area around the concession each day upon close of business. No concession
shall leave any grease or other marks upon the concrete or asphalt where the concession is located.
(Ord. 1449, passed 4-4-11) Penalty, see§ 111.99
§ 111.66 TERMINATION AND EXPIRATION OF PERMIT.
In the event that any permit holder fails to maintain insurance on the operation of the concession as
required by § 111.61(C); fails to maintain for any reason a proof of permit or other form of permission
as required by § lll.6l(D) or (E); or is prohibited from operation by any applicable law, rule,
regulation, ordinance, resolution or similar enactment by any federal, state, or local governmental entity;
then, and in any of such events, the permit from the city for operation of such food concession shall
immediately terminate and expire.
(Ord. 1449, passed 4-4-11)
§ 111.67 NOTICE OF PERMIT FAILURE.
In the event that any permit holder fails to comply with any other applicable federal, state or local
law, rule, regulation, ordinance, resolution or similar enactment, or otherwise fails to satisfy any other
provision of this subchapter other than those requirements referenced at § 111.66, the city, by its Code
Enforcement Officer, shall give written notice to the permit holder of such failure and the permit holder
shall have three days after receipt of such written notice in which to cure the failure. The notice from
14 Nappanee ~ Business Regulations
the Code Enforcement Officer shall state the specific failure of the permit holder, In the event the Code
Enforcement Officer finds that the failure has not been cured within such three day period, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall send written notice to the permit holder notifying the permit holder that the
failure has not been cured. The permit from the city for the operation of such food concession shall
automatically tenninate and expire five days after notice of the failure to cure by the Code Enforcement
Officer unless within such five day period the permit bolder files a notice of protest with the Office of
the City's Clerk-Treasurer, in which case the protest will be heard at the next meeting of the City's
Board of Public Works and Safety (the "Board") which is at least seven days after the filing of the notice
of protest and the Board shall rule on such protest at such public meeting where the permit holder shall
be permitted to address the findings of the Code Enforcement Officer,
(Ord. 1449, passed 4-4-11)
§ 111.68 OPERATION DURING APPLE FESTIVAL,
No permit holder shall be permitted to operate his/her or its concession during the term of the
Nappanee Apple Festival without applying for, and obtaining the permission of the Nappanee Apple
Festival to operate a concession during such festival.
(Ord. 1449, passed 44-11) Penalty, see§ 111.99
§ 111.99 PENALTY.
Any individual or entity operating a food concession within the area specified by§ 111.60 without
a permit as provided by this subchapter or, who operates a food concession during the Nappanee Apple
Festival without the permission of the Nappanee Apple Festival shall, for the first violation or
noncompliance be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined not less than $5 nor more
than $100, and each day that such violation or noncompliance shall be permitted to exist shall constitute
a separate offense and, upon conviction of a second or subsequent such noncompliance shall be fined not
less than $100 nor more than $500.
(Ord. 1449, passed 4-4-11)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
Chapter
130. GENERAL OFFENSES
I
2 Nappanee - General Offenses
--.\\
:· i
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL OFFENSES
Section
General Offenses
130.01 Discharging firearms and the like prohibited
130.02 Advertisements and handbills restricted
130.03 Loitering defined
130.15 Definitions
130.16 Prohibited acts
130 .17 Enforcement
130.18 Violations
130.19 School and Horoe Safety Fund
Cross-reference:
Curfew
Ordinance Violations Bureau, see Chapter 36
GENERAL OFFENSES
§ 130.01 DISCHARGING FIREARMS AND THE LIKE PROIDBITED.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to shoot or ilischarge any firearms, slingshots, firecrackers,
or other missile propelling instruments or explosives within the city limits.
(B) For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning,
FIREARM. Any weapon capable of firing a projectile with deadly force by means of an
explosion, including but not limited to guns, pistols, revolvers, cannons, muskets, and rifles.
3
4 Nappanee ~ General Offenses
(C) Shooting or propulsion of any missile, pellet, shot, arrow, dart, or other thing by means of any
firearm, compressed air or gas propulsion device, bow, slingshot, or propelling device of any kind,
nature, or description, into, upon, across, through, or against any lands, the air above same, or the
waters, or any structures, shelters, buildings, or facilities within the city limits is unlawful.
(D) The only exception to this section are police officers in discharge of their official duties.
('83 Code,§ 6-39) (Ord. 1091, passed 11-21-88) Penalty, see§ 10.99
§ 130.02 ADVERTISEMENTS AND HANDBILLS RESTRICTED.
(A) For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
ADVERTISEMENTS and HANDBIUS. Any printed or written matter, circular, leaflet,
pamphlet, paper booklet, advertisement, bill, or notice.
(B) It shall be illegal to post or cause to be posted on any public or private place, including but not
limited to walks, fences, and poles, or on any public or private motor vehicle, any advertisement or
handbill, without the permission of the owner or person having control of the same.
(C) Persons violating this section shall be fined, payable through the Ordinance Violations Bureau.
('83 Code,§ 6-40) (Am. Ord. 1100, passed4-17-89) Penalty, see§ 10.99
§ 130.03 LOITERING DEFINED.
(A) For the purpose of this section, the following defmition shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
LOITERING. To spend time idly by wandering from place to place or upon the streets with
no apparent reason or business.
(B) A person commits loitering when he or she is requested by a police officer to identify himself
or herself and to account for his or her presence due to public safety demands, and the person refuses
to do so.
(C) A person commits loitering when he or she interferes, interrupts, or disrupts the business of any
person or disturbs the peace and quiet of the city by his or her actions.
(D) A person commits loitering when he or she congregates on a sidewalk in the city so as to
prevent the free passage of any person on or along the same.
('83 Code,§ 6-41) Penalty, see§ 10.99
General Offenses 5
CURFEW
§ 130.15 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
CURFEW HOURS. For individuals 15, 16, and 17 years of age, refers to the time between 1 a.m.
and 5 a.m. on Saturday or Sunday, after 11 p.m. on Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, or
Thursday, and before 5 a.m. on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, or Friday. CURFEW
HOURS for individuals less than 15 years of age refers to the time after 11 p.m. and before 5 a.m. on
any day.
EMERGENCY. Unforeseen circumstances, or the status or condition resulting therefrom, requiring
immediate action to safeguard life, limb, or property. The term includes, but is not limited to, frres,
natural disasters, automobile accidents, or other similar circumstances.
ESTABllSHMENT. Any privately owned place of business within the city operated for a profit,
to which the public is invited, including but not limited to any place of amusement or entertainment.
With respect to an ESTABLISHMENT, the term OPERATOR shall mean any person. and any firm,
associates, partnership (and the members or partners thereof), and/or any corporation or limited liability
company (and the officers or managers thereof) conducting or managing that ESTABLISHMENT.
MINOR. Any person under 18 years of age.
PARENT.
(1) A person who is a minor's biological or adoptive PARENT and who has legal custody of
a minor (including either PARENT, if custody is shared under a court order or agreement);
(2) A person who is the biological or adoptive PARENT with whom a minor regularly resides;
(3) A person judicially appointed as a legal guardian of the minor; and/or
(4) A person 18 years of age or older standing in loco parentis, as indicated by the
authorization of an individual listed in division(s) (1), (2), or (3) of this definition, for the care or
physical custody of the child, or as indicated by any other circumstances.
PERSON. An individual, and not any association, corporation or any other legal entity.
PUBLIC PIA CE. Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access,
including, but not limited to, streets, highways, roads, sidewalks, alleys, avenues, parks, and/or the
common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transportation facilities, and
shops.
6 Nappanee w General Offenses
REMAIN. The following actions:
(1) To linger or stay at or upon a place; and/or
(2) To fail to leave a place when requested to do so by an officer of the city's Police
Department, a member of its Police Reserve Unit, or any other state or county police officer with law
enforcement jurisdiction within the city.
(Ord. 1302, passed 9-18-00)
§ 130.16 PROHIBITED ACTS.
(A) It shall be unlawful for a minor, during curfew hours, to remain in or upon any public place
within the city, to remain in any motor vehicle operating or parked therein or thereon, or to remain in
or upon the premises of any establishment within the city, unless:
(1) The minor is accompanied by a parent;
(2) The minor is involved in an emergency;
(3) The minor is engaged in an employment activity, or is going to or returning home from that
activity, without detour or stop;
(4) The minor is on the sidewalk directly abutting a place where he or she resides with a
parent;
(5) The minor is attending an activity sponsored by a school, religious, or civic organization
or agency, or by another similar organization or entity, which activity is supervised by an adult, and/or
the minor is going to or returning from this type of an activity without detour or stop;
(6) The minor is involved in interstate travel through, or beginning or terminating in, the city;
or
(7) The minor is exercISmg First Amendment rights protected by the United States
Constitution, such as the bona fide free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the right to
assembly.
(B) It shall be unlawful for a minor's parent to knowingly permit, allow, or encourage the minor
to violate any term of this subchapter.
(C) It shall be unlawful for a person who is the owner or operator of any motor vehicle to
knowingly permit, allow, or encourage a violation of any term of this subchapter.
(D) It shall be unlawful for the operator of any establishment, or for any person who is an employee
thereof, to knowingly permit, allow, or encourage a minor to remain upon the premises of the
General Offenses 7
establishment during the curfew hours. It shall be a defense to prosecution under this division that the
operator or employee of an establishment promptly notified the Police Department that a minor was
present at the establishment after curfew hours and refused to leave.
(Ord. 1302, passed9-18-00) Penalty, see§ 10.99
§ 130.17 ENFORCEMENT.
A police officer, before taldng any legal action, shall take steps necessary to question any individual
who appears to be under the age of 18 years for the specific purpose of enforcing this subchapter.
Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a police officer shall ask the apparent offender's
age and reason for being in the public place. The officer shall not issue a citation under this subchapter
unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that, based on any response and
other circumstances, none of the factors referenced in § 130.16(A)(l) through (A)(7) of this code is
present. An effort will be made on behalf of the city Police Department to contact the minor's parent
to inform him or her of the alleged curfew violation under this subchapter.
(Ord. 1302, passed 9-l&-00)
§ 130.18 VIOLATIONS.
A person who violates a prov~sion of this subchapter is in violation of a separate offense for each
day or part of a day during which a violation is committed, continued, or permitted. Each offense is
punishable by a fine.
(Ord. 1302, passed 9-18-00) Penalty, see§ 10.99
§ 130.19 SCHOOL AND HOME SAFETY FUND.
(A) The School and Home Safety Fund is hereby established as a separate dedicated non-reverting
fund to be used to receive monies from fines assessed as described in this subchapter. All sums of
monies so collected and deposited in the separate dedicated fund shall be used solely for the purpose of
educating the public on home and school safety. Monies in this Fund shall be expended at the discretion
of the Chief of Police, as appropriated by the City Council.
(B) Fifty percent of the monies collected as fines assessed as described in§ 130.18 of this code shall
be deposited in the School and Home Safety Fund and shall be used solely for the purpose designated
in division (A) of this section. The remaining 50% of the monies collected as fines assessed as described
in § 130.18 shall be deposited to the City Court/General Fund.
(Ord. 1302, passed 9-18-00)
8 Nappanee ~ General Offenses
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
Chapter
150. BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION
151. ELECTRICAL INSTALLATION REGULATIONS
152. UNSAFE BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES
153. ffiSTORIC PRESERVATION
154. FLOOD HAZARD AREAS
155. ZONING AND SUBDIVISION CONTROL
156. MINIMUM HOUSING CODE
1
2016 ~1
2 Nappanee - Land Usage
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION
Section
Building Code
150.01 Title
150.02 PuIJ>ose
150.03 Authority
150.04 Application
150.05 State regulations adopted by reference
150. 06 Standards
Building Perniits
150.20 Pennit required; fees
150.21 Compliance with other ordinances
150.22 Permit application
150.23 Application review
Building Code; AdministratWn and Enforcemenl
150.35 Inspections
150.36 Right of entry
150.37 Stop order
150.38 Certificate of occupancy; compliance required
150.39 Violations
150.40 Right of appeal
150.41 Remedies
Street Address Numbering
150.55 Definitions
150.56 Street numbers required; numeral specifications
150.57 New structures; numeral requirements
ISO.SS Address changes; numeral requirements
150. 59 Existing numbers; replacement
150.60 Violation; time to correct
3
4 Nappanee - Land Usage
BUILDING CODE
§ 150.01 TITLE.
This chapter and all amendments thereto shall be known as the "Building Code of the city," may
be cited thus, and may be referred to herein as the "Building Code."
(' 83 Code, § 7-81) (Ord. 1045, passed 2-2-87)
§ 150.02 PURPOSE.
The purpose of the Building Code is to provide minimum standards for the protection of life, limb,
health, environment, public safety and welfare, and for the conservation of energy in the design and
construction of buildings and structures.
(' 83 Code, § 7-82) (Ord. 1045, passed 2-2-87)
§ 150.03 AUTHORITY.
The Zoning Administrator is authorized and directed to administer and enforce all of the provisions
of the Building Code. Whenever, in the building regulations, it is provided that anything must be done
with the approval of or subject to the direction of the Zoning Administrator or any other officer of the
city, this shall be construed to give that officer only the discretion of determining whether the rules and
standards established by ordinance have been complied with; and no provision shall be construed as
giving any officer discretionary powers as to what the regulations, codes, or standards shall be, or power
to require conditions not prescribed by ordinances or to enforce ordinance provisions in an arbitrary or
discriminatory manner.
(' 83 Code, § 7-83) (Ord. 1045, passed 2-2-87)
§ 150.04 APPLICATION.
The provisions of the Building Code apply to the construction, alterations, repair, use, occupancy,
maintenance, and additions to all buildings and structures, other than fences, in the city.
('83 Code, § 7-84) (Ord. 1045, passed 2-2-87)
§ 150.05 STATE REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
(A) Building rules of the state Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission as set out in the
following articles of I.A.C. Title 675 are adopted by reference and shall include later amendments to
those articles as the same are published in the Indiana Register or the I.A.C., with effective dates as
fixed therein:
•
<1
Building Regulations; Construction 5
(1) Article 13: Building Codes:
(a) 675 I.A.C. 13-1: Fire and Building Safety Standards;
(b) 675 l.A.C. 13-2: State Building Code.
(2) Article 14: One and Two Family Dwelling Codes:
(a) 675 I.A.C. 14-4.2: Council of American Building Officials (CABO) One and Two
Family Dwelling Code;
(b) 675 l.A.C. 14-4.2: CABO One and Two Family Dwelling Code; Amendments; and
(c) 675 l.A.C. 14-4.2: Standard for Permanent Installation of Manufactured Homes.
(3) Article 16: Plumbing Codes: 675 I.A.C. 16-1.3: State Plumbing Code;
(4) Article 17: Electrical Codes:
(a) 675 l.A.C. 17-1.5: State Electrical Code; and
(b) 675 l.A.C. 17-2: Safety Code for Health Care Facilities.
(5) Article 18: Mechanical Codes: 675 I.A.C. 18~1.3: State Mechanical Code;
(6) Article 19: Energy Conservation Codes:
(a) 675 I.A.C. 19-3: State Energy Conservation Code; and
(b) 675 I.A.C. 19-3: Modifications to the Model Energy Code.
(7) Article 20: Swinnning Pool Codes: 675 l.A.C. 20-1.1: State Swinuning Pool Code.
(B) Copies of the adopted building rules, codes, and standards are on file in the office of the
Building Commissioner.
C 83 Code, § 7-85) (Ord. 1071, passed 10-19-87)
§ 150.06 STANDARDS.
All work on the construction, alteration, and repair of buildings and other structures shall be
performed in a good and workmanlike manner according to standards and practices in the trade.
: ' ('83 Code, § 7-95) (Ord. 1045, passed 2-2-87)
6 Nappanee - Land Usage
BUILDING PERMITS
§ 150,2-0 PERMIT REQUIRED; FEES.
(A) A permit shall be obtained before beginning construction, alteration, or repair of any building
or structure, the cost of which exceeds $500, using forms furnished by the Building Commissioner. All
permits shall be issued by the Building Commissioner, and all fees provided for herein shall be paid to
the city.
('83 Code,§ 7-87)
(B) Permits required by division (A) of this section shall be issued upon prior payment of inspection
fees according to the schedule in § 3 8 .17 of this code.
('83 Code,§ 7-89) (Ord. 1045, passed 2-2-87; Am. Ord. 1179, passed 12-20-93)
§ 150.21 COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER ORDINANCES.
All work done under any permit issued hereunder shall be in full compliance with all other
ordinances pertaining thereto, and in addition to the fees for permits herein provided for, there shall be
paid the fees prescribed in those ordinances.
(' 83 Code, § 7-88) (Ord. 1045, passed 2-2-87)
§ 150.22 PERMIT APPLICATION.
(A) No permits shall be issued for these purposes unless the application for the permit is
accompanied by a plat or sketch of the proposed location showing lot boundaries, and by plans and
specifications showing the work to be done.
(B) All plans for building construction under the authority of the Fire Prevention and Building
Safety Commission of the state must also be filed with the State Building Commissioner. No local
permits shall be issued hereunder urrtiJ a copy of a release for construction from the State Building
Commissioner is received by the Building Commissioner.
(' 83 Code, § 7-86) (Ord. 1045, passed 2-2-87)
§ 150.23 APPLICATION REVIEW.
Prior to the issuance of any building permit hereunder the Building Commissioner shall review all
building permit applications:
(A) To determine full compliance with the provisions of the Building Code;
\
' i
Building Regulations; Construction 7
(B) For new construction or substantial improvements, to determIDe whether proposed building sites
will be reasonably safe from flooding;
(C) For major repairs within the flood plain area having special flood hazards, to determine that the
proposed repair:
(1) Uses construction materials and utility equipment that are resistant to flood damage; and
(2) Uses construction methods and practices that will .minimize flood damage.
(D) For new construction or substantial improvements within the flood plan area having special
flood hazards, to assure that the proposed construction including prefabricated and mobile homes:
(1) Is protected against flood damage;
(2) ls designed or modified and anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement
of the structure, flood damage; and
(3) Uses construction methods and practices that will minimize flood damage.
(' 83 Code, § 7-90) (Ord. 1045, passed 2-2-87)
BUIWING CODE; AJJMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 150.35 INSPECTIONS.
After the issuance of any building permit hereunder, the Building Commissioner shall make or cause
to be made those inspections of the work being done under that permit as are necessary to insure full
compliance with the provisions of the Building Code and the terms of the permit. Reinspections of work
found to be incomplete or not ready for inspection are subject to assessment of reinspection fees as
prescribed :in the Building Code.
('83 Code, § 7-91) (Ord. 1045, passed 2-2-87)
§ 150.36 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
Upon presentation of proper credentials, the Building Commissioner or his or her duly authorized
representatives may enter at reasonable times any building, structure, or premises in the city to perform
any duty imposed upon him or her by the Building Code.
C 83 Code, § 7-92) (Ord. 1045, passed 2-2-87)
8 Nappanee ~ Land Usage
§ 150.37 STOP ORDER.
Whenever any work is being done contrary to the provisions of the Building Code, the Building
Conunissioner may order the work stopped by notice in writing served on any persons engaged in the
doing or causing the work to be done, and those persons shall forthwith stop that work until authorized
by the Building Commissioner to proceed with the work.
C 83 Code. § 7-93) (Ord. 1045, passed 2·2·87)
§ 150,38 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY; COMPLIANCE REQUIRED,
No certificate of occupancy for any building or structure erected, altered, or repaired after the
adoption of the Building Code shall be issued unless that building or structure was erected, altered, or
repaired in compliance with the provisions of the Building Code.
(' 83 Code, § 7-94) (Ord. 1045, passed 2·2·87)
§ 150.39 VIOLATIONS.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation, whether as owner, lessee, sublessee, or
occupant, to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, improve, remove, convert, demolish, equip, use,
occupy, or maintain any building or structure other than fences in the city, or cause or permit the same
to be done, contrary to or in violation of the provisions of the Building Code.
('83 Code,§ 7-96) (Ord. 1045, passed 2-2-87) Penalty, see§ 10.99
§ 150.40 RIGHT OF APPEAL.
All persons shall have the right to appeal the Building Commissioner decision, first through the
Board of Public Works and Safety of the city and then to the Fire Prevention and Building Safety
Commission of the state in accordance with the provisions of l.C. 22-13-2-11 or 22-12-7 as applicable.
('83 Code,§ 7-97) (Ord. 1045, passed 2-2...87)
§ 150.41 REMEDIES.
(A) The Building Commissioner shall, in the name of the city, bring actions in the circuit or
superior courts of Elkhart County or Kosciusko County as the case may be for mandatory and injunctive
relief in the enforcement of and to secure compliance with any order or orders made by the Building
Commissioner, and any action for mandatory or injunctive relief may be joined with an action to recover
the penalties provided for in the Building Code.
C 83 Code, § 7-98)
(B) If any person, frrm, or corporation violates any of the provisions of the Building Code, does
any act prohibited herein, or fails to perform any duty lawfully enjoined, within the time prescribed by
.~--
' --~ J
Building Regulations; Construction 9
the Building Commissioner, or fails, neglects, or refuses to obey any lawful order given by the Building
Commissioner in connection with the provisions of the Building Code, then for each violation, failure,
or refusal, that person, firm, or corporation shall be fined.
('83 Code,§ 7-99) (Ord. 1045, passed 2-2-87) Penalty, see§ 10.99
STREET ADDRESS NUMBERING
§ 150.55 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
RESIDENCE. Any RESIDENCE located within the city, which has a street address which has been
designated for receipt of mail or any other purpose. The term RESIDENCE shall also refer to each
RESIDENCE contained within the same building or which is attached to another RESIDENCE or
building.
('83 Code, § 7-110)
STRUCTURE. A building or a part of a building within the city, which has a street address which
has been designated for receipt of mail or any other purpose and which is not utilized as a residence.
('83 Code,§ 7-111) (Ord. 1190, passed 7-6-94)
§ 150.56 STREET NlJMBERS REQUIRED; NUMERAL SPECIFICATIONS.
(A) The owner of any residence or structure in existence upon the effective date of this subchapter
and not currently possessing any numerals representing its street number on the outside wall of the
residence or structure on the side of the structure or residence facing the street of that residence's or
structure's street address, shall place those numerals on that outside wall so that the view of the numerals
from the street is unobstructed.
(B) Each required numeral placed upon the residence shall be at least three inches high if the
numerals are located 50 feet or less from the curb on the street of its address, and shall be at least four
inches high if the numerals are located more than 50 feet from the curb of the street of its address.
('83 Code,§ 7-112) (Ord. 1190, passed 7-6-94)
ID Nappanee - Land Usage
§ 150.57 NEW STRUCTURES; NUMERAL REQUIREMENTS.
(A) The owner of any residence or structure constructed after the effective date of this subchapter
shall, prior to the initial occupancy of the new residence or structure, place numerals representing its
street address on the outside waU of the residence or structure facing the street of its address so that the
view of the numerals from the street is unobstructed.
(B) Each street nuriieral placed upon the residence shall be at least three inches high if the numerals
are located 50 feet or less from the curb on the street of its address, and shall be at least four inches high
if the numerals are located more than 50 feet from the curb of the street of its address.
('83 Code,§ 7-113) (Ord. 1190, passed 7-6-94)
§ 150.58 ADDRESS CHANGES; NUMERAL REQUIREMENTS.
(A) The owner of any residence or structure whose designated street address is changed by the city
or its authorized employee, agent, official, or designated body, or who never previously possessed a
designated street address shall, within 15 days of a street address change or designation, as the case may
be, place numerals representing its street address on the outside wall of the residence or structure facing
the street of its address so that the view of these numerals from the street is unobstructed.
(B) Each street numeral placed upon the residence shall be at least three inches high if the numerals
are located 50 feet or less from the curb on the street of its address, and shall be at least four inches high
if the numerals are located more than 50 feet from the curb of the street of its address.
('83 Code,§ 7-113) (Ord. 1190, passed 7-6-94)
§ 150.59 EXISTING NUMBERS; REPLACEMENT.
(A) Nothing in this subchapter shall require further action of the owner of any residence or structure
in existence upon the effective date of this subchapter, which possessed upon that effective date numerals
representing its street number on the outside wall of the residence or structure facing the street which
is designated as the street of that residence's or structure's street address, for so long as those numerals
continue to be located on that outside wall.
(B) However, should the numerals or any one of them be removed from the wall fur more than ten
days, then the owner of that residence or structure must place numerals in the location and manner
described in § 150.56 above within 15 days of any one or more of the numerals being removed from the
outside wall.
('83 Code,§ 7-114) (Ord. 1190, passed 7-6-94)
Building Regulations; Construction 11
§ 150.60 VIOLATION; TIME TO CORRECT.
Any person or entity violating any provision of this subchapter may be fined. Each day that the
violation shall continue to exist after the date which is ten days after the service of citation for that
violation shall be served upon the owner of the property in question shall constitute a separate violation
under the terms of this subchapter.
('83 Code,§ 7-115) (Ord. 1190, passed 7-6-94) Penalty, see§ 10.99
12 Nappanee - Land Usage
I
CHAPTER 151: ELECTRlCAL INSTALLATION REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
151.01 Application
151.02 Violations; injunctive relief; license suspension
151.03 Liability for damages
151.04 Right to appeal
Electrical Inspector
151.15 Qualifications
151.16 Appointment and instatement; compensation; removal
151.17 Duties; assistants; restrictions
151.18 Authority
Electrical Examining Board
151.30 Establishment and organization
151.31 Records
151.32 Meetings
151.33 Board of Review and Appeals
151.34 Electrical licensing examinations
Installatio1i Requireme1its
151.45 Electrical equipment; installation standards
151.46 Electrical equipment standards
151.47 Electrical work; license required; exceptions
151.48 Permit required; exceptions
151.49 Permit fees
151.50 Inspections; approval; notice to correct
151.51 Connections; approval required
Electrical Licen~ing
151.65 License classes
13
14 Nappanee - Land Usage
151. 66 License fees and expiration
151.67 Application procedure
151.68 Examinations; conduct
151.69 Failure to pass; re-examination
151.70 Holder of license
151. 71 Change of representative; notification required
151.72 Certificate of license
151.73 Non-transferability; grounds fur suspension or revocation
Cross~reference:
Fees, see Chapter 38
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 151.01 APPLICATION.
(A) Application. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all installations of electrical raceways,
conductors, fittings, devices, appliances, controls, and fixtures, hereinafter referred to as "electrical
equipment," within or on private and public buildings and premises, according to the requirements of
the state Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission hereinafter sometimes referred to as the State
Commission with the following general exceptions.
(B) Exceptions. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to electrical wiring expressly declared
to be exempt from the provisions of this electrical chapter by any other sections hereof or by any other
provisions of the rules adopted in sections of this chapter.
(C) Definition. For the purpose of this chapter, the fol1owing definition shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
REASONABLY SAFE TO PERSONS AND PROPERTY. As applied to electrical installations
and electrical equipment, the term means safe to use in the service for which the installation of equipment
is intended without unnecessary risk to life, limb, or property.
(' 83 Code, § 7-120) (Ord. 1185, passed 4-5-94; Am. Ord. 1378, passed 1-10-05)
§ 151.02 VIOLATIONS; INJUNCTIVE RELIEF; LICENSE SUSPENSION.
Any person, frrm, or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
liable for a civil penalty of not less than $100 no more than $2,500 together with court costs. Injunctive
relief shall also be available to the city to prevent violations. If the violating person, firm, or corporation
is a license holder of any license provided for in this chapter, the conviction shall have the effect of
suspending that license until the suspension has been lifted by the Examining Board.
('83 Code,§ 7-142) (Ord. 1185, passed 4-5-94; Am. Ord. 1378. passed 1-10-05)
•
·-·-._ \
' !
Electrical Installation Regulations 15
§ 151.03 LIABILITY FOR DAMAGES.
This chapter shall not be considered to relieve from or lessen the respectability or liability of any
party owning, operating, controlling, or installing any electrical equipment for damages to persons or
property caused by any defect therein, nor shall the city be held as assuming any liability by reason of
the examination authorized herein or by the license and certificate therefor issued as herein provided.
C 83 Code, § 7-143) (Ord. 1185, passed 4-5-94)
§ 151.04 RIGHT TO APPEAL.
Any person, frnn or other entity aggrieved by an order issued under this chapter shall have the right
to petition for review any decision or order of the Electrical Inspector. The person, firm or other entity
may file a petition using either, or both, of the following procedures:
(A) Appeal to the State Commission;
(1) A person aggrieved by a decision or order issued under this chapter may appeal to the State
Commission, in accordance with I.C. 22-13-2-7;
(2) The State Commission may modify or reverse any decision or order issued by the city that
covers a subject governed by I.C. 22-12, J.C. 22-13, LC. 22-14, J.C. 22-15, a fire safety, or a building
rule;
(3) The State Commission must review decisions and orders that concern a Class 2 structure
if the person aggrieved by the decision or order petitions for review under I. C. 4-21. 5-3-7 within 30 days
after the issuance of the decision of the order;
(4) The State Commission may review all other decisions and orders issued under this chapter;
and
(5) The review of a decision or order by the State Commission does not suspend the running
of the time period under any statute in which a person must petition a court for judicial review of the
decision or order.
(B) Appeal to the Board of Review as referenced in§ 151.33.
(Ord. 1378, passed 1-10-05)
16 Nappanee - Land Usage
ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR
§ 151.15 QUALIFICATIONS.
(A) There is created the office of Electrical Inspector.
(B) The person chosen to fill the office of Electrical Inspector:
(1) Shall be of good moral character, shall be possessed of executive ability as is requisite for
the performance of the duties, and shal1 have a thorough knowledge of the standard materials and
methods used in the installation of electrical equipment;
(2) Shall be well-versed in approved methods of construction for safety to persons and
property, the statutes of the state relating to electrical work, and any orders, rules, and regulations issued
by authority thereof, and the National Electric Code (NEC), as prescribed by the American National
Standards Institute (ANSI); and
(3) Shall have had at least five years experience in the lines of electrical installation for which
an Electrical Inspector would be responsible, or in lieu of this experience, shall hold at least an
associate's degree from a recognized electrical engineering school, college, or university, and in addition
shall have five years practical experience, or be certified as an Electrical Inspector by a nationally
recognized certification program.
('33 Code. § 7-121) (Ord. 1135, passed 4-5-94; Am. Ord. 1373, passed 1-10-05)
§ 151.16 APPOINTMENT AND INSTATEMENT; COMPENSATION; REMOVAL.
(A) The Electrical Inspector shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to approval of the Board of
Review.
(B) Before entering upon the discharge of the duties of the Electrical Inspector, the appointed
Inspector shall file a bond in the sum of $1,000 payable to the city, this bond to be approved by the City
Council and conditioned upon the faithful performance of the Electrical Inspector's duties. The
Electrical Inspector shall also take and subscribe an oath which, together with the certificate of the
appointment, shall be filed with the City Clerk-Treasurer.
(C) The compensation to be paid to the Electrical Inspector shall be as established by City Council.
(D) The Electrical Inspector shall be removed for cause by the Board of Review, only after a full
hearing before the Board of Review, at which time he or she shall be entitled to appear and produce
evidence why the removal should not take place.
(' 83 Code, § 7-121) (Ord. 1135. passed 4-5-94; Am. Ord. 1373, passed 1-10-05)
Electrical Installation Regulations 17
§ 151.17 DUTIES; ASSISTANTS; RESTRICTIONS.
(A) It shall be the duty of the Electrical Inspector to enforce the provisions of this chapter under the
supervision and direction of the Zoning and Code Enforcement Adntinistrator. The Electrical Inspector
shall, upon application, grant permits for the installation or alteration of electrical equipment, and shall
make inspections of electrical installation, all as provided in this chapter.
(B) The Electrical Inspector shall keep complete records of all pennits issued, inspections and
reinspections made, and other official work performed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter
at such location as shall be directed by the Zoning and Code Enforcement Administrator.
(C) The Electrical Inspector may hold membership in recognized associatiom consistent with his
or her duties and the electrical trade, and, with the consent of the City Board of Public Works and
Safety, serve on any electrical committee of these associations. The expense of which shall be addressed
to the Board of Public Works and Safety for approval or disapproval,
(D) The Electrical Inspector is empowered to employ, after receiving the approval of the Zoning
and Code Enforcement Administrator and the Board of Public Works and Safety, any assistants necessary
for the proper conduct of the office and the inspection of electrical installations as provided for in this
chapter. The salary of these assistants shall be determined by the Mayor or City Council.
(E) It shall be unlawful for the Electrical Inspector to engage in the business of the sale, installation,
or maintenance of electrical equipment within the city limits, except for the consulting or other required
expertise or information regarding the electrical installations, alterations, or repair of equipment or
buildings belonging to or leased by the city.
('83 Code,§ 7-122) (Ord. 1185, passed4-5-94; Am. Ord. 1378, passed 1-10-05) Penalty, see§ 10.99
§ 151.18 AUTHORITY.
(A) The Electrical Inspector shall have the authority to make electrical inspections. When any
electrical equipment is found by the Electrical Inspector to be dangerous to persons or to propercy
because it is defectively installed, the person, firm, or corporation responsible for the electrical
equipment shall be notified in writing, and shall make any changes or repairs required, in judgment of
the Electrical Inspector, to place the equipment in safe condition, and if that work is not completed
within 15 working days or any longer period that may be specified by the Electrical Inspector in the
notice, the Electrical Inspector shall have the authority to disconnect or order discontinuance of electric
service to that electrical equipment. In case of emergency, where necessary for safety to persons or
property, or where electrical equipment may interfere with the work of the Fire Department, the
Electrical Inspector shall have the authority to immediately disconnect or cause the disconnection of any
electrical equipment.
(B) Those construction projects that the Electrical Inspector determines are repair rather than
'"~·· alteration, and those projects or alterations which do not change the overall electrical service, the
Electrical Inspector shall consider under local authority. Those projects under the jurisdiction of the
18 Nappanee - Land Usage
state commission shall be released for construction by the State Building Commission with the approval
of the Office of the State Fire Marshal prior to the issuance of a permit by the Electrical Inspector.
(C) Any of the duties or powers of the Electrical Inspector may be delegated to any assistants of the
Inspector by the Electrical Inspector.
(' 83 Code, § 7-123) (Ord. 1185, passed 4-5-94; Am. Ord. 1378, passed 1-10-05)
ELECTRICAL EXAMINING BOARD
§ 151.30 ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION.
(A) There is created the Electrical Examining Board of the city, hereinafter designated as the
"Board," which shall consist of the Electrical Inspector of the city, and five other members appointed
by the Mayor as follows:
(1) One representative of the electrical utility company serving the city;
(2) One representative of the Class A licensed contractors in the city;
(3) One master electrician, well-versed on the electrical code(s), not associated with the Class
A contractor;
(4) One representative from industry; and
(5) One representative from the public who is a private property owner.
(B) The five Board members shall be appointed for a term of four years or until a successor is
appointed.
(C) The Electrical Inspector shall act as Chairperson of the Board. Any appointed members may,
for cause and after a hearing, be removed from office by the Mayor of the city.
('83 Code, § 7-124) (Ord. 1185, passed 4-5-94)
§ 151.31 RECORDS.
Records of the meetings of the Board shall be open to the public for inspection at all reasonable
times. The Board shall keep a record of all licenses and certificates issued by it and shall have printed
a manual of its rules and regulations for the conduct of electrical examinations.
('83 Code,§ 7-124) (Ord. 1185, passed 4-5-94)
' '- ·,
i
I
I Electrical Installation Regulations 19
§ 151.32 MEETINGS,
(A) Regular meetings of the Board shall be held the first Thursday of January, April, July and
October of each year or as may be needed. The times and dates are to be yearly scheduled. Special
meetings of the Board may be called at the discretion of the Chairperson or by a majority of the members
of the Examining Board.
(B) Four members of the Board present at any meeting shall constitute a quorum for the transaction
of business, but any action taken at any meeting shall require the affirmative vote of at least four
members.
('83 Code,§ 7-125) (Ord. 1185, passed 4-5-94; Am. Ord. 1378, passed 1-10-05)
§ 151.33 BOARD OF REVIEW AND APPEALS.
(A) There is created a Board of Review and Appeals which shall consist of the Mayor, or the
Mayor's designee, who shall be the chairperson, and the five members of the Examining Board other
than the Electrical Inspector. Each member of this Board shall serve without pay and until the member
has been removed from office by the Mayor and a successor has been appointed.
(B) A meeting of the Board of Review may be called by the Mayor or by at least three members of
the Board of Review. Four members of the Board of Review shall constitute a quorum for the
transaction of business, but any action taken at any meeting shall require the affirmative vote of at least
four members.
(C) In addition to the other duties prescribed for the Board of Review in this chapter, any person,
frrm or other entity may appeal a decision or order of the Electrical Inspector by delivering to the office
of the Clerk-Treasurer within 30 days from the date of the decision or order in question, a written
request for an appeal and designating with specificity the decision or order complained of.
(D) The person, firm or entity initiating the appeal will then be given notice of the date, time and
location of the meeting of the Board of Review at which the appeal shall be heard. The appeal and the
right to appeal from the Board of Review shall be governed by the terms of I. C. 36-1-6-9.
(' 83 Code, § 7-124) (Ord. 1185, passed 4-5-94; Am. Ord. 1378, passed 1-10-05)
§ 151.34 ELECTRICAL LICENSING EXAMINATIONS.
(A) Examinations of applicants for electrical licenses shall take place at such place, times, dates and
locations as prescribed by the entity designated by the city for the conduct of the examinations. No other
dates, times or locations shall be considered for the examinations, the results of which will be determined
by the entity conducting the exams and considered final,
(B) It shall be the duty of the Board to examine the reports of persons, firms, or corporations who
apply for licenses to approve issuance of electrical licenses to qualified applicants who have paid the
20 r~appanee ~ Land Usage
prescribed fees, and to revoke or suspend any electrical license on the grounds set forth in§§ 151.02 and
151.03 of this code.
C 83 Code, § 7-125) (Ord. 1185, passed 4-5-94; Am. Ord. 1378, passed 1-10-05)
INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS
§ 151.45 ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT; INSTALLATION STANDARDS.
(A) All installations of electrical equipment shall be reasonably safe to all persons and property and
in conformity with the provisions of this chapter and the applicable statutes of the state and all orders,
rules, and regulations issued by authority thereof.
(B) Unless otherwise stated below in divisions (D) and (E), all electrical installations covered by
this chapter shall be in compliance with the most current edition of the state Electrical Code (675 I.A. C.
17), as adopted by the state Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission most current edition.
(C) Conformity of installations of electrical equipment with applicable regulations set forth in the
current edition of the state Electrical Code shall be prima facie evidence that those installations are
reasonably safe to persons and property.
(D) Service equipment for buildings located in the I 00-year floodplain area as determined by the
Department of Zoning and Planning shall be located a minimum of four feet above grade level.
(E) All electric powered signs, and their locations installed in Class 1 structures will be required
to be in conformance with the latest accepted addition of the state Electrical Code, as amended, and
pursuant to the rules of this chapter.
('83 Code,§ 7-126) (Ord. 1185, passed 4-5-94; Am. Ord. 1378, passed 1-10-05)
§ 151.46 ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT STANDARDS.
(A) All electric equipment installed or used shall be reasonably safe to persons and property and in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter and any orders, rules, or regulations issued by authority
thereof.
(B) Conformity of electrical equipment with applicable standards of nationally recognized testing
laboratories or services shall be prima facie evidence that the equipment is reasonably safe to persons
and property.
(' 83 Code, § 7-127) (Ord. 1185, passed 4-5-94; Am. Ord. 1378, passed 1-10-05)
,, '
Electrical Installation Regulations 21
§ 151.47 ELECTRICAL WORK; LICENSE REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS.
(A) Except as otherwise provided in§ 151.01 of this code, no person, firm, or corporation shall in
any manner undertake to execute or perform any work of installing, maintaining, altering, or repairing
any electrical equipment unless the work is performed or supervised by a holder of a Class A electrical
contractor's license, and has a certificate therefor as provided for in§ 151.65 of this code; nor shall any
person, frrm, or corporation execute or perform that work otherwise than as specifically pennitted under
the class of license held by the person performing or supervising the work for a firm or corporation.
(B) Exception to the above is that these provisions shall not apply to any person employed by and
working under the discretion of a holder of a Class A electrical license and that no license shall be
required in order to execute or perform any of the following electrical work:
(1) The replacement of switches, receptacles, and lamps, or the connection of portable
electrical equipment to suitable permanently installed receptacles;
(2) Electric wiring expressly declared to be not covered by the provisions of this electrical code
by any other provisions of the rules adopted in § 151.45 of this code;
(3) The installation, alteration, or repair of electrical equipment for the operation of signals or
the transportation of intelligence by wire;
(4) Any work involved in the manufacturing, testing, servicing, altering, or repairing of
electrical equipment or apparatus, except that this exemption shall not include any permanent wiring
other than that required for testing purposes;
(5) The assembly, erection, and connection of electrical equipment by the manufacturer of that
equipment, but not including any electrical wiring other than that involved in making electrical
connections on the equipment itself or between two or more parts of the equipment;
(6) The owner of a single-family dwelling, including the usual accessory buildings located on
the same premises, may do electrical work in the dwelling or accessory buildings, provided:
(a) The owner satisfies the Electrical Inspector by examination or other means that they
are qualified to perform the work;
(b) The dwelling is, or will be, occupied by the owner;
(c) The dwelling is a detached building containing no other dwelling unit or other
occupancy;
( d) There are no other buildings, other than the dwelling and accessory buildings, located
on the premises;
22 Nappanee - Land Usage
(e) No more than one of this type of permit has been issued to the same person in the
preceding 36 calendar months;
(f) All work shall be done by the owner; and
(g) The owner files with the Electrical Inspector an affidavit stating all of the foregoing
facts.
(7) The owner executes a release in the form prescribed by the Electrical Inspector which
releases the city from any and all liability connected with the work performed.
(' 83 Code, § 7-128) (Ord. 1185, passed 4-5-94; Am. Ord. 1378, passed 1-10-05) Penalty, see§ 10.99
§ 151.48 PERMIT REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS.
(A) Permit requi.red. No electrical wiring or equipment shall be installed or connected within or
on any building structure or premises publicly or privately owned, nor shall any alteration or addition
be made in any existing equipment, without first securing a permit therefor from the Electrical Inspector,
or posting a certificate showing that a permit has been applied for_ within 72 working hours of the start
of work and authorizing the contractor to proceed with electrical installation.
(B) Application. Application for the pennit, describing the work to be done, shall be made in
writing to the Electrical Inspector by the person, firm, or corporation installing the work.
(C) Exceptions.
(1) Permits shall not be required for electrical work specifically exempted in§§ 151.01 and
151.47 of this code.
(2) A permit shall not be required for a license holder to connect, alter, or install electrical
equipment on the load side of a branch circuit, provided that the work is done in compliance with the
electrical rules and codes recognized by this chapter.
('83 Code,§ 7-137) (Ord. 1185, passed 4-5-94) Penalty, see§ 10.99
§ 151.49 PERMIT FEES.
(A) -Before any permit is granted for the installation of electrical equipment, the person, firm, or
corporation making application fur the permit shall pay a minimum fee or other amo'ilnt for an electric
service entrance, single phase or three phase, as stated in the fee schedule in§ 38.15 of this code,
whichever is the higher amount.
(B) If any person, frrm, or corporation shall do any work covered by this chapter requiring a permit
without first obtaining a permit, a penalty fee as stated in § 38. 15 of this code shall be charged in
addition to the regular amount of the permit fee. Payment of this penalty shall not release them from
' i
Electrical Installation Regulations 23
other penalties provided for in this chapter, and each day the violation exists shall be declared a separate
offense.
(C) It shall be a violation of this chapter for any licensee to secure a permit to do electrical work
if the license holder does not intend to perform or inspect and supervise the performance of that work.
(D) Permit fees for electrical work done on the municipal property for the municipality and/or its
authorized agencies may be waived, Permits must have the value of the waived fee noted on the permit.
('83 Code,§ 7-138) (Ord. 1185, passed 4-5-94) Penalty, see§ 10.99
§ 151.50 INSPECTIONS; APPROVAL; NOTICE TO CORRECT.
(A) Upon completion of any installation of electrical wiring and equipment which has been made
under a permit, it shall be the duty of the person, frrm, or corporation making the installation to notify
the Electrical Inspector. The Electrical Inspector shall inspect the installation within 48 hours, exclusive
of Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays, of the time the notice is given or as soon thereafter as practical.
(B) Where the Electrical Inspector fmds the installation in conformity with the provisions of this
chapter, the Inspector will issue a certificate of approval, autb(Jrizing connection to the supply of
electricity, and shal1 send written notice of this authorization to the agency supplying the electrical
service.
(C) If, upon inspection, the installation is not found to be in conformity with the provisions of this
chapter, the Electrical Inspector shall at once forward to the person, firm, or corporation making the
installation a written notice stating the defect(s) which have been found to exist, and the person, furn,
or corporation making the installation shall make the necessary corrections immediately and call for
reinspection.
('83 Code, § 7-139) (Ord. 1185, passed 4-5-94)
§ 151.51 CONNECTIONS; APPROVAL REQUIRED.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to make connection from a supply of
electricity or to supply electricity to any electrical equipment for the installation of which a permit is
required, or which has been disconnected by, or ordered to be disconnected by the Electrical Inspector,
until approval has been issued by the Electrical Inspector authorizing the connection and use of that
equipment. All electrical services that have been disconnected shall not be reconnected until approval
is issued by the Electrical Inspector.
(' 83 Code, § 7-140) (Ord. 1185, passed 4-5-94) Penalty, see§ 10.99
24 Nappanee - Land Usage
ELECTRICAL LICENSING
§ 151.65 LICENSE CLASSES.
(A) One class of license and certificate therefor shall be issued by the Board, which shall be known
as a Class A electrical contractor's license.
(B) A Class A license shall entitle the holder thereof to undertake to execute or perform any work
of installing, maintaining, altering, or repairing electrical equipment.
(' 83 Code. § 7-129) (Ord. 1185, passed 4-5-94)
§ 151.66 LICENSE FEES AND EXPIRATION.
(A) Any person applying for a Class A license as required by this chapter shall, before being
granted a license, give, execute, and deliver a surety bond to the city in the penal sum of $5,000, to be
approved by the City Council and conditioned upon the faithful compliance with the ordinances and laws
regulating electrical work.
(B) Upon approval of the Examining Board, the Electrical Inspector is authorized to issue the
license under the provisions of this chapter.
(C) Before a license is granted to any applicant, a license fee as stated in§ 38.15 of this code shall
be paid for a Class A license, and before a Class A license is renewed, a renewal fee as stated in§ 38.15
shall be paid.
(D) Each license shall expire on December 31 following the date of its issue and shall be renewed
upon application of the holder of the license and payment of the required fee. All licenses and bonds
must be renewed on or before the date of expiration, and any license becoming 30 days delinquent shall
be issued as a new license with all requirements of same.
('83 Code, § 7-130) (Ord. 1185, passed 4-5-94)
§ 151.67 APPLICATION PROCEDURE.
(A) Each application for a license shall be made in writing to the Board.stating the class of license
applied for, and the name and place of business of the applicant.
(B) A non-refundable examination fee as stated in § 38.15 of this code shall be paid when
application is made. The applicant is also responsible for making reservations for the taking of the
required examination with the entity designated by the city for the conduct of the examination and the
payment of any fees required by the entity.
(' 83 Code, § 7-131) (Ord. 1185, passed 4-5-94; Am. Ord. 1378, passed 1-10-05)
. ;
Electrical Installation Regulations 25
§ 151.68 EXAMINATIONS; CONDUCT.
(A) The individual applicant shall take the examination administered by the entity designated by the
city to conduct electrical examinations to determine the person's knowledge of the rules and regulations
for the installation of electrical equipment, and determine the general qualifications and fitness of the
applicant for executing the class of work covered by the license applied for; provided that a person now
holding a city license will be issued a like license without further examination, but by paying the new
fee as set forth in this chapter.
(B) Each examination shall be conducted by a person, or firm duly designated by the Electrical
Examining Board. A complete record of every examination given shall be kept on file until three years
after the date of examination. Any person who cheats during any examination shall be conclusively
presumed unqualified and unfit for licensing pursuant to this chapter, and in addition thereto, shall be
guilty of a Class C infraction, punishable as provided under state statutes covering this type of infraction,
and shall be disqualified from holding any license or applying for or taking any future examinations for
licensing by the city as a licensed electrical contractor.
('83 Code,§ 7-132) (Ord. 1185, passed4-5-94; Am. Ord. 1378, passed 1-10-05) Penalty, see§ 10.99
§ 151.69 FAILURE TO PASS; RE-EXAMINATION .
Should an applicant fail to pass an examination by obtaining a rating lower than 70% score, the
applicant may be re-examined upon submitting application in writing for the next examination date,
accompanied with the examination fee.
(' 83 Code, § 7-133) (Ord. 1185, passed 4-5-94; Am. Ord. 1378, passed 1-10-05)
§ 151.70 HOLDER OF LICENSE.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
HOLDER OF A LICENSE. The person to whom the license is issued. A person may not hold
more than one license issued by the city at one time.
('83 Code,§ 7-134) (Ord. 1185, passed 4-5-94)
§ 151.71 CHANGE OF REPRESENTATIVE; NOTIFICATION REQUIRED.
Any holder of a license who is performing or supervising the installation, maintenance, alteration,
or repair of electrical equipment, or performing or supervising electrical work for a firm or corporation
under § 151.47 of this code, whose employment with that frrm or corporation shall terminate, shall
immediately notify the Board of this termination. The firm or corporation shall provide to the Board,
26 Nappanee ~ Land Usage
within ten days of the date of notice, written notice of the name and address of the license holder
replacing that person.
('83 Code,§ 7-135) (Ord. 1185, passed4-5-94)
§ 151.72 CERTIFICATE OF LICENSE.
(A) Each certificate for a license shall specify the name of the person to whom the license is issued,
the name of the finn or corporation (if applicable) the person designated as the commercial or industrial
representative, and the expiration date.
(B) Every holder of a license shall keep the, their, or its certificate of license displayed in a
conspicuous place in the holder's principal place of business (if applicable).
('83 Code,§ 7-136) (Ord. 1185, passed 4-5-94; Am. Ord. 1378, passed 1-10-05)
§ 151. 73 NON-TRANSFERABILITY; GROUNDS FOR SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.
No license and certificate therefor issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall be
assigned or transferable. Any license issued hereunder may, after hearing, be suspended for a defmite
length of time, or revoked by the Board of Review or Examining Board, if the person holding that
license willfully or negligently violates any ordinance of the city or any statute of the state, relating to
the installation, maintenance, alteration, or repair of electrical equipment, or any orders, rules, or
regulations issued by authority thereof.
('83 Code,§ 7-141) (Ord. 1185, passed 4-5-94)
CHAPTER 152: UNSAFE BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES
Section
General Provisions
152.01 Definitions
152.02 Property transfer by person not complying with orders; requirements
152.03 Violations
Orders to Correct
152. 15 Order of action; notice requirements; expiration
152.16 Modification or rescission of order
152.17 Hearings; extensions; records
152.18 Judicial review
Administration and Enforcement Action
152.30 Emergency action; cost recovery; challenge of emergency
152.31 Action to enforce orders; grounds for action
152.32 Performance of work required by order; procedures; public bids
152.33 Action required by order; liability for costs
152.34 Unpaid costs; notice, hearing, and judgment
_152.35 Unsafe Building Fund; deposits and expenditures
152.36 Inspection warrants
152.37 Notice requirements
152.38 Records
152.39 Interested person; terms
Unsafe Buildings,· Court Proceedings
152.50 Civil action authorized
152.51 Injunctions
152.52 Civil forfeitures
152.53 Appointment of receiver
152.54 Court order authorizing performance of work; judgment for costs
152.55 Emergency action; court order authorizing action; judgment for costs
152.56 Priority of actions
27
28 Nappanee - Land Usage
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 152.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
DEPARTMENT. The executive DEPARTMENT authorized to administer this chapter.
ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY. The chief administrative officer of the department.
HEARING AUTHORITY. The person or persons designated as the HEARING AUTHORITYby
the executive of the city.
SUBSTANTIAL PROPERTY INTEREST. Aoy right in real property that may be affected in a
substantial way by actions authorized by this chapter, including a fee interest, a life estate interest, a
future interest, or a present possessory interest, or an equitable interest of a contract purchaser.
(' 83 Code, § 7-55)
UNSAFE BUILDING. A building or structure or any part of a building or strucrure that is:
(1) In an impaired strucrural condition that makes it unsafe to a person or property;
(2) A fire hazard;
(3) A hazard to the public health;
(4) A public nuisance; or
(5) Dangerous to a person or property because of a violation of a statute or ordinance
concerning building condition or maintenance.
UNSAFE PREMISES. An unsafe building and the tract of real property on which the unsafe
building is located.
('83 Code,§ 7-56) (Ord. 975, passed 12-17-84)
§ 152.02 PROPERTY TRANSFER BY PERSON NOT COMPLYING WITH ORDERS;
REQUIREMENTS.
(A) A person who has been issued and received notice of an order relative to unsafe premises and
has not complied with that order must supply:
Unsafe Buildings and Structures 29
(1) Full information regarding the order to a person who takes or agrees to take a substantial
property interest in the unsafe premises before transferring or agreeing to transfer that interest; and
(2) Within five days after transferring or agreeing to transfer a substantial property interest in
the unsafe premises, the enforcement authority with written copies of:
(a) The full name, address, and telephone number of the person taking a substantial
property interest in the unsafe premises; and
(b) The legal instrument under which the transfer or agreement to transfer the substantial
property interest is accomplished.
(B) If a judgment is obtained against the department, enforcement authority, or other governmental
entity for the failure of that entity to provide notice to persons holding an interest in unsafe premises in
an action taken by the entity under this chapter, a person who failed to comply with this section is liable
to the entity for the amount of the judgment if it can be shown that the entity's failure to give notice was
a result of that person's failure.
C 83 Code, § 7-79) (Ord. 975, passed 12-17-84)
§ 152.03 VIOLATIONS.
A person who does any of the following commits a Class C infraction:
(A) Remains in, uses, or enters a building in violation of an order made under this chapter;
(B) Knowingly interferes with or delays the carrying out of an order made under this chapter;
(C) Knowingly obstructs, damages, or interferes with persons engaged or property used in
performing any work or duty under this chapter; or
(D) Fails to comply with§ 152.02 of this code.
('83 Code,§ 7-80) (Ord. 975, passed 12-17-84) Penalty, see§ 10.99
ORDERS TO CORRECT
§ 152.15 ORDER OF ACTION; NOTICE REQUIREMENTS; EXPIRATION.
(A) The enforcement authority may issue an order requiring action relative to any unsafe premises,
including:
(1) Vacating of an unsafe building;
30 Nappanee M Land Usage
(2) Sealing of an unsafe building against intrusion by unauthorized persons, in accordance with
a uniform standard established by ordinance;
(3) Extermination of vennin in and about the unsafe premises;
(4) Removal of trash, debris, or fire hazardous material in and about the unsafe premises;
(5) Repair of an unsafe building to bring it into compliance with standards for building
condition or maintenance prescribed by law;
(6) Removal of part of an unsafe building; and
(7) Removal of an unsafe building.
(B) Notice of the order must be given under § 152.37 of this code. The ordered action must be
reasonably related to the condition of the unsafe premises and the nature and use of nearby properties.
The order supersedes any permit relating to building or land use, whether that permit is obtained before
or after the order is issued. The order must contain the following:
(1) The name of the person to whom the order is issued;
(2) The legal description or address of the unsafe premises that are the subject of the order;
(3) The action that the order requires;
(4) The period of time in which the action is required to be accomplished measured from the
time when the notice of the order is given;
(5) If a hearing is required, a statement indicating the exact time and place of the hearing, and
stating that the person to whom the order was issued is entitled to appear at the hearing with or without
legal counsel, to present evidence, to cross-examine opposing witnesses, and to present arguments;
(6) If a hearing is not required, a statement that an order under division (A)(2), (A)(3), or
(A)( 4) of this section becomes frnal ten days after notice is given, unless a hearing is requested in writing
by a person holding a fee interest, life estate interest, or equitable interest of a contract purchaser in the
unsafe premises. and the request is delivered to the enforcement authority before the end of the ten-day
period;
(7) A statement briefly indicating what action can be taken by the enforcement authority if the
order is not complied with;
(8) A statement indicating the obligation created by § 152.02 of this code relating to the
notification of subsequent interest holders and the enforcement authority; and
(9) The name, address, and telephone number of the enforcement authority.
I
; ·,
Unsafe Buildings and Structures 31
(C) The order must allow a sufficient time of at least ten days from the time when notice of the
order is given to accomplish the required action. If the order allows more than 30 days to accomplish
the action, the order may require that a substantial beginning be made in accomplishing the action within
30 days.
(D) The order expires two years from the day the notice of the order is given, unless one or more
of the following events occurs within that two-year period:
(1) A complaint requesting judicial review is filed under§ 152.30 of this code;
(2) A contract for action required by the order is let at public bid under § 152.32 of this code;
or
(3) A civil action is filed under§ 152.50 of this code.
('83 Code, § 7-57) (Am. Ord. 975, passed 12-17-84)
§ 152.16 MODIFICATION OR RESCISSION OF ORDER.
(A) Tue enforcement authority may issue an order that modifies the order previously issued.
(B) The enforcement authority may rescind an order previously issued, even if the order has been
affirmed by the hearing authority.
C 83 Code, § 7-58)
§ 152.17 HEARINGS; EXTENSIONS; RECORDS.
(A) A hearing must be held relative to each order of the enforcement authority, except an order
issued under§ 152.15(A)(2), (A)(3), or (A)(4) above. An order issued under§ 152. 15(A)(2), (A)(3),
or (A)(4) becomes final ten days after notice is given, unless a hearing is requested before the ten-day
period ends by a person holding a fee interest, life estate interest, or equitable interest of a contract
purchaser in the unsafe premises. The hearing shall be conducted by the hearing authority.
(B) The hearing shall be held on a business day no earlier than ten days after notice of the order is
given. The hearing authority may, however, take action at the hearing, or before the hearing if a written
request is received by the enforcement authority not later than five days after notice is given, to continue
the hearing to a business day not later than 14 days after the hearing date shown on the order. Unless
the hearing authority takes action to have the continued hearing held on a definite, specified date, notice
of the continued hearing roust be given to the person to whom the order was issued at least five days
before the continued hearing date, in the manner prescribed by§ 152.37 of this code. If the order being
considered at the continued hearing was served by publication, it is sufficient to give notice of the
continued hearing by publication unless the enforcement authority has received information in writing
that enables it to make service under § 152.37 by a method other than publication.
32 Nappanee - Land Usage
(C) The person to whom the order was issued, any person having a substantial property interest in
the unsafe premises that are the subject of the order, or any other person with an interest in the
proceedings may appear in person or by counsel at the hearing. Each person appearing at the hearing
is entitled to present evidence, cross-examine opposing witnesses, and present arguments.
(D) At the conclusion of any hearing at which a continuance is not granted, the hearing authority
may make findings and take action to;
(I) Affirm the order;
(2) Rescind the order; or
(3) Modify the order, but unless the person to whom the order was issued, or counsel for that
person, is present at the hearing, the heaiing authority may modify the order in only a manner that makes
its terms less stringent.
(E) If, at a hearing, a person to whom an order has been issued requests an additional period to
accomplish action required by the order, and shows good cause for this request to be granted, the hearing
authority may grant the request. However, as a condition for allowing the additional period, the hearing
authority may require that the person post a performance bond to be forfeited if the action required by
the order is not completed within the additional period.
(F) The board or commission having control over the department shall, at a public hearing, after
having given notice of the time and place of the hearing by publication in accordance with I.C. 5-3-1,
adopt a schedule setting forth the maximum amount of performance bonds applicable to various types
of ordered action. The hearing authority shall use this schedule to fix the amount of the performance
bond required under division (E).
(G) (1) The record of the fmdings made and action taken by the hearing authority at the hearing
shall be available to the public upon request.
(2) However, neither the enforcement authority nor the hearing authority is required to give
any person notice of the findings and action.
('83 Code,§ 7-59) (Am. Ord. 975, passed 12-17-84)
§ 152.18 JUDICIAL REVIEW.
(A) An action taken under § 152.17(D) above is subject to review by the circuit or superior court
of Elkhart County or Koscuisko County as the case may be on the request of:
(1) Any person who has a substantial property interest in the unsafe premises; or
(2) Any person to whom that order was issued.
Unsafe Buildings and Structures 33
(B) A person requesting judicial review under this section must file a verified complaint including
the findings of fact and the action taken by the hearing authority. The complaint must be filed within
ten days after the date when the action was taken.
(C) An appeal under this section is an action de novo. The court may affrrm, modify, or reverse
the action taken by the hearing authority.
C 83 Code, § 7-60) (Ord. 975, passed 12-17-84)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT ACTION
§ 152.30 EMERGENCY ACTION; COST RECOVERY; CHALLENGE OF EMERGENCY.
(A) If the enforcement authority finds it necessary to take emergency action concerning an unsafe
premises in order to protect life, safety, or property, it may take that action without issuing an order or
giving notice. However, this emergency action must be limited to removing any immediate danger,
(B) The department, acting through the enforcement authority, may recover the costs incurred by
the enforcement authority in taking emergency action, by filing a civil action in the circuit court or
superior court of the county against the persons who held a fee interest, life estate interest, or equitable
interest of a contract purchaser, in the unsafe premises at the time the enforcement authority found it
necessary to take emergency action. The department is not liable for the costs of this civil action.
(C) If an unsafe premises poses an immediate danger to the life or safety of persons occupying or
using nearby property, the enforcement authority may, without following this chapter's requirements for
issuing an order and giving notice, take emergency action to require persons to vacate and not use the
nearby property until the danger has passed. However, any person required to vacate an Ullilafe premises
under this division may challenge in an emergency court proceeding the enforcement authority's
determination that the premises poses an immediate danger to the life or safety of any person. In an
emergency court proceeding, the enforcement authority has the burden of proving that emergency action
is necessary to protect from immediate danger the life or safety of persons occupying or using nearby
property.
('83 Code,§ 7-61) (Am. Ord. 975, passed 12-17-84)
§ 152.31 ACTION TO ENFORCE ORDERS; GROUNDS FOR ACTION.
(A) The enforcement authority may cause the action required by an order issued under
§ 152.15(A)(2), (A)(3), or (A)(4) of this code to be performed by a contractor if:
(1) The order has been served, in the manner prescribed by § 152.37 of this code, on each
person having a fee interest, life estate interest, or equitable interest of a contract purchaser in the unsafe
premises that are the subject of the order;
34 Nappanee - Land Usage
(2) The order has not been complied with;
(3) A hearing was not requested under § 152.15(B)(6) of this code, or, if a bearing was
requested, the order was affirmed at the hearing; and
(4) The order is not being reviewed under § 152.18 of this code.
(B) The enforcement authority may cause the action required by an order other than an order under
§ 152.15(A)(2), (A)(3), or (A)(4) of this code to be performed if:
(1) Service of an order, in the manner prescribed by § 152.37 of this code, has been made on
each person having a substantial property interest in the unsafe premises that are the subject of the order;
(2) The order has been affirmed or modified at the hearing in such a manner that all persons
having a substantial property interest in the unsafe premises that are the subject of the order are currently
subject to an order requiring the accomplishment of substantially identical action;
(3) The order, as affirmed or modified at the hearing, has not been complied with; and
(4) The order is not being reviewed under§ 152.18 of this code.
(C) If action is being taken under this section on the basis of an order that was served by
publication, it is sufficient to serve the statement that the enforcement authority intends to perform the
work by publication, unless the authority has received information in writing that enables it to make
service under § 152.37 of this code by a method other than publication.
('83 Code,§ 7-62) (Ord. 975, passed 12-17-84)
§ 152.32 PERFORMANCE OF WORK REQUIRED BY ORDER; PROCEDURES; PUBLIC
BIDS.
(A) The work required by an order of the enforcement authority may be performed in the following
manners.
(1) If the work is being performed under an order other than an order under § 152.15(A)(2),
(A)(3), or (A)(4) of this code, and if the cost of this work is estimated to be less than $5,000, the
department, acting through its enforcement authority or other agent, may perform the work by means
of its own workers and equipment owned or leased by it. Notice that this work is to be performed must
be given to all persons with a substantial property interest, in the manner prescribed in division (C) of
this section, at least ten days before the date of performance of the work by the enforcement authority.
This notice must include a statement that an amount representing a reasonable estimate of the cost
incurred by the enforcement authority in processing the matter and performing the work may, if not paid,
be recorded after a hearing as a lien against all persons having a fee interest, life estate interest, or
equitable interest of a contract purchaser in the unsafe premises.
Unsafe Buildings and Structures 35
(2) If the work is being performed under an order other than an order under § 152.15(A)(2),
(A)(3), or (A)(4) of this code, and if the estimated cost of this work is $5,000 or more, this work must
be let at public bid to a contractor licensed and qualified under law. The obligation to pay costs imposed
by§ 152.33 of this code is based on the condition of the unsafe premises at the time the public bid was
accepted. Changes occurring in the condition of the unsafe premises after the public bid was accepted
do not eliminate or diminish this obligation.
(3) If the work is being performed under an order issued under§ 152.15(A)(2), (A)(3), or
(A}(4) of this code, the work may be performed by a contractor who has been awarded a base bid
contract to perform the work for the enforcement authority, or by the department, acting through its
enforcement authority or other governmental agency and using its own workers and equipment owned
or leased by it. Work performed under an order issued under§ 152.15(A)(2), (A)(3), or (A)(4) of this
code may be performed without further notice to the persons holding a fee interest, life estate interest,
or equitable interest of a contract purchaser, and these persons are liable for the costs incurred by the
enforcement authority in processing the matter and performing the work, as provided by§ 152.33 of this
code.
(B) Bids may be solicited and accepted for work on more than one property if the bid reflects an
allocation of the bid amount among the various unsafe premises in proportion to the work to be
accomplished. The part of the bid amount attributable to each of the unsafe premises constitutes the basis
for calculating the part of the costs described by § 152.33(A)(l) of this code.
(C) All persons who have a substantial property interest in the unsafe premises and are suqject to
an order other than an order under§ 152.15(A)(2), (A)(3), or (A)(4) of this code must be notified about
the public bid in the manner prescribed by § 152.37, by means of a written statement including:
(1) The name of the person to whom the order is issued;
(2) The legal description or address of the unsafe premises that are the subject of the order;
(3) A statement that a contract is to be let at public bid to a licensed contractor to accomplish
work to comply with the order;
( 4) A description of work to be accomplished;
(5) A statement that both the bid price of the licensed contractor who accomplishes the work
and an amount representing a reasonable estimate of the cost incurred by the enforcement authority in
processing the matter of the unsafe premises may, if not paid, be recorded after a hearing as a lien
against all persons having a fee interest, life estate interest, or equitable interest of a contract purchaser,
in the unsafe premises;
(6) The time of the bid opening;
(7) The place of the bid opening; and
36 Nappanee - Land Usage
(8) The name, address, and telephone number of the enforcement authority.
(D) If the notice of the statement that public bids are to be let is served by publication, the
publication must include the information required by division (C), except that it need only include a
general description of the work to be accomplished. The publication must also state that a copy of the
statement of public bid may be obtained from the enforcement authority.
(E) Notice of the statement that public bids are to be let must be given, at least ten days before the
date of the public bid, to all persons who have a substantial property interest in the property and are
subject to an order other than an order under§ 152.15(A)(2), (A)(3), or (A)(4) of this code.
(F) If action is being taken under this section on the basis of an order that was served by
publication, it is sufficient to serve the statement that public bids are to be let by publication, unless the
enforcement authority has received information in writing that enables it to make service under § 152. 37
of this code by a method other than publication.
('83 Code,§ 7-63) (Ord. 975, passed 12-17-84)
§ 152,33 ACTION REQUIRED BY ORDER; LIABILITY FOR COSTS.
(A) When action required by an order is performed by the enforcement authority or by a contractor
acting under§ 152.32 of this code, each person who held a fee interest or life estate interest or equitable
interest of a contract purchaser in the unsafe premises from the time when the order requiring the work
performed was recorded to the time that the work was completed is jointly and severally responsible for
the following costs:
(1) The actual cost of the work performed by the enforcement authority or the bid price of
work accomplished by the contractor under§ 152.32 of this code; and
(2) An amount that represents a reasonable forecast of the average processing expense that will
be incurred by the enforcement authority in taking the technical, administrative, and legal actions
concerning typical unsafe premises that are necessary under this chapter so that the action required by
an order may be performed by a contractor under § 152.32 above. In calculating the amount of the
average processing expense, the following costs may be considered:
(a) The cost of obtaining reliable information about the identity and location of persons
who own a substantial property interest in the unsafe premises;
(b) The cost of notice of orders, notice of statements of rescission, notice of continued
hearing, notice of statements that public bids are to be let or that the enforcement authority intends to
accomplish the work, and notice that a hearing may be held on the amounts indicated in the record, in
accordance with§ 152.37 of this code;
(c) Salaries for employees; and
I
I
I ,\'
Unsafe Buildings and Structures 37
(d) The costs of supplies, equipment, and office space.
(B) The board or commission having control over the department shall determine the amount of the
average processing expense at the public hearing, after notice has been given in the same manner as is
required for other official action of the board or commission. In determining the average processing
expense, the board or commission may fix the amount at a full dollar amount that is an even multiple
of ten.
('83 Code,§ 7-64) (Ord. 975, passed 12-17-84)
§ 152,34 UNPAID COSTS; NOTICE, HEARING, AND JUDGMENT.
(A) If all or any part of the costs listed in § 152.33 of this code remain unpaid for any unsafe
premises other than unsafe premises owned by a governmental entity for more than 15 days after the
completion of the work, and if the enforcement authority determines that there is a reasonable probability
of obtaining recovery. the enforcement authority shall prepare a record as follows.
(!) The record shall state:
(a) The name and last known address of each person who held a fee interest, life estate
interest, or equitable interest of a contract purchaser in the unsafe premises from the time the order
requiring the work to be performed was recorded to the time that the work was completed;
(b) The legal description or address of the unsafe premises that were the subject of work;
(c) The nature of the work that was accomplished;
(d) The amount of the unpaid bid price of the work that was accomplished; and
(e) The amount of the unpaid average processing expense.
(2) The record must be in a form approved by the State Board of Accounts.
(B) The enforcement authority, or its head, shall swear to the accuracy of the record before the
Clerk of the circuit court and deposit the record in the Clerk's office. Notice that the record has been
filed and that a hearing on the amounts indicated in the record may be held must be sent to the persons
named in the record, in the manner prescribed by § 152.37 of this code.
(C) If, within 30 days after the notice required by division (B) above, a person named in the record
files with the Clerk of the circuit court a written petition objecting to the claim for payment and
requesting a hearing, the Clerk shall enter the cause on the docket of the circuit or superior court as a
civil action, and a hearing shall be held on the question in the manner prescribed by I.e. 4-21.5-1.
' ! However, issues that could have been determined under § 152.18 of this code may not be entertained
. __) at the hearing. At the conclusion of the hearing, the court shall either sustain the petition or enter a
judgment against the persons named in the record for the amounts recorded or for modified amounts.
38 Nappanee - Land Usage
(D) If no petition is filed under division (C), the Clerk of the circuit court shall enter the cause on
the docket of the court and the court shall enter a judgment for the amounts stated in the record.
(E) A judgment under division (C) or (D) above is a debt and a lien on all the real and personal
property of the person natned, or a joint and several debt and lien on the real and personal property of
the persons named. The lien on real property is perfected against all creditors and purchasers when the
judgment is entered on the judgment docket of the court The lien on personal property is perfected by
filing a lis pendens notice in the appropriate filing office, as prescribed by the state Rules of Trial
Procedure.
(F) Judgments rendered under this section may be enforced in the same manner as all other
judgments are enforced.
('83 Code,§ 7-65) (Am. Ord. 975, passed 12-17-84)
§ 152.35 UNSAFE BUILDING FUND; DEPOSITS AND EXPENDITURES.
(A) The enforcement authority shall establish in its operating budget a fund designated as the Unsafe
Building Fund. Any balance remaining at the end of a fiscal year shall be carried over for the following
year and does not revert to the General Fund.
(B) Money for the Unsafe Building Fund may be received ft om any source, including appropriations
by local, state, or federal governments and donations. The following money shall be deposited in the
Fund:
(1) Payment for or settlement of obligations or judgments established under §§ 152.30 through
152.34 and 152.50 through 152.55 of this code;
(2) Money received from bonds posted under§ 152.17 of this code; and
(3) Money received in satisfaction of receiver's notes or certificates that were issued under
§ 152.53 of this code and were purchased with money from the Unsafe Building Fund.
(C) Money in the Unsafe Building Fund may be used for the expenses incurred in carrying out the
purposes of this chapter, including:
(1) The cost of obtaining reliable information about the identity and location of each person
who owns a substantial property interest in unsafe premises;
(2) The cost of an examination of an unsafe building by a registered architect or registered
engineer not employed by the department;
(3) The cost of surveys necessary to determine the location and dimensions of real property on
which an unsafe building is located;
Unsafe Buildings and Structures 39
(4) The cost of giving notice of orders, notice of statements of rescission, notice of continued
hearing, and notice of statements that public bids are to be let in the manner prescribed by § 152.37 of
this code;
(5) The bid price of work by a contractor under §§ 152.31 or 152.50 through 152.55 of this
code;
(6) The cost of emergency action under§ 152.30 of this code; and
(7) The cost of notes or receiver's certificates issued under § 152.53 of this code.
(D) Payment of money from the Unsafe Building Fund must be made in accordance with applicable
law.
(' 83 Code, § 7-66)
(E) The board or commission having control over the department may transfer all or part of the
money in a building, demolition, repair, and contingent fund that was established by LC. 36-7-9-14 to
the Unsafe Building Fund.
('83 Code, § 7-67) (Ord. 975, passed 12-17-84)
§ 152.36 INSPECTION WARRANTS.
(A) If the owners or those in possession of a building refuse inspection, an inspection officer of the
enforcement authority may obtain an inspection warrant from any court of record in the county in which
the building is located in order to determine if the building is an unsafe building. The court shall issue
the warrant subject to the following conditions.
(1) The person seeking the warrant must establish that the building to be searched or inspected
is to be searched or inspected as part of a legally authorized program of inspection that naturally includes
the building, or that there is probable cause for believing that a condition, object, activity, or
circumstance legally justifies a search or inspection of that building.
(2) An affidavit establishing one of the grounds described in division (A)(l) above must be
signed under oath or affirmation by the affiant.
(3) The court must examine the affiant under oath or affirmation to verify the accuracy of the
affidavit.
(B) The warrant is valid only if it:
(l) ls signed by the judge of the court and bears the date and hour of its issuance above that
signature, with a notation that the warrant is valid for only 48 hours after its issuance;
40 Nappanee - Land Usage
(2) Describes (either directly or by reference to the affidavit) the building where the search or
inspection is to occur so that the executor of the warrant and the owner or possessor of the building can
reasonably detennine what property the warrant authorizes an inspection of;
(3) Indicates the conditions, objects, activities, or circumstances that the inspection is intended
to check or reveal; and
(4) Is attached to the affidavit required to be made in order to obtain the warrant.
(C) A warrant issued under this section is valid for only 48 hours after its issuance, must be
personally served upon the owner or possessor of the building, and must be returned within 72 hours.
('83 Code,§ 7-68) (Ord. 975, passed 12-17-84)
§ 152.37 NOTICE REQUIREMENTS.
(A) Notice of orders, notice of continued hearings without a specified date, notice of a statement
that public bids are to be let, and notice of claims for payment must be given by:
(1) Sending a copy of the order or statement by registered or certified mail to the residence or
the place of business or employment of the person to be notified, with return receipt requested;
(2) Delivering a copy of the order or statement personally to the person to be notified; or
(3) Leaving a copy of the order or statement at the dwelling or usual place of abode of the
person to be notified.
(B) If, after a reasonable effort, service is not obtained by a means described in division (A) above,
service may be made by publishing a notice of the order or statement in accordance with I.C. 5-3-1 in
the county where the unsafe premises are located, However, publication may be made on consecutive
days. If service of an order is made by publication, the publication must include the information
required by § 152.15(B)(l), (B)(2), (B)(4), (B)(5), (B)(6), (B)(7), and (B)(9) of !hi< code, and must also
include a statement indicating generally what action is required by the order and that the exact terms of
the order may be obtained from the enforcement authority.
(C) When service is made by any means described in this section, except by mailing or by
publication, the person making service must make an affidavit stating that he or she has made the service,
the manner in which service was made, to whom the order or statement was issued, the nature of the
order or statement, and the date of service. The affidavit must be placed on file with the enforcement
authority.
(D) The date when notice of the order or statement is considered given is as follows.
Unsafe Buildings and Structures 41
(1) If the order or statement is delivered personally or left at the dwelling or usual place of
abode, notice is considered given on the day when the order or statement is delivered to the person or
left at his or her dwelling or usual place of abode.
(2) If the order or statement is mailed, notice is considered given on the date shown on the
return receipt, or, if not date is shown, on the date when the return receipt is received by the
enforcement authority.
(3) Notice by publication is considered given on the date of the second day that publication was
made.
(E) Notice of orders, notice of continued hearings without a specified date, and notice of a statement
that public bids are to be let need not be given to a person holding a property interest in an unsafe
premises if:
(1) No instrument reflecting the property interest held by the person is reCorded in the
Recorder's office of the county where the property is located;
(2) The order or statement was recorded in accordance with § 152.38 of this code; and
(3) The enforcement authority has received neither written information nor actual notice of the
identity of the person who holds a property interest in the unsafe premises.
(F) A person who fails to record an instrument reflecting an interest in his or her unsafe premises
is considered to consent to action taken under this chapter relative to which notice would otherwise be
given.
(' 83 Code, § 7-77) (Am. Ord. 975, passed 12-17-84)
§ 152.38 RECORDS.
The enforcement authority shall record in the office of the County Recorder orders issued under
§§ 152.15 or 152.16 of this code, statements of rescission issued under § 152.16(B) of this code,
statements that public bids are to be let under § 152.32 of this code, and records of action in which an
order is affirmed, modified, or rescinded taken by the hearing authority under § 152.17 of this code.
The Recorder shall charge the fee required Md.er I.C. 36-2-7-10 for recording these items.
(' 83 Code, § 7-78)
§ 152.39 INTERESTED PERSON; TERMS.
(A) A person who takes an interest in unsafe premises that are the subject of an order takes that
interest. whether or not a hearing has been held, subject to the terms of the order and ina manner so that
all of the requirements of §§ 152.31, 152.32, and 152.50 through 15.2.55 of this code relating to the
issuance of orders, service of orders, and affirmation of orders are considered satisfied. If a hearing has
42 Nappanee - Land Usage
been held, the interest is taken subject to the terms of the order as modified at the hearing and in a
manner so that all of the requirements of§§ 152.31, 152.32, and 152.50 through 152.55 of this code
relating to the issuance of orders at hearings are considered satisfied.
(B) A person who takes an interest in unsafe premises that are the subject of a statement that public
bids are to be let takes the interest subject to the terms of the statement and in a manner so that the notice
of the statement required by § 152. 32 of this code is considered given to the person.
('83 Code,§ 7-78) (Am. Ord. 975, passed 12-17-84)
UNSAFE BUILDINGS; COURT PROCEEDINGS
§ 152.50 CIVIL ACTION AUTHORIZED.
The department, acting through its enforcement authority, may bring a civil action regarding unsafe
premises in the circuit or superior court of the county where the unsafe premises is located. The
department is not liable for the costs of this type of an action. The court may grant one or more of the
kinds of relief authorized by §§ 152.51 through 152.55 of this code.
('83 Code, § 7-69) (Ord. 975, passed 12-17-84)
§ 152.51 INJUNCTIONS.
A court acting under § 152,50 of this code may grant a mandatory or prohibitory injunction against
any person that will cause the order to be complied with, if it is shown that:
(A) An order, which need not set a hearing date, was issued to a person;
(B) The person has a property interest in the unsafe premises that are the subject of the order that
would allow the person to take the action required by the order;
(C) The building that is the subject of the order is an unsafe building; and
(D) The order is not being reviewed under § 152.18 of this code.
('83 Code,§ 7-70) (Ord. 975, passed 12-17-84)
§ 152.52 CIVIL FORFEITURES.
(A) A court acting under § 152.50 of this code may impose a civil forfeiture not to exceed $1,000
against any person if the conditions of§ 152.51 of this code are met. The forfeirure imposed may not
be substantially less than the cost of complying with the order, unless that cost exceeds $1,000. The
effective date of the forfeiture may be postponed for a period not to exceed 30 days, after which the court
I I
!
Unsafe Buildings and Structures 43
may order the forfeiture reduced or stricken if it is satisfied that all work necessary to fully comply with
the order has been done.
(B) On request of the enforcement authority, the court shall enter a judgment in the amount of the
forfeiture. If there is more than one party defendant, the forfeiture is separately applicable to each
defendant. The amount of a forfeiture is separately applicable to each defendant. The amount of a
forfeiture that is collected shall be deposited in the Unsafe Building Fund.
('83 Code, § 7-71) (Ord. 975, passed 12-17-84)
§ 152.53 APPOINTMENT OF RECEIVER.
(A) A court acting under § 152.50 of this code may appoint a receiver for the unsafe premises,
subject to the following conditions.
(1) The purpose of the receivership must be to take possession of the unsafe premises for a
period sufficient to accomplish and pay for repairs and improvements.
(2) The receiver may be a not-for-profit corporation, the primary purpose of which is the
improvement of housing conditions in the county where the unsafe premises is located, or may be any
other capable person residing in the county where the unsafe premises is located.
(3) Notwithstanding any prior assignments of the rents and other income of the unsafe
premises, the receiver must collect and use that income to repair or remove the defects as required by
the order, and may, upon approval by the court, make repairs and improvements in addition to those
specified in the order or required by applicable statutes, ordinances, codes, or regulations.
( 4) The receiver may make any contracts and do all things necessary to accomplish the repair
and improvements of the unsafe premises.
(5) The court may, after a hearing, authorize the receiver to obtain monies needed to
accomplish the repairs and improvements by the issuance and sale of notes or receiver's certificates
bearing interest fixed by the court. The notes or certificates are a first lien on the unsafe premises and
the rents and income of the unsafe building. This lien is superior to all other assignments of rents, liens,
mortgages, or other encumbrances on the property, except taxes, if, within 60 days following the sale
or transfer for value of the notes by the receiver, the holder of tre notes files a notice containing the
following information in the County Recorder's office:
(a) Tue legal description of the tract of real property on which the unsafe building is
located;
(b) The face amount and interest rate of the note or certificate; and
(c) The date when the note or certificate was sold or transferred by the receiver.
44 Nappanee - Land Usage
(6) Upon payment to the holder of a receiver's note or certificate of the face amount and
interest, and upon filing in the Recorder's office of a sworn statement of payment, the lien of that note
or certificate is released. Upon a default in payment on a receiver's note or certificate, the lien may be
enforced by proceedings to foreclose in the manner prescribed for mechanic's liens or mortgages.
However, the foreclosure proceedings must be commenced within two years after the date of default.
(7) The receiver is entitled to the same fees, commissions, and necessary expenses as receivers
in actions to foreclose mortgages. The fees, commissions, and expenses shall be paid out of the rents
and incomes of the property in receivership.
(B) The issuance of an order concerning unsafe premises is not a prerequisite to the appointment
of a receiver; nor does this type of an order prevent the appointment of a receiver.
(C) If the enforcement authority requests the appointment of a receiver, all persons having a
substantial property interest in the unsafe premises shall be made party defendants.
('83 Code,§ 7-72) (Ord. 975, passed 12-17-84)
§ 152.54 COURT ORDER AUTHORIZING PERFORMANCE OF WORK; JUDGMENT FOR
COSTS.
(A) A court acting under § 152.50 of this code may authorize the department, acting through its
enforcement authority, to cause the action required by the order to be performed by a contractor licensed
and qualified under the law, if it is shown that:
(1) An order was issued to each person having a substantial property interest in the unsafe
premises;
(2) Each of the orders has been affrrmed or modified at a hearing in a manner so that all
persons having substantial property interest in the unsafe premises that are the subject of the orders are
currently subject to an order requiring substantially identical action;
(3) The order, as affirmed or modified at the hearing, has not been complied with;
( 4) The building that is the subject of the order is an unsafe building; and
(5) The order is not being reviewed under§ 152.18 of this code.
(B) If the enforcement authority request<; permission to cause the action required by the order to be
performed by a contractor, all persons having a substantial property interest in the unsafe premises shall
be made party defendants.
Unsafe Buildings and Structures 45
(C) The cost of the work and the processing expenses incurred by the enforcement authority,
computed ·under § 152. 33 of this code, may, after a hearing, be entered by the court as a judgment
against persons having a fee interest, life estate interest, or an equitable interest of a contract purchaser
in the unsafe premises.
('83 Code,§ 7-73) (Am. Ord. 975, passed 12-17-84)
§ 152.55 EMERGENCY ACTION; COURT ORDER AUTHORIZING ACTION; JUDGMENT
FOR COSTS.
(A) A court acting under § 152.50 of this code may set a hearing to be held withill ten days after
the filing of a complaint alleging the existence of unsafe premises presenting an immediate danger to the
health and safety of the surrounding community sufficient to warrant emergency action.
(1) Upon a finding at the hearing in favor of the enforcement authority, the court may:
(a) Permit the enforcement authority to cause the action necessary to make the premises
safe to be immediately performed by a contractor licensed and qualified under law;
(b) Permit the enforcement authority to cause the action necessary to make the premises
safe to be immediately perfonned by a contractor licensed and qualified under law, after the defendants
have had a reasonable time, as established by the court, to make the unsafe premises safe and have failed
to complete the necessary action;
(c) Grant a mandatory injunction relative to the unsafe premises that would require a
defendant who has an interest in the premises that allows the defendant to talce corrective action to
immediately make the premises safe.
(2) Io granting relief under division (A)(l)(b) or (A)(J)(c), the court shall set a date certain for
the completion of the necessary action, and shall hold a hearing within ten days after that date to
determine whether the necessary action has been completed.
(B) (1) The issuance of an order concerning the unsafe premises is not a prerequisite to permission
by the court to cause action to be performed on the unsafe premises.
(2) If an order has been issued concerning the unsafe premises, it does not prevent the
permission by the court to cause action to be performed on the unsafe premises.
(C) If the enforcement authority requests authority to cause action on the unsafe premises to be
performed by a contractor, all persons having a substantial property interest in the unsafe premises shall
be made party defendants.
46 Nappanee ~ Land Usage
(D) The cost of accomplishing the work may, after a hearing, be entered by the court as a judgment
against persons having a fee interest, life estate interest, or equitable interest of a contract purchaser in
the unsafe premises.
(' 83 Code, § 7·74) (Arn. Ord. 975, passed 12·17·84)
§ 152.57 PRIORITY OF ACTIONS.
An action filed under §§ 152.18 or 152.50 of this code takes precedence over other pending
litigation, and shall be tried and determined by the court at as early a date as possible.
('83 Code,§ 7·76) (Ord. 975, passed 12·17·84)
•
.\ '. :
CHAPTER 153: HISTORIC PRESERVATION
Section
Historic Preservation Commission
153.01 Definitions
153.02 Establishment and organization
Historic Districts; Designation
153 .15 Commission powers and duties; historic districts
153.16 Council approval required
153.17 Additional surveys and maps
153.18 Historic districts; establishment; right of objection
153 .19 Record of boundaries
Hi"stortc Districts; Construction and Developnient
153.30 District regulations; relationship to zoning districts
153.31 Building permits; certificate of appropriateness required
153.32 Certificate application and fee
153 .33 Action on certificate application
153.34 Development standards
153.35 Maintenance
153.36 Visual compatibility; factors
153. 37 Demolition permit; appeal provisions
Administration and Enforcement
153 .50 Interested parties; right of action
153.51 Violations; remedies; judicial review
47
48 Nappanee~ Land Usage
HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION
§ 153.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following defmitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
ALTERATION. Any material change in the external architectural features of any historic structure
within an historic district.
COMMISSION. The Historic Preservation Commission of the city.
CONSERVATION DISTRICT. A continuous and distinctive area where a majority of the buildings
retain an adequate amount of historic character for interpretation, although some alterations may have
occurred. A CONSERVATION DISTRICT may be limited to the boundaries of a property containing
a single building, structure, object, or site and have been designated by ordinance by the City Council,
or for which application for listing is pending with the Commission; provided, that the Commission will
determine within 90 days of receipt of an application pursuant to § 153 .15 of this code whether to list
the property, and any property not so listed will not be considered an historic district within the terms
of this chapter.
DEMOLITION. The substantial deterioration or complete or substantial removal or destruction of
any historic structure or any structure which is located within an historic district.
HISTORIC DISTRICT. A concentration of buildings, structures, objects, spaces, or sites which
may be limited to the boundaries of a property containing a single building, structure, object, or site and
have been designated by ordinance by the City Council, or for which application for this listing is
pending with the Commission; provided, that the Commission will determine withln 90 days of receipt
of an application pursuant to § 153 .15 of this code whether to list the property, and any property not so
listed will not be considered an HISTORIC DISTRICT within the terms of this chapter.
(Ord. 1205. passed 3-6-95)
§ 153.02 ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION.
(A) There is hereby established the Historic Preservation Commission of the city. The Commission
shall consist of five voting members. The voting members shall be appointed by the Mayor of the city,
subject to the approval of the City Council. Voting members shall serve for a term of three years;
however, the initial terms of members shall be for one year, two years, and three years in order for the
terms to be staggered. A vacancy shall be filled within 90 days for the duration of the term of the
member who is being replaced.
(B) Voting members shall be residents of the city who are interested in the preservation and
development of historic areas. To the extent available in the community, the Commission shall include
. __ _/
Historic Preservation 49
professional members from the disciplines of architecture, history, architectural history, preservation
planning, archaeology, or other historic preservation related disciplines, such as urban planning,
American studies, art history, American civilization, cultural geography, or cultural anthropology.
(C) The Mayor of the city may, with the approval of the City Council, appoint advisory members
as the City Council considers appropriate.
(D) The city Zoning Administrator shall serve as the ex officio Administrator and a member of the
Commission. The Administrator shall provide staff assistance to the Commission, act as the
Commission's secretary, and issue certificates of appropriateness as directed by the Commission.
(E) Members of the Commission shall serve without compensation, bnt may be paid for reasonable
expenses incurred in the performance of their duty.
(F) The Commission shall elect from its membership a Chairperson, Vice Chairperson, and
Treasurer who shall serve for one year and who may be reelected. The Commission shall adopt rules
for the transaction of its business not inconsistent with this chapter. The rules must include the time and
place of regular meetings and a procedure for the calling of special meetings. Meetings of the
Commission must be open to the public in accordance with the Open Door Law, and a public record
shall be kept of the Commission's resolutions, proceedings, and actions.
(G) The Commission shall hold regular meetings at least monthly, except when it has no business
pending.
(H) Each official of the city who has responsibility for building inspection, building pennits,
planning, or zoning shall provide technical, administrative, and clerical assistance as may be requested
by the Commission.
(Ord. 1205, passed 3-6-95)
HISTORIC DISTRICTS; DESIGNATION
§ 153.15 COMMISSION POWERS AND DUTIES; HISTORIC DISTRICTS.
(A) The Commission shall be concerned with those elements of development, redevelopment,
rehabilitation, and preservation that affect visual quality in an historic district. However, the
Commission may not consider details of design, interior arrangements, or building features, if those
details, arrangements, or features are not subject to public view, and may not make any requirement
except for the purpose of preventing development, alteration, or demolition in the historic district
obviously incongruous with the historic district .
50 Nappanee - Land Usage
(B) The Commission shall conduct a survey to identify historic buildings, structures, and places
located within the city; however, neither the survey nor any other action of the Commission shall affect
any property not located within the city limits.
(C) Based on its survey, the Commission shall submit to the City Council a map describing the
boundaries of an historic district or historic districts. A district may be limited to the boundaries of a
property containing a single building, structure, or site. The map may divide a district into primary and
secondary areas.
(D) Owners of property in fee simple wishing to establish an historic district which includes their
property may petition the Commission to consider drawing and submitting a map of that property to the
City Council for its approval. The Commission may establish in its rules criteria to be met before it
considers a petition.
(E) The Commission shall also classify and designate on the map all buildings and structures within
each historic district described on the map. Buildings and structures shall be classified as historic or
non-historic, in the following manner.
(1) Historic buildings and structures must possess identified historic or architectural merit of
a degree warranting their preservation. They may be further classified as:
(a) Outstanding;
(b) Significant; or
(c) Contributing.
(2) Non-historic buildings and structures are those not classified on the map as historic.
(F) The Commission shall promote public interest in historic preservation by initiating and carrying
on a public relations and community education program.
(Ord. 1205, passed 3-6-95)
§ 153.16 COUNCIL APPROVAL REQUIRED.
The map setting forth the historic district boundaries and building classifications must be submitted
to, and approved in an ordinance by, the City Council before the historic district is established and the
building classifications take effect
(Ord. 1205, passed 3-6-95)
I.
Ir
·
·. '
Historic Preservation 51
§ 153.17 ADDITIONAL SURVEYS AND MAPS.
The Commission may conduct additional surveys, and draw and submit additional maps for approval
of the City Council, as it considers appropriate.
(Ord. 1205, passed 3-6-95)
§ 153.18 lllSTORIC DISTRICTS; ESTABLISHMENT; RIGHT OF OBJECTION.
(A) In an ordinance approving the establishment of an historic district, the city may provide that the
establishment occur in two phases. Under the first phase, hereinafter referred to as a "conservation
district," which lasts three years from the date the ordinance is adopted, a certificate of appropriateness
is required only for the activities described in§ 153.3l(B)(l), (B)(2), and (B)(4) of this code. Subject
to the terms of division (B) below, at the end of the frrst phase, the district shall become fully
established, and a certificate of appropriateness must be issued before work may begin on an activity
described in§ 153.31.
(B) The first phase described in division (A) above continues and the second phase does not become
effective if a majority of the property owners in the district object to the Commission in writing, to the
requirement that certificates of appropriateness be issued for the activities described in § 153 .31 (B)(3),
(B)(5), and (B)(6). The objections must be received by the Commission not earlier than 180 days orlater
than 60 days before the third anniversary of the establishment of any conservation district. The city shall
give written notice, certified mail, return receipt requested, to each property owner of record within the
conservation district in question not later than 180 days prior to the third anniversary of the establishment
of the conservation district in question, informing each property owner of his or her right to object to
the establishment of an historic district and the deadline for filing an objection.
(Ord. 1205, passed 3-6-95)
§ 153.19 RECORD OF BOUNDARIES.
The boundaries of any historic district may be recorded in the office of the appropriate County
Recorder.
(Ord. 1205, passed 3-6-95)
HISTORIC DISTRICTS; CONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT
§ 153.30 DISTRICT REGULATIONS; RELATIONSHlP TO ZONING DISTRICTS.
The historic district regulation provided in this chapter is intended to preserve and protect the
historic or architecturally worthy buildings, structures, sites, monuments, streetscapes, squares, and
neighborhoods of the historic district.s. Zoning districts lying within the boundaries of the historic
52 Nappanee M Land Usage
district are subject to the regulations for both the zoning district and the historic district. If there is a
conflict between the requirements of the zoning district and the historic district, the more restrictive
requirements shall apply.
(Ord. 1205, passed 3-6-95)
§ 153.31 BUILDING PERMITS; CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS REQUlRED.
(A) A certificate of appropriateness must be issued by the Commission of the city before a building
permit is issued for, or work is begun on, any of the following.
(B) Within all areas of the historic district, a certificate is required for:
(1) The demolition of any building;
(2) The moving of any building;
(3) A conspicuous change in the exterior appearance of existing buildings by additions,
reconstruction, alteration, or maintenance involving exterior color changes;
(4) Any new construction of a principal building or accessory building or structure subject to
view from a public way;
(5) A change in walls and fences or construction of walls and fences, if along the public ways;
or
(6) A conspicuous change in the exterior appearance of non-historic buildings subject to view
from a public way by additions, reconstruction, alteration, or maintenance involving exterior color
change.
(Ord. 1205, passed 3-6-95)
§ 153.32 CERTIFICATE APPLICATION AND FEE.
(A) An application for certificates of appropriateness may be made in the office of the Zoning
Administrator on forms provided by that office.
(B) The application shall be subject to the following requirements.
(1) The Commission may adopt, as a part of its rules, filing requirements which it fmds
reasonable and necessary to expedite the business of the Commission. These rules may include, but are
not limited to, filing deadlines, and application requirements such as sketches, drawings, photographs,
descriptions, or other information which the Commission requires to make a decision.
___ ,,,,;
Historic Preservation 53
(2) A fee as stated in § 38.15 shall be charged for the application to cover the cost of
processing the application.
(3) Applications are to be received two weeks prior to the regularly scheduled Commission
meeting,
(Ord. 1205, passed 3-6-95)
§ 153.33 ACTION ON CERTIFICATE APPLICATION.
(A) The Commission may advise and make recommendations to the applicant before acting on an
application for a certificate of appropriateness.
(B) (1) A certificate of appropriateness shall be issued if, within 30 days after an application for
a certificate of appropriateness is filed, the application:
(a) Is approved by the Commission; or
(b) Is not acted on by the Commission,
(2) If the certificate is issued, the application shall be processed in the same manner as
applications for building or demolition permits required by the city, if any, are processed. If no building
or demolition permits are required by the city, the applicant may proceed with the work authorized by
the certificate.
(C) lfthe Commission denies an application for a certificate of appropriateness within 30 days after
it is filed, the certificate may not be issued. The Commission must state its reasons for the denial in
writing and must advise the applicant An application that has been denied may not be processed as an
application for a building or demolition permit and does not authorize any work by the applicant.
(D) The Commission may grant an extension of the 30-day limit prescribed by divisions (B) and (C)
above if the applicant agrees to it.
(Ord. 1205, passed 3-6-95)
§ 153.34 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
(A) An historic building or structure or any part of or appurtenance to an historic building or
structure, including stone walls, fences, light fixtures, steps, paving, and signs, may be moved,
reconstructed, altered, or maintained only in a manner that will preserve the historical and architectural
character of the building, structure, or appurtenance.
(B) An historic building may be relocated to another site only if it is shown that preservation on its
present site is inconsistent with division (A) above.
(Ord. 1205, passed 3-6-95)
54 Nappanee - Land Usage
§ 153 .35 MAINTENANCE.
Historic buildings shall be maintained to meet the applicable requirements established under state
and local laws for buildings generally.
(Ord. 1205, passed 3-6-95)
§ 153.36 VISUAL COMPATIBILITY; FACTORS.
(A) The construction of a new building or structure, and the moving, reconstruction, alteration,
major maintenance, or repair involving a color change conspicuously affecting the external appearance
of any non-historic building, structure, or appurtenance within the district must be generally of a design,
form proportion, mass, configuration, building material, texture, color, and location on a lot compatible
with buildings in the historic district (particularly with buildings designated as historic) and with squares
and places to which it is visually related.
(B) Within the area of the historic district, new buildings, structures, and appurtenances that are
moved, reconstructed, materially altered, repaired, or changed in color, must be visually compatible with
buildings, squares, and places to which they are visually related generally in terms of the following
visual compatibility factors.
(1) Height. The height of proposed buildings must be visually compatible with adjacent
buildings.
(2) Proportion of building's front facade. The relationship of the width of a building to the
height of the front elevation must be visually compatible to buildings, squares, and places to which it is
visually related.
(3) Proportion of openings within the facility. The relationship of the width of the windows
to the height of windows in a building must be visually compatible with buildings, squares, and places
to which it is visually related.
(4) Rhythm of solids to voids in front facades. The relationship of solids to voids in the front
facade of a building must be visually compatible with buildings, squares, and places to which it is
visually related.
(5) Rhythm of spacing of buildings on streets. The relationship of a building to the open space
between it and adjoining buildings must be visually compatible to the buildings, squares, and places to
which it is visually related.
(6) Rhythm of entrances and porch projections. The relationship of entrances and porch
projections to sidewalks of a building must be visually compatible to the buildings, squares, and places
to which it is visually related.
Historic Preservation 55
(7) Relationship of materials, texture, and color. The relationship of the materials, texture,
and color of the facade of a building must be visually compatible with the predominant materials used
in the buildings to which it is visually related.
(8) Roof shapes. The roof shape of a building must be visually compat1b1e :.Vith the buildings
to which it is visually related.
(9) Walls of continuity. Appurtenances of a building, such as walls, wrought iron fences,
evergreen landscape masses, and building facades, must form cohesive walls of enclosure along the
street, if necessary to insure visual compatibility of the building to the buildings, squares, and places to
which it is visually related.
(10) Scale of the building. The size of a building and the building mass of a building in relation
to open spaces, windows, door openings, porches, and balconies must be visually compatible with the
buildings, squares, and places to which it is visually related.
(11) Directional expression of front elevation. A building must be visually. compatible with the
buildings, squares, and places to which it is visually related in its directional character, including vertical
character, horizontal character, or non-directional character.
( 12) . Exterior paint colors. A building must be visually compatible with the buildings, squares,
and places to which it is visually related in its directional character, including vertical character,
horizontal character, or non-directional character. In. an ordinance establishing an historic district, an
individual district may exclude changes in paint colors from the activities requiring the issuance of a
certificate of appropriateness.
(Ord. 1205, passed 3-6-95)
§ 153.37 DEMOLITION PERMIT; APPEAL PROVISIONS.
(A) The purpose of this section is to preserve historic districts that are important to the education,
culture, traditions, and economic values of the city, and to afford the city, historical organizations, and
other interested persons the opportunity to acquire or to arrange for the preservation of these buildings.
(B) If the Commission denies the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness for the demolition of
a building or structure, a demolition permit may be issued by oilier agencies and a building may be
demolished, but only after establishing all of the following.
( 1) The property owner must demonstrate to the Commission that an historic building or
structure is incapable of earning an economic return on its value, as appraised by a licensed real estate
appraiser.
(2) The property owner shall file with the Administrator documented evidence that a good faith
. ___ / effort is being made to sell or otherwise dispose of the property at fair market value to any public or
private person or agency which gives a reasonable assurance of its willingness to preserve and restore
56 Nappanee ~ Land Usage
the property. This documented evidence shall be provided at the property owner's expense and shall
include:
(a) The offering price;
(b) The date the offer of sale is to begin;
(c) The name and address of the listing real estate agent, if any;
(d) A copy of an advertisement to run in the same manner as the notice in division (C)
below which offers the property for sale; and
(e) An appraisal of the property's fair market value by a licensed real estate appraiser.
(C) Notice of the proposed demolition must be given for a period fixed by the Commission, based
on the Commission's classification on the approved map, but not less than 60 days nor more than one
year. Notice must be posted on the premises of the building or structure proposed for demolition in a
location clearly visible from the street. In addition, notice must be published in a newspaper of general
local circulation at least three times before demolition, with the first publication not more than 15 days
after the application for a pennit to demolish is filed, and the final publication at least 15 days before
the date of the permit.
(D) The Commission may approve a certificate of appropriateness at any time during the notice
period under division (C) above. If the certificate is approved, a demolition permit shall be issued
without further delay, and demolition may proceed.
(Ord. 1205, passed 3-6-95)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 153.50 INTERESTED PARTIES; RIGHT OF ACTION.
(A) For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning,
INTERESTED PARTY. One of the following:
(a) The Mayor of the city;
(b) The City Council;
(c) The Historic Preservation Commission of the city;
•
ffistoric Preservation 57
(d) A neighborhood association, whether incorporated or unincorporated, a majority of
whose members are residents under this chapter;
(e) An owner or occupant owning or occupying property in an historic district or
conservation district established by an ordinance adopted under this chapter;
(f) Historic Landmarks Foundation of Indiana, Inc. or any of its successors; or
(g) The state Historic Preservation offices designated under I.C. 14-21-1 et seq., as may
be amended from time to time.
(B) Every interested party has a private right of action to enforce and prevent violation of a
provision under this chapter, and with respect to any building, structure, or site within an historic
district, has the right to restrain, enjoin, or enforce by restraining order or injunction, temporarily or
permanently, any person from violating a provision of this chapter or an ordinance adopted by a unit
under this chapter.
(C) The interested party does not have to allege or prove irreparable harm or injury to any person
or property to obtain relief under this section.
'..·} (D) The interested party bringing an action under this section does not have to post bond unless the
·. '
court, after a hearing, determines that a bond should be required in the interest of justice.
(E) The interested party that brings an action under this section is not liable to any person for
damages resulting from bringing or prosecuting the action, unless the action was brought without good
faith or without a reasonable belief that a provision of this chapter, or an ordinance adopted by a unit
under this chapter, had been, or was about, to be violated or breached.
(F) An interested party who obtains a favorable judgment in an action under this section may
recover reasonable attorneys' fees and court costs from the person against whom judgment was rendered.
(G) An action arising under this section must be brought in the circuit or superior court of the
county in which the historic district lies, and no change of venue from the county shall be allowed in the
action.
(H) The remedy provided in this section is in addition to other remedies that may be available at law
or in equity.
(Ord. 1205, passed 3-6-95)
§ 153.51 VIOLATIONS; REMEDIES; JUDICIAL REVIEW.
(A) Any person, whether as principal, agent, owner, lessee, tenant, contractor, builder, architect,
engineer, or otherwise, who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject to a frne for each
offense. Each day of the existence of any violation of this chapter shall be a separate offense.
58 Nappanee - Land Usage
(B) The erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, demolition, color change, moving,
or maintenance of any building, structure, or appurtenance which is begun, continued, or maintained
contrary to the provisions of this chapter is hereby declared to be a nuisance and in violation of this
chapter and unlawful. The city may institute a suit for injunction in the circuit court or superior court
of the county in which the subject real estate is located to restrain any person or governmental unit from
violating any provision of this chapter and to cause the violation to be prevented, abated, or removed.
This type of action may also be instituted by any property owner who is adversely affected by the
violation of any provision of this chapter.
(C) The reme.dies provided for in this section shall be cumulative and not exclusive, and shall be
in addition to any other remedies provided by law.
(D) Any person or party aggrieved by a decision or action taken by the Commission shall be entitled
to a judicial review thereof in accordance with I. C. 4-21.5-1.
(Ord. 1205, passed 3-6-95) Penalty, see§ 10.99
Section
154.001
154.002
154.003
154.004
154.005
154.006
154.007
154.008
154.009
154.010
154.011
154.012
• 154.013
154.025
154.026
154.027
154.040
154.041
154.042
154.043
154.044
154.045
154.046
154.047
2016 S-1
CHAPTER 154: FLOOD HAZARD AREAS
General Provisions
Statutory authorization
Findings of fact
Statement of purpose
Objectives
Definitions
Lands to which these regulations fipply
Basis for establishing regulatory flood data
Establishment of floodplain development pennit
Compliance
Abrogation and greater restrictions
Discrepancy between mapped floodplain and actual ground elevations
Interpretation
Warning and disclaimer of liability
Administration
Designation of Administrator
Permit procedures
Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator
Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
General standards
Specific standards
Standards for subdivision proposals
Critical facility
Standards for identified floodways
Standards for identified fringe
Standards for SFHAs·without established base flood elevation and/or floodways/fringes
Standards for flood prone areas
59
60
154.060
154.061
154.062
154.063
154.064
154.065
154.066
154.999
Nappanee - Land Usage
Variance Procedures
Designation of Variance and Appeals Board
Duties of Variance and Appeals Board
Variance.procedures
Conditions for variance
Variance notification
Historic structure
Special conditions
Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 154.001 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.
The Indiana Legislature has in I. C. 36-7-4 granted the power to local government units to control
land use within their jurisdictions. Therefore, the Common Council of the city does hereby adopt the
fallowing floodplain management regulations and this chapter shall amend Ord. 1452 in its entirety.
(Ord. 1507, passed 9-21-15)
§ 154.002 FINDINGS OF FACT.
(A) The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life
and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of
which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare,
(B) These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing
increases in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy in flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable
to floods or hazardous to other lands which are inadequately elevated, inadequately flood-proofed, or
otherwise unprotected from flood damages.
(Ord. 1507, passed 9-21-15)
§ 154.003 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare and to
minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
2016 S-1
Flood Hazard Areas 61
(A) Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or
erosion hazards, which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities.
(B) Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected
against flood damage at the time of initial construction.
(C) Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers
which are involved in the accommodation of flood waters.
(D) Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase erosion or flood
damage.
(E) Prevent or regulate the construction of flood bilrriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters
or which may increase flood hazards to other lands.
(F) Make federal flood insurance available for structures and their contents in the city by fulfilling
the requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program.
(Ord. 1507, passed 9-21-15)
§ 154.004 OBJECTIVES.
The objectives of this chapter are:
(A) To protect human life and health.
(B) To rninllnize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects.
(C) To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally
undertaken at the expense of the general public.
(D) To minitnize prolonged business interruptions.
(E) To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric,
telephone, and sewer lines, streets, and bridges located in floodplains.
(F) To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood
prone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas.
(Ord. 1507, passed 9-21-15)
?016S-1
62 Nappanee - Land Usage
§ 154.005 DEFINITIONS.
Unless specifically defined below~ words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as
to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable
application.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE (APPURTENANT STRUCTURE). A structure with a floor area 400
square feet or less that is located on the same parcel of property as the principal structure and the use
of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure. ACCESSORY STRUCTURES should
constitute a minimal initial investment, may not be used for human habitation, and be designed to have
minimal flood damage potential. Examples of ACCESSORY STRUCTURES are detached garages,
carports, storage sheds, pole barns, and hay sheds.
ADDffiON (TO AN EXISTING STRUCTURE). Any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter
of a structure in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall.
Any walled and roofed addition, which is connected by a frrewall or is separated by independent
perimeter load-bearing walls, is new construction.
APPEAL. A request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator's interpretation of any provision
of this chapter.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING. A desiguated AO or AH Zone on the community's Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet where a clearly defined
channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity
flow may be evident, Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
A ZONE. Portions of the SFHA in which the principal source of flooding is runoff from rainfall,
snowmelt, or a combination of both. In A ZONES, floodwaters may move slowly or rapidly, but waves
are usually not a significant threat to buildings. These areas are labeled as ZONE A, ZONE AE,
ZONES Al-A30, ZONE AO, ZONE AH, ZONE AR and ZONE A99 on a FIRM. The definitions are
presented below:
(1) ZONE A. Areas subject to inundation by the 1 % annual chance flood event. Because
detailed hydraulic analyses have not been performed, no base flood elevation or depths are shown.
(2) ZONE AE AND Al-A30. Areas subject to inundation by the I% annual chance flood event
determined by detailed methods. Base flood elevations are shown within these zones. (ZONE AE is on
new and revised maps in place of ZONES Al-A30.)
(3) ZONE AO. Areas subject to inundation by 1 % annual chance shallow flooding (usually
sheet flow on sloping terrain) where average depths are between one and three feet, Average flood depths
derived from detailed hydraulic analyses are shown within this zone.
?fl 1,; .'\-1
Flood Hazard Areas 63
(4) ZONE AH. Areas subject to inundation by 1 % annual chance shallow flooding (usually
areas of ponding) where average depths are between one and three feet. Average flood depths derived
from detailed hydraulic analyses are shown within this zone.
(5) ZONE AR. Areas that result from the decertification of a previously accredited flood
protection system that is determined to be in the process of being restored to provide base flood
protection.
(6) ZONE A99. Areas subject to inundation by the 1 % anuua1 chance flood event, but which
will ultimately be protected upon completion of an under-construction Federal flood protection system.
These are areas of special flood hazard where enough progress has been made on the construction of a
protection system, such as dikes, dams, and levees, to consider it complete for insurance rating purposes.
ZONE A99 may only be used when the flood protection system has reached specified statutory progress
toward completion. No base flood elevations or depths are shown. ·
BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1 % chance of being equaled or exceeded in auy given year.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE). The elevation of the 1 % annoal chance flood.
BASEMENT. That portion of a structure having its floor sub-grade (below ground level) on all
sides.
BOUNDARY RIVER. The part of the Ohio River that forms the boundary between Kentucky and
Indiana.
BOUNDARY RIVER FLOODWAY. The floodway of a boundary river.
BUILDING. See STRUCTURE.
COMMUNITY. A politi"'1 entity that has the authority to adopt and enforce floodplain ordinances
for the area under its jurisdiction.
COMMUNITY RATING SYSTEM (CRS). A program developed by the Federal Insurance
Administration to provide incentives for those communities in the regular program that have gone beyond
the minimum floodplain management requirements to develop extra measures to provide protection from
flooding.
CRITICAL FACILITY. A facility for which even a slight chance of flooding might be too great
CRITICAL FACIUTIES illclude, but are not limited to, schools, nursing homes, hospitals, police, fire,
and emergency reyiponse installations, installations which produce, use or store hazardous materials or
hazardous waste.
2016 S-1
64 Nappanee - Land Usage
DEVELOPMENT.
(1) Any man made change to improved or unimproved real estate including but not limited to:
(a) Construction, reconstruction, or placement of a structure or any addition to a structure;
(b) Installing a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for a manufactured home or
installing a recreational vehicle on a site for more than 180 days;
(c) Installing utilities, erection of walls and fep.ces, construction of roads, or similar
projects;
(d) Construction of flood control structures such as levees, dikes, dams, channel
improvements, etc.;
(e) Mining, dredging, filling, grading, excavation, or drilling operations;
(f) Construction and/or reconstruction of bridges or culverts;
(g) Storage of materials; or
(h) Any other activity that might change the direction, height, or velocity of flood .or
surface waters.
(2) DEVELOPMENT does not include activities such as the maintenance of existing structures
and facilities such as painting, re-roofing; resurfacing roads; or gardening, plowing, and similar
agricultural practices that do not involve filling, grading, excavation, or the construction of permanent
structures.
D ZONE. Unstudied areas where flood hazards are undetermined, but flooding is possible. Flood
insurance is available in participating communities but is not required by regulation in this zone.
ELEVATED STRUCTURE. A non-basement structure built to have the lowest floor elevated above
the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, filled stem wall foundations (also
called chain walls), pilings, or columns (posts and piers).
ELEVATION CERTIFICATE. A certified statement that verifies a structure's elevation
information.
EMERGENCY PROGRAM. The first phase under which a community participates in the NFIP.
It is intended to provide a first layer amount of insurance at subsidized rates on all insurable structures
in that community before the effective date of the initial FtRM.
2016S-1
I
l I
ii
I'
t
Flood Hazard Areas 65
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park
or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured
homes are to be afftxed (including, at a minill111ro, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets,
and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the
community's first floodplain ordinance.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the
manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities 1 the construction of streets,
and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FEMA. The Federal Emergency Management Agency,
FLOOD. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land
areas from the overflow, the unusual and rapid accumulaticin, or the runoff of surface waters from any
source.
FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM). An official map on wlllch the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) or Federal Insurance Administration (FIA).has delineated the
areas of flood haZards and regulatory flood.way.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM), An official map of a community, on which FEMA has
delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS). The official hydraulic and hydrologic report provided by
FEMA. The report contains flood profiles, as well as the FIRM, FEFM (where applicable), and the
water surface elevation of the base flood.
FLOODPLAIN. The channel proper and the areas adjoining any wetland, lake, or watercourse
which have been or hereafter may be covered by the regulatory flood. The FLOODPLAIN includes both
the. floodway and the fringe districts.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT. The operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive
measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing, where possible, natural resources
in the floodplain, including but not lirriited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works,
floodplain management regulations, and open space plans.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS. This chapter and other zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances, and other
applications of police power which control development in flood-prone areas. This term describes
Federal, state. or local regulations in any combination thereof, which provide standards for preventing
')f\1h c;:_1
66 Nappanee - Land Usage
and reducing flood loss and damage. FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS are also
referred to as floodplain regulations, floodplain ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, and
floodplain management requirements.
FLOOD PRONE AREA. Any land area acknowledged by a cmnmunity as being susceptible to
inundation by water from any source (see FLOOD).
FLOOD PROTECTION GRADE (FPG). The elevation of the regulatory flood plus two feet at any
given location in the SFHA (see FREEBOARD).
FLOODPROOFING (DRY FWODPROOFING). A method of protecting a structure that ensnres
that the structure, together with attendant utilities and sanitary facilities, is watertight to the flood proofed
design elevation with walls that are substantially impermeable to the passage of water. AH structural
components of these walls are capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic flood forces, including
the effects of buoyancy, and anticipated debris impact forces.
FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATE. Is a form used to certify compliance for non-residential
strucmres as an alternative to elevating structures to or above the PPG. This certification must be by
a registered professional engineer or architect.
FLOOD WAY. The channel of a river or stream and those portions of the floodplains adjoining the
channel which are reasonably required to efficiently carry and discharge the peak flood flow of the
regulatory flood of any river or stream.
FREEBOARD. A factor of safety, usually expressed in feet above the BFE, which is applied for
the purposes of floodplain management. It is used to compensate for the many unknown factors that
could contribute to flood heights greater than those calculated for the base flood.
FRINGE. Those portions of the floodplain lying outside the floodway,
HARDSHIP. (As related to variances of this chapter.) The exceptional hardship that would result
from a failure to grant the requested variance. The Board of Zoning Appeals requires that the variance
is exceptional, unusual, and peculiar to the property involved. Mere economic or financial hardship alone
is not exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps, personal preferences,
or the disapproval of one's neighbors likewise cannot, as a rule, qualify as an exceptional hardship. All
of these problems can be resolved through other means without granting a variance, even ~f the
alternative is more expensive, or requires the property owner to build elsewhere or put the parcel to a
different use than originally intended.
filGHEST ADJACENT GRADE. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to the
start of construction, next to the proposed walls of a structure.
•
F1ood Hazard Areas 67
HISTORIC STRUCTURES. Any structures individually listed on the National Register of Historic
Places or the Indiana State Register of Historic Sites and Structures.
INCREASED COST OF COMPLIANCE (ICC). The cost to repair a substantially damaged structure
that exceeds the minimal repair cost and that is required to bring a substantially damaged structure into
compliance with the local flood damage prevention ordinance. Acceptable mitigation measures are
elevation, relocation, demolition, or any combination thereof.
LETTER OF FINAL DETERMINATION (LFD). A letter issued by FEMA during the mapping
update process which establishes fmal elevations and provides the new flood map and flood study to the
community. The LFD initiates the six-month adoption period. The ccimmunity must adopt or amend its
floodplain management regulations dwing this six-month period unless the community has previously
incorporated an automatic adoption clause.
LETTER OF MAP CHANGE (LOMG). A general term used to refer to the several types of
revisions and amendments to FEMA maps that can be accomplished by letter. They include LETTER
OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA), LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR), and LETTER OF MAP
REVISION BASED ON FILL (LOMR-F). The definitions are presented below:
(1) LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA). An amendment by letter to the currently
effective FEMA map that establishes that a property is not located in a SFHA through the submittal of
property specific elevation data. A LOMA is only issued by FEMA.
(2) LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR). An official revision to the currently effective
FEMA map. It is issued by FEMA and changes flood zones, delineations, and elevations.
(3) LETTER OF MAP REVISION BASED ON FILL (LOMR-F). An official revision by letter
to an effective NFIP map. A LOMR-F provides FEMA 's determination concerning whether a structure
or parcel has been elevated on fill above the BFE and excluded from the SFHA.
LOWEST ADJACENT GRADE. The lowest elevation, after completion of construction, of the
ground, sidewalk, patio, deck support, or basement entryway immediately next to the structure .
. LOWEST FWOR. The lOwest elevation described among the following:
(!) The top of the lowest level of the structure.
(2) The top of the basement floor.
(3) The top of the garage floor, if the garage is the lowest level of the structure.
(4) The top of the first floor of a structure elevated on pilings or pillars.
2016 S-1
68 Nappanee - Land Usage
(5) The top of the floor level of any enclosure, other than a basement, below an elevated
structure where the walls of the enclosure provide any resistance to the flow of flood waters unless:
(a) The walls are designed to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on the
walls by allowing for the entry and exit of flood waters by providing a minimum of two openings (in
addition to doorways and windows) in a minimum of two exterior walls; if a structure has more than one
enclosed area, each shall have openings on exterior walls;
(b) The total net area of all openings shall be at least one square inch for every one square
foot of enclosed area; the bottom of all such openings shall be no higher than one foot above the exterior
grade or the interior grade immediately beneath each opening,- whichever is higher; and
(c) Such enclosed space shall be usable solely for the parl<lng of vehicles and building
access.
MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on
a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to
the required utilities. The term MANUFACTURED HOME does not include a RECREATIONAL
VEHICLE.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDWISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land
divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
MARKET VALUE. The building value, excluding the land (as agreed to between a willing buyer
and seller), as established by what the local real estate market will bear.MARKET VALUE can be
established by independent certified appraisil, replacement cost depreciated by age of building (actual
cash value), or adjusted assessed values.
MITIGATION. Sustained actions taken to reduce or eliminate long-term risk to people and property
from hazards and their effects. The purpose of mitigation is twofold: to protect people and structures,
and to minimize the cost of disaster response and recovery.
NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM (NFIP). The Federal program that makes flood
insurance available to owners of property in participating communities nationwide through the
cooperative efforts of the Federal Government and the private insurance industry.
NATIONAL GEODETIC VERTICAL DATUM (NGVD) OF I929 AS CORRECTED IN 1929. A
vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain.
NEW CONSTRUCTION. Any structure for which the START OF CONSTRUCTION commenced
after the effective date of the community's first floodplain ordinance.
Flood Hazard Areas 69
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured
homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets,
and either fmal site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date
of the community 1 s first floodplain ordinance.
NON-BOUNDARY RIVER Fl.OODWAY. The floodway of aoy river or strearo other thao a
boundary river.
NORTH AMERICAN VERTICAL DATUM OF 1988 (NA VD 88) AS ADOPTED IN 1993. A .
vertical control datum used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain.
OBSTRUCTION. Includes, but is not lhrdted to, aoy dam, wall, wharf, ernbaokment, levee, dike,
pile, abutment, protection, excaV-ation, canalization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock,
gravel, refuse, fill, structure, vegetation, or other material in, along, across or projecting into any
watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the flow of water;
or due to its location, its propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of water, or its
likelihood of being carried downstream.
ONE-PERCENT ANNUAL CHANCE FLOOD. The flood that has a I% chaoce of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year. Any flood zone that begins with the Jetter A is subject to the 1 % annual
chance flood (see REGULATORY FLOOD).
PHYSICAL MAP REVISION (PMR). An official republication of a cornmuoity's FEMA map to
effect changes to base (1 % annual chance) flood elevations, floodplain boundary delineations, regulatory
floodways, and planimetric features. These changes typically occur as a result of structlll'al works or
improvements, annexations resulting in additional flood hazard areas, or correction to base flood
elevations or SFHAs.
PUBLIC SAFETY AND NUISANCE. Anything which is injurious 1D the safety or health of an
entire community, neighborhood or any considerable number of persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free
passage or use, in the customary manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal, or basin.
RECREATIONAL VEfilCLE. A vehicle which is:
(I) Built on a single chassis;
(2) Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal,projections;
(3) Desigoed to be self propelled or permaneutly towable by a light duty truck; and
(4) Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as quarters for recreational
camping, travel, or seasonal use.
70 Nappanee - Land Usage
REGULAR PROGRAM. The phase of the community's participation in the NFIP where more
comprehensive floodplain management requirements are imposed and higher amounts of insurance are
available based upon risk zones and elevations determined in a FIS.
REGULATORY FLOOD. The flood having a I% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given
year, as calculated by a method and procedure that is acceptable to and approved by the Indiana
Department of Natural Resources and the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The regulatory
flood elevation at any location is as defined in § 154.026 The REGULA.TORY FWOD is also known
by the term BASE FLOOD. 1% ANNUAL CHANCE FLOOD, and 100-YEAR FLOOD.
REPETITIVE LOSS. Flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two separate occasions
during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on the
average, equaled or exceeded 25 % of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
SECTION 1316. That section of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968, as amended, which
states that no new flood insurance coverage shall be provided for any property that the Administrator
finds has been declared by a duly constituted state or local zoning authority or other authorized public
body to be in violation of state or local laws, regulations, or ordinances that intended to discourage or
otherwise restrict land development or occupancy in flood-prone areas.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA). Those lands within the jurisdiction of the city subject
to inundation by the regulatory flood. The SFHAs of the city, ta the extent they exist, are generally
identified as such on the Kosciusko County, Indiana and Incorporated Areas Flood Insurance Rate Map
dated September 30, 2015 and the Elkhart County, Indiana and Incorporated Areas Flood Insurance Rate
Map dated August 2, 2011 as well as any future updates, amendments, or revisions, prepared by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency with the most recent date (these areas are shown on a FIRM
as Zone A, AE, Al-A30, AH, AR, A99, or AO).
START OF CONSTRUCTION. Includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building
permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was
within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent
construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of piles,
the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement- of a
manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such
as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does
it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, foundations, or the erection of temporary forms;
nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not
occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main struchlre. For a substantial improvement, the actual
START OF CONSTRUCTION means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural
part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the biiilding.
Flood Hazard Areas 71
STRUCTURE. A structure that is principally above ground and is enclosed by walls and a roof.
The term includes a gas or liquid storage tank, a manufactured home, or a prefabricated building. The
term also includes recreational vehicles to be installed on a site for more than 180 days.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin susWned by a structure whereby the cost of
restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 % of the market value
of the structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of.the market value of the structure
before the start of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures that have incurred
REPETITIVE WSS or SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE regardless of the actual repair work performed. The
term does not include improvements of structures to correct existing violations of state or local health,
sanitary, or safety code requirements or any alteration of a HISTORIC STRUCTURE; provided that the
alteration will not preclude the structures continued designation as a HISTORIC STRUCTURE.
SUSPENSION. The removal of a participating community from the NFIP because the community
has not enacted and/ or enforced the proper floodplain management regulations required for participation
in the NF!P.
VARIANCE. A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter, which permits construction
in a manner otherwise prohibited by this chapter where specific enforcement would result in unnecessary
hardship.
VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with this
chapter. A structure or other development without the elevation, other certification, or other evidence
of compliance required in this chapter is presumed to be in VIOLATION until such time as that
documentation is provided.
WATERCOURSE. A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel or other topographic feature on or
over which waters flow at least periodically. WATERCOURSE includes specifically designated areas
in which substantial flood damage may occur.
X ZONE. The area where the flood hazard is less than that in the SFHA. Sbaded X ZONES shown
on recent FIR.Ms (B zones on older FIRMs) designate areas subject to inundation by the flood with a
0.2% chance of being equaled or exceeded (the 500-YEAR FLOOD). Unshaded X ZONES (C zones
on older FIR.Ms) designate areas where the annual exceedance probability of flooding is less than 0.2 % .
ZONE. A geographical area shown on a FIRM that reflects the severity or type of flooding in the
area.
?fl16 S-1
72 Nappanee - Land Usage
ZONE A. (See definition for A ZONE.)
ZONE B, C, AND X. Areas identified in the community as areas of moderate or minimal hazard
from the principal source of flood in the area. However, buildings in these zones could be flooded by
severe, concentrated rainfall coupled with inadequate local drainage systems. Flood insurance is available
in participating communities but is not required by regulation in these zones (ZONE X is used on new
and revised maps in place of ZONES Band C.)
(Ord. 1507, passed 9-21-15)
§ 154.006 LANDS TO WHICH THESE REGULATIONS APPLY.
This chapter shall apply to all SFHAs and known flood prone areas within the jurisdiction of the
city.
(Ord. 1507, passed 9-21-15)
§ 154.007 BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING REGULATORY FLOOD DATA.
This chapter's protection standard is the regulatory flood. The best available regulatory flood data
is listed below.
(A) The regulatory flood elevation, floodway, and fringe limits for the studied SFHAs within the
jurisdiction of the city shall be as delineated. on the 1 % annual chance flood profiles in the Flood
Insurance Study of Kosciusko County, Indiana and incorporated areas effectively dated September 30,
2015 and the corresponding~Flood Insurance Rate Map dated September 30, 2015 and the 1 % annual
chance flood profiles in the Flood Insurance Study of Elkhart County, Indiana and Incorporated Areas
dated August 2, 2011 and the corresponding Flood Insurance Rate Map dated August 2, 2011 as well
as any future updates, amendments, or revisions, prepared by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency with the most recent date.
(B) The regulatory flood elevation, floodway, and fringe limits for each of the SFHAs within the
jurisdiction of the city, delineated as an "A Zone" on the Kosciusko County, Indiana and Incorporated
Areas Flood Insurance Rate Map effectively dated September 30, 2015 and the Elkhart County, Indiana
and Incorporated Areas Flood Insurance Rate Map dated August 2, 2011 as well as any future updates,
amendments, or revisions, prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency with the most recent
date, shall be according to the best data available as provided by the Indiana Department of Natural
Resources; provided the upstream drainage area from the subject site is greater than one square mile.
Whenever a party disagrees with the be11t available data, the party needs to replace existing data with
better data that meets current engineering standards. To be considered, this data must be submitted to
the Indiana Department of Natural Resources for review and subsequently approved.
2016S-1
I
I
Flood Hazard Areas 73
(G) In the absence of a published FEMA map, or absence of identification on a FEMA map, the
regulatory flood elevation, tloodway, and fringe limits of any watercourse in the community's known
flood prone areas shall be according to the best data available as provided by the Indiana Department of
Natural Resources, provided the upstream drainage area from the subject site is greater than one square
mite.
(D) Upon issuance of a letter of final determination (LFD), any more restrictive data in the new (not
yet effective) mapping/study shall be utilized for· permitting and construction (development) pu.rposes,
replacing all previously effective less restrictive flood hazard data provided by FEMA.
(Ord. 1507, passed 9-21-15)
§ 154.008 ESTABLISHMENT OF FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
A floodplain development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this
chapter prior to the commencement of any development activities in areas of special flood hazard.
(Ord. 1507, passed 9-21-15)
§ 154. 009 COMPLIANCE.
No structure shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or structurally altered within the SFHA
without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. No land or stream
within the SFHA shall hereafter be altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and
other applicable regulations.
(Ord. 1507, passed 9-21-15)
§ 154.010 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or
deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another chapter or ordinance conflict or overlap,
whichever imposes the more stringent restt:ictions shall prevail.
(Ord. 1507, passed 9-21-15)
§ 154.011 DISCREPANCY BETWEEN MAPPED FLOODPLAIN AND ACTUAL GROUND
ELEVATIONS.
(A) In cases where there is a discrepancy between the mapped floodplain (SFHA) on the FIRM and
the actual ground elevations, the elevation provided on the profiles shall govern.
2016 S-1
74 Nappanee ~ Land Usage
(B) If the elevation of the site in question is below the base flood elevation, that site shall be
included in the SFHA and regulated accordingly.
(C) If the elevation (natural grade) of the site in question is above the base flood elevation and not
located within the flood way, that site shall be considered outside the SFHA and the floodplain regulations
will not be applied. The property owner shall be advised to apply for a LOMA.
(Ord. 1507, passed 9-21-15)
§ 154.012 INTERPRETATION.
In the interpretation and application of this chapter all provisions shall be:
(A) Considered as minimum requirements;
(B) Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
(C) Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.
(Ord. 1507, passed 9-21-15)
§ 154.013 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory
purposes and is based on available information derived from engineering and scientific methods of study.
Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Therefore, this chapter does not create any liability
on the part of the city, the Indiana Department of Natmal Resources, or the State of Indiana, for any
flood damage that results from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision made lawfully
thereunder.
(Ord. 1507, passed 9-21-15)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 154.025 DESIGNATION OF ADMINISTRATOR.
The Common Council hereby appoints the Zoning Administrator to administer and implement the
provisions of this chapter and is herein referred to as the Floodplain Administrator.
(Ord. 1507, passed 9-21-15)
2016 S-1
'
I
Flood Hazard Areas 75
§ 154.026 PERMIT PROCEDURES.
Application for a Floodplain Development Permit shall be made to the Floodplain Administrator on
forms furnished by him or her prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited
to, the following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and
elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, earthen fill, storage of materials or
equipment, drallage facilities, and the location of the foregoing, Specifically the following information
is required:
(A) Application stage.
(1) A description of the proposed development
(2) Location of the proposed development sufficient to accurately locate property and
structure(s) in relation to existing roads and streams.
(3) A legal description of the property site.
( 4) A site development plan showing existing and proposed development locations and existing
and proposed land grades.
(5) Elevation of the top of the planned lowest floor (including basement) of all proposed
buildings. Elevation should be in NA VD 88 or NGVD,
(6) Elevation (in NAVD 88 or NGVD) to which any non-residential structure will be
floodproofed.
(7) Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result
of proposed development. A hydrologic and hydraulic engineering study is required and any watercourse
changes submitted to DNR for approval and then to FEMA as a letter of map revision (see
§ 154.027(B)(6) for additional information).
(B) Construction stage.
(1) Upon establishment of the lowest floor of an elevated structure or structure constructed on
fill, it shall be the dnty of the applicant to submit to the Floodplaln Administrator a certification of the
NA VD 88 or NGVD elevation of the lowest floor, as built. Said certification shall be prepared by or
under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by the
same. The Floodplain Admlnistrator shall review the lowest floor elevation survey data submitted. The
applicant shall correct deficiencies detected by such review before any further work is allowed to
proceed. Failure to submit the survey or failure to make said correcti~ns required hereby shall be cause
to issue a stop-work order for the project. Any work undertaken prior to submission of the elevation
certification shall be at the applicant's risk.
76 Nappanee - Land Usage
(2) Upon establishment of the floodproofed elevation of a floodproofed structure, it shall be
the duty of the applicant to submit to the Floodplain Administrator a floodproofing certificate.
Certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered professional engineer
and certified by same (the Floodplain Administrator shall review the floodproofing certification
submitted). The applicant shall correct any deficiencies detected by such review before any further work
is allowed to proceed. Failure to submit the floodproofing certification or failure to make correction
required shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project.
(C) Finished construction. Upon completion of construction, an elevation certification (FEMA
Elevation Certificate Form 81-31 or any future updates) which depicts the as-built lowest floor elevation
is required to be submitted to the Floodplain Administrator. If the project includes a floodproofing
measure, flocxlproofing certification (FEMA Floodproofing Certificate Form 81-65 or any future
updates) is required to be submitted by the applicant to the Floodplain Administrator.
(Ord. 1507, passed 9-21-15)
§ 154.027 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
(A) The Floodplain Administrator and/or designated staff is hereby authorized and directed to
enforce the provisions of this chapter. The Administrator is further authorized to render interpretations
of this chapter, which are consistent with its spirit and purpose.
(B) Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Adn:rinistrator shall include, but are not limited to:
(1) Review all floodplain development permits to assure that the permit requirements of this
chapter have been satisfied.
(2) Inspect and inventory damaged structures in the SFHA and complete substantial damage
determinations.
(3) Ensure that construction authorization has been granted by the Indiana Department of
Natural Resources for all development projects subject to§§ 154.044 and 154.045(A), and J!.laintain a
record of such authorization (either copy of actual permit/authorization or floodplain analysis/regulatory
assessment).
( 4) Ensure that all necessary Federal or state permits have been received prior to issuance of
the local floodplain development permit. Copies of such permits/authorizations are to be maintained on
file with the floodplain development permit.
(5) Maintain and track permit records involving additions and improvements to residences
located in the floodway.
••
Flood Hazard Areas 77
(6) Notify adjacent communities and the State Floodplain Coordinator prior to any alteration
or relocation of a watercourse, and submit copies of such notifications to FEMA.
(7) Maintain for public inspection and furnish upon request local permit documents, damaged
structure inventories, substantial damage determinations, regulatory flood data, SFHA maps, letters of
map change (LOMC), copies of DNR permits, letters of authorization, and floodplain analysis and
regulatory assessments (letters of recommendation)', Federal permit documents, and as-built elevation
and floodproofing data for all buildings constructed subject to this chapter.
(8) Utilize and enforce all letters of map change (LOMC) or physical map revisions (PMR)
issued by FEMA for the currently effective SFHA maps of the community.
(9) Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of said
watercourse so that the flood~carrying capacity is not diminished.
(10) Review certified plans and specifications for compliance.
(11) Verify and record the actual elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new
or substantially improved structures, in accordance with§ 154.026.
(12) Verify and record the actual elevation to which any neW or substantially improved
.. ./
1 structures bave been floodproofed in accordance with§ 154.026.
( 13) Perform a minimum of three inspections to ensure that all applicable ordinances and
floodplain development requirements have been satisfied. The first upon the establishment of the flood
protection grade reference mark at the development site; the second upon the establishment of the
structure's footprint/establishment of the lowest floor; and the final inspection upon completion and
submission of the required finished construction elevation certificate. Authorized city officials shall have
the right to enter and inspect properties located in the SFHA.
(14) Stop work orders.
(a) Upon notice from the Floodplain Administrator, work on any building, structure or
premises that is being done contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall immediately cease.
(b) Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given td the owner of the property, or to
his agent, or to the pers'on doing the work, and shall state the conditions under which work may be
resumed.
(15) Revocation of pennits.
(a) The Floodplain Adntinistrator may revoke a permit or approval, issued under the .
provisions of the chapter, in cases where there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to
the material fact in the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based.
2016 S-1
78 Nappanee - Land Usage
(b) The Floodplain Administrator may revoke a permit upon determination by the
Floodplain Administrator that the construction, erection,_ alteration, repair, moving, demolition,
installation, or replacement of the structure for which the permit was issued is in violation of, or not in
conformity with, the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 1507, passed 9-21-15)
PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
§ 154,040 GENERAL STANDARDS.
In all SFHAs and known flood prone areas the following provisions are required:
(A) New construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse
or lateral movement of the structure.
(B) Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement.
Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground
anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for
resisting wind forces.
(C) New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility
equipment resistant to flood damage below the PPG.
(D) New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices
that minimize flood damage.
(E) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment, utility meters, and other
service facilities shall be located at/above the FPG or designed so as to prevent water from entering or
accumulating within the components below the FPG. Water and sewer pipes, electrical and telephone
lines, submersible pumps, and other waterproofed service facilities may be located below the PPG.
(F) New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of flood waters into the system.
(G) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of flood waters into the· system.
(H) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or
contamination from them dming flooding.
2016 S-1
Flood Hazard Areas 79
(I) Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a structure that is in compliance with
the provisions of this chapter shall meet the requirements of new construction as contained in this
chapter.
(D Parking lots, driveways, and sidewalks within the SFHA shall be constructed with permeable
materials.
(K) Whenever any portion of the SFHA is authorized for use, the volume of space which will be
occupied by the authorized fill or structure below the BFE shall be compensated for and balanced by an
equivalent volume of excavation taken below the BFE. The excavation volume shall be at least equal to
the volume of storage lost (replacement ratio of one to one) due to the fill or structure.
(1) The excavation shall take place in the floodplain and in the same property in which the
authorized fill or structure is located.
(2) Under certain circumstances, the excavation may be allowed to take place outside of, but
adjacent. to, the floodplain provided that the excavated_ volume will be below the regulatory flood
elevation, will be in the same property in which the authorized fill or structure is located, will be
accessible to the regulatory flood water, will not be subject to ponding when not inundated by flood
water, and that it shall not be refilled.
(3) The excavation shall provide for true storage ·of floodwater but shall not be subject to
ponding when not inundated by flood water.
(4) The fill or structure shall not obstruct a drainage way leading to the floodplain.
(5) The grading around.the excavation shall be such that the excavated area is accessible to the
regulatory flood water.
(6) The fill or structure shall be of a material deemed stable enough to remain firm and in place
during periods of flooding and shall include provisions to protect adjacent property owners against any
increased runoff or drainage resulting from its placement.
(7) Plans depicting the areas to be excavated and filled shall be submitted prior to the actual
start of construction or any Site work; once site work is complete, but before the actual start of
construction, the applicant shall provide to the Floodplain Administrator a certified survey of the ·
excavation and fill sites demonstrating the fill and excavation comply with this chapter.
(Ord. 1507, passed 9-21-15)
§ 154.041 SPECIFIC STANDARDS.
In all SFHAs, the following provisions are required:
?.n16 S-1
80 Nappanee M Land Usage
(A) In addition to the requirements of§ 154.040, all structures to be located in the SF11A shall be
protected from flood damage below the FPG. This building protection requirement applies to the
following situations:
(1) Construction or placement of any structure having a floor area greater than 400 square feet.
(2) Addition or improvement made to any existing structure where the cost of the addition or
improvement equals or exceeds 50 % of the value of the eXisting structure (excluding the value of the
land).
(3) Reconstruction or repairs made to a damaged structure where the costs of restoring the
structure to it's before damaged condition equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure
(excluding the value of the land) before damage occurred.
(4) Installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a site for more than 180 days.
(5) Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new manufactured home on an existing
site. This chapter does not apply to returning the existing manufactured home to the same site it lawfully
occupied before it was removed to avoid flood damage.
(6) Reconstruction or repairs made to a repetitive loss structure.
(7) Addition or improvement made to any existing structure with a previous addition or
hnprovement constructed since the community's first floodplain ordinance.
(B) Residential structures. New construction or substantial improvement of any residential structure
(or manufactured home) shall have the lowest floor; including basement, at or above the PPG (two feet
above the base flood elevation). Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure,
openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance
with the standards of division (D).
(C) Non-residential strudures. New construction or substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial, or non-residential structure (or manufactured home) shall either have the lowest floor,
including basement, elevated to or above the FPG (two feet above the base flood elevation) or be
floodproofed to or above the FPG. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a
structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the mrimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided
in accordance with the standards of division (D). Structures located in all A Zones may be floodproofed
in lieu of being elevated if done in accordance with the following:
(1) A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the structure has been
designed so that below the PPG, the structure and attendant utility facilities are watertight and capable
of resisting the effects of the regulatory flood. The structure design shall take into account flood
velocities, duration, rate of rise, hydrostatic pressures, and impacts fr01n debris or ice. Such certification
shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator as set forth in§ 154.027(B)(12).
'
·.
)
·-_/
Flood Hazard Areas 81
(2) Floodproofing measures shall be operable without human intervention and without an
outside source of electricity.
(D) Elevated structures.
(1) New construction or substantial :improvements of elevated structures shall have the lowest
floor at or above the PPG.
(2) Elevated structures with fully_ enclosed areas formed by foundation and other exterior walls
below the flood protection grade shall be designed to preclude finished living space and designed to allow
for the entry and exit of floodwaters to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls.
Designs must meet the following minimum criteria:
(a) Provide a minimum of two openings located in a minimum of two exterior walls
(having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every one square foot of enclosed area).
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no more than one foot above the exterior grade or
the interior grade immediately beneath each opening, whichever is higher.
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices
provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in both directions.
(d) Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow for parking for
vehicles (garage door) or limited storage of maintenance equipment used :in connection. with the premises
(standard exterior door) or entry to the living area (stairway or elevator).
(e) The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into
separate rooms.
(f) The interior grade of such enclosed area shall be at an elevation at or higher than the
exterior grade.
(g) Openings are to be not less than three inches in any direction in the plane of the wall.
This requirement applies to the hole in the wall, excluding any device that may be inserted such as
typical foundation air vent device.
(h) Property owners shall be required to execute a flood openings/venting affidavit
acknowledging that all openings will be maintained as flood vents, and that the elimmation or alteration
of the openings in any way will violate the requirements of § 154. 04 l(D). Periodic inspections will be
conducted by the Floodplain Administrator to ensure compliance. The affidavit shall be recorded in the
office of the county recorder of the county :in which the property is located. ·
?016S-1
82 Nappanee - Land Usage
(i) Property ow~ers shall be required to execute and record with the structure's deed a
non-conversion agreement declaring that the area below the lowest floor (where the interior height of
the enclosure exceeds six feet) shall not be improved, finished or otherwise converted; the community
will have the right to inspect the enclosed area. The non-conversion agreement shall be recorded in the
office of the county recorder of the county in which the property is located.
(E) Structures constructed on fill. A residential or nonresidential structure may be constructed on
a permanent land fill in accordance with the following:
(1) The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than one foot deep before compacting to 95%
of the maximum density obtainable with either the standard or modified proctor test method. The results
of the test.showing compliance shall be retained in the permit file.
(2) The fill shall extend ten feet beyond the foundation of the structure before sloping below
theBFE.
(3) The fill shall be protected against erosion and scour during flooding by vegetative cover,
riprap, or bulkheading. If vegetative cover is used, the slopes shall be no steeper than three horizontal
to one vertical.
( 4) The fill shall not adversely affect the flow of surface drainage from or onto neighboring
properties.
(5) The top of the lowest floor including basements shall be at or above the FPG.
(6) Fill shall be composed of clean granular or earthen material.
(F) Standards for manicjactured homes arui recreational vehicles. Manufactured homes and
recreational vehicles to be installed or substantially improved on a site for more than 180 days must meet
one of the following requirements:
(1) These requirements apply to all manufactured homes to be placed on a site outside a
manufactured home park or subdivision; in a new manufactured home park or subdivision; in an
expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or in an existing manufactured home
park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as a result of a
flood:
(a) The manufactured home shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the
lowest floor shall be at or above the FPG and securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation
system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
(b) Fully enclosed areas formed by foundation and other exterior walls below the FPG
shall be designed to preclude finished living space and designed to allow for the entry and exit of
•
Flood Hazard Areas 83
floodwaters to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls as required for elevated
structures in division (D).
(c) Flexible skirting and rigid skirting not attached to the frame or foundation of a
manufactured home are not required to have openings.
(2) These requirements apply to all manufactured homes to be placed on a site in ~ existing
manufactured home park or subdivision that has not been substantially damaged by a flood:
(a) The manufactured home shall be elevated so that the lowest floor of the manufactured
home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elevations that are no less than 36
inches in height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to
resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
(b) Fully enclosed areas formed by foundation and other exterior walls below the FPG
shall be designed to preclude fmished living space and designed to allow for the entry and exit of
floodwaters to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls as required for elevated
structures in division (D).
(c) Flexible skirting and rigid skirting not attached to the frame or foundation of a
manufactured home are not required to have openings.
(3) Recreational vehicles placed on a site shall either:
(a) Be on site for less than 180 days;
(b) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use (defined as being on its wheels or jacking
system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no
permanently attached additions); or
(c) Meet the requirements for manufactured homes as stated earlier in this section,
(G) Accessory structures. Relief to the elevation or dry floodproofing standards may be granted for
accessory structures. Such structures must meet the following standards:
(1) Shall not be used for human habitation;
(2) Shall be constructed of flood resistant materials;
(3) Shall be constructed and placed on ~e lot to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of
floodwaters;
2016 S-1
84 Nappanee ~ Land Usage
(4) Shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation;
(5) Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment shall be elevated or floodproofed
to or above the FPG; and
(6) Shall be designed to allow for the entry and exit of floodwaters to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls as required for elevated structures in division (D).
(H) Above ground gas or liquid storage tanks. All above ground gas or liquid storage tanks shall
be anchored to prevent flotation or lateral movement.
(Ord. 1507, passed 9-21·15)
§ 154.042 STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISION PROPOSALS.
(A) All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
(B) All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical,
and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.
(C) All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood
hazards.
(D) Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals and other proposed
development (including manufactured home parks and subdivisions), which is greater than the lesser of
50 lots or five acres.
(E) All subdivision proposals shall minimize development in the SFHA and/or limit density of
development permitted in the SFHA. ·
(F) All subdivision proposals shall ensure safe access into/out of SFHA for pedestrians and vehicles
(especially emergency responders).
(Ord. 1507, passed 9-21·15)
§ 154.043 CRITICAL FACILITY.
Construction of new critical facilities shall be, to the extent possible, located outside the limits of
the SFHA. Construction of new critical facilities shall be permissible within the SFHA if no feasible
alternative site is available. Critical facilities constructed within the SFHA shall have the lowest floor
elevated to or above the PPG at the site. Floodproofing and sealing measures must be taken to ensure
that toxic substances will not be displaced by or released into floodwaters. Access routes elevated to or
above the PPG shall be provided to all critical facilities to the extent possible.
(Ord. 1507, passed 9·21·15)
•
Flood Hazard Areas 85
§ 154.044 STANDARDSFORIDENTIFIEDFLOODWAYS.
(A) Located within SFHAs, established in § 154.007, are areas designated as floodways. The
floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters, which carry debris, potential
projectiles, and has erosion potential. If the site is in an identified floodway, the Floodplain
Administrator shall require the applicant to forward the application, along with all pertinent plans and
specifications, to the Indiana Department of Natural Resources and apply for a permit for construction
in a ftoodway. Under the provisions of I.C. 14-28-1 a permit for construction in a floodway from the
Indiana Department of Natural Resources is required prior to the issuance of a local building permit for
any excavation, deposit, construction, or obstruction activity located in the flood.way. This includes land
preparation activities such as filling, grading, clearing and paving etc. undertaken before the actual start
of construction of the structure. However, it does exclude non-substantial additions/improvements to
existing (lawful) residences in a non-boundary river floodway (I. C. 14-28-1-26 allows construction of
a non-substantial additionl improvement to a residence in a non-boundary river floodway without
obtaining a pennit for construction in the ftoodway from the Indiana Department of Natural Resources.
Please note that if fill is needed to elevate an addition above the existing grade, prior approval for the
fill is required from the Indiana Department of Natural Resources).
(B) No action shall be taken by the Flood.plain Administrator until a permit or letter of authorization
(when applicable) has been issued by the Indiana Department of Natural Resources granting approval
for construction in the floodway. Once a permit for construction in a floodway or letter of authorization
has been issued by the Indiana Department of Natural Resources, the Floodplain Administrator may issue
the local floodplain development permit, provided the provisions contained in§§ 154.025 et seq. have
been met. The floodplain development permit cannot be less restrictive than the permit for construction
in a floodway issued by the Indiana Department of Natural Resources. However, a community's more
restrictive regulations (if any) shall take precedence.
( C) No development shall be allowed, which acting alone or in combination with existing or future
development, that will adversely affect the efficiency of, or unduly restrict the capacity of the flood way.
This adverse affect is defined as an increase in the elevation of the regulatory flood of at least 0.15 of
a foot as determined by comparing the regulatory flood elevation under the project condition to that
under the natural or pre-floodway condition as proven with hydraulic analyses.
(D) For all projects involving channel modifications or fill (including levees) the city shall submit
the data and request that the Federal Emergency Management Agency revise the regulatory flood data
per mapping standard regulations found at 44 CFR § 65.12.
(Ord. 1507, passed 9-21-15)
§ 154.045 STANDARDS FOR IDENTIFIED FRINGE.
If the site is located in an identified fringe, then the Floodplain Administrator may issue the local
floodplain development permit provided the provisions contained in §§ 154.025 et seq, have been met.
2016 S-1
86 Nappanee ~ Land Usage
The key provision is that the top of the lowest floor of any new or substantially improved structure shall
be at or above the PPG.
(Ord. 1507, passed 9-21-15)
§ 154.046 STANDARDS FOR SFHAS WITHOUT ESTABLISHED BASE FLOOD
ELEVATION AND/OR FLOODWAYS/FRINGES.
(A) Drainage area upstream of the site is greater than one square mile:
(1) If the site is in an identified floodplain where the limits of the floodway and fringe have not
yet been determined, and the.drainage area -Upstream of the site is greater than one square mile, the
Floodplain Administrator shall require the applicant to forward the applicatio~. along with all pertinent
plans and specifications, to the Indiana Department of Natural Resources for review and comment.
(2) No action shall be taken by the Floodplain Administrator until either a permit for
construction in a floodway (including letters of authorization) or a floodplain analysis/regulatory
assessment citing the 1 % annual chance flood elevation and the recommended flood protection grade has
been received from the Indiana Department of Natural Resources.
(3) Once the Floodplain Administrator has received the proper permit for construction in a
floodway (including letters of authorization) or floodplain analysis/regulatory assessment approving the
proposed development, a floodplain development permit may be issued provided the conditions of the
floodplain development permit are not less restrictive than the conditions received from the Indiana
Department of Natural Resources and the provisions contained in§§ 154.025 et seq. have been met.
(B) Drainage area upstream of the site is less than one square mile:
(1) If the site is in an identified floodplain where the limits of the floodway and fringe have not
yet been determined and the drainage area upstream of the site is less than one square mile, the
Floodplain Administrator shall require the applicant to provide an engineering analysis showing the
limits of the floodplain and 1 % annual chance flood elevation for the site.
(2) Upon receipt, the Floodplain Administrator may issue the local Floodplain Development
Permit, provided the provisions contained in§§ 154.025 et seq. have been met.
(C) The total cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing
and anticipated development, shall not increase the regulatory flood more than 0.14 of one foot and shall
not increase flood damages or potential flood damages.
(Ord. 1507, passed 9-21-15)
'lf'\iC..C'1
•
•
Flood Hazard Areas 87
§ 154.047 STANDARDS FOR FLOOD PRONE AREAS.
All development in known flood prone areas not identified on FEMA maps, or where no FEMA
published map is available, shall meet applicable standards as required per §§ 154.025 et seq.
(Ord, 1507. passed 9-21-15)
VARIANCE PROCEDURES
§ 154.060 DESIGNATION OF V ARlANCE AND APPEALS BOARD.
The City of Nappanee Board of Zoning Appeals shall hear and decide appeals aod requests for
variances from requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 1507, passed 9-21-15)
§ 154,061 DUTIES OF VARIANCE AND APPEALS BOARD.
The Board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision,
or determination is made by the Floodplain Administrator in the enforcement or administration of this
chapter. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Board may appeal such decision to the Circuit or
Superior Courts of the county in which the property in question is located.
(Ord. 1507, p.Ssed 9-21-15)
§ 154,062 VARIANCE PROCEDURES.
In passing upon such applications, the Board shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant
factors, all standards specified in other sections of this chapter and:
J"
(A) ~e danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
(B) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such
damage on the individual owner;
(C) The :importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community;
(D) The necesSity of the facility to a waterfront location, where applicable;
(E) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding
or erosion damage;
2016 S-1
88 Nappanee ~ Land Usage
(F) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;
(G) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management
program for that area;
(H) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;
(I) The expected height, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment of transport of the
floodwaters at the site; and
(J) The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including
maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems,
and streets and bridges.
(Ord. 1507, passed 9-21-15)
§ 154.063 CONDITIONS FOR VARIANCE.
(A) Variances shall only-be issued when there is:
(1) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(2) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and
(3) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights,
additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud or
victimization of the public, or conflict with existing laws or ordinances.
(B) No variance for a residential use within a floodway subject to§§ 154.043 or 154.045(A) may
be granted.
(C) Any variance granted in a floodway subject to §§ 154.043 or 154.045(A) will require a permit
from the Indiana Department of Natural Resources.
(D) Variances to the provisions for flood hazard reduction of§ 154.041, may be granted only when
a new structure is to be located on a lot of one half acre or less in size, contiguous to and surrounded
by lots with existing structures constructed below the flood protection grade.
(E) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the mllrimum necessary,
considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
(F) variances may be granted for the reconstruction or restoration of anr structure individually
listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the Indiana State Register of Historic Sites and
Structures .
2016 S-1
,
Flood Hazard Areas 88A
(G) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the
difference between the flood protection grade and the elevation to which the lowest floor is to be built
and stating that the cost of the flood insurance will be Commensurate with the increased risk resulting
from the reduced lowest floor elevation (see§ 154.064).
(H) The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain the records of appeal actions and report any
variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency or the Indiana Department of Natural
Resources upon request (see§ 154.064).
(Ord. 1507, passed 9-21-15)
§ 154.064 VARIANCE NOTIFICATION.
(A) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted that a.11ows the lowest floor of a structure to be
built below the flood protection grade shall be given written notice over the signature of a community
official that:
(1) The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the flood protection grade will
result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance
coverage; and
(2) Such construction below the flood protection grade in.creases risks to life and property. A
t copy of the notice shall be recorded by the Floodplain Administrator in the Office of the County
1\ Recorder and shall be recorded in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel
ofland.
(B) The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain a record of all variance actions, including
justification for their issuance.
(Ord. 1507, passed 9-21-15)
§ 154.065 HISTORIC STRUCTURE.
Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination
that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an
historic structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the
structure,
(Ord. 1507, passed 9-21-15)
88B Nappanee - Land Usage
§ 154.066 SPECIAL CONDITIONS.
Upon the consideration of the factors listed in §§ 154.060 et seq. and the purposes of this chapter,
the Board of Zoning Appeals may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems
necessary to further the purposes of this chapter.
(Ord. 1507, passed 9-21-15)
§ 154.999 PENALTY.
Failure to obtain a floodplain development permit in the SFHA or failure to comply with the
requirements of a :floodplain development permit or conditions of a variance shall be deemed to be a
violation of this chapter. All violations shall be considered a common nuisance and be treated rui such
in accordance with the provisions of the zoning code for the city. All violations shall be punishable by
a fine not exceeding $500.
(A) A separate offense shall be deemed to occur for each day the violation continues to exist.
(B) The Common Council shall inform the owner that any such violation is considered a willful act
to increase flood damages and therefore may cause coverage by a standard flood insurance policy to be
suspended.
(C) Nothing herein shall prevent the city from taldng such other lawful action to prevent or remedy
any violations. All costs connected therewith shall accrue to the person or persons responsible.
(Ord. 1507, passed 9-21-15)
2016 S-1
····. \
' I
CHAPTER 155: ZONING AND SUBDIVISION CONTROL
Section
155.01 Regulations adopted by reference
§ 155.01 REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
The city's Unified Zoning and Subdivision Control Ordinance, which is city Ord. 1258, and all
amendments or successors thereto, are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this code as if
set forth in full herein.
89
90 Nappanee - Land Usage
I
Section
156.01 Title
156. 02 Purpose
156.03 Definitions
CHAPTER 156: MINlMUM HOUSING CODE
156.04 Minimum standards for all structures
156.05 Minimum standards for basic equipment and facilities
156.06 Minimum standards for light, ventilation, egress and heating
156.07 Safe and sanitary maintenance
156.08 Minimum space, use and location requirements
156.09 Responsibilities of owner and occupants
156.10 Hotels and rooming houses
156.11 Smoke detectors
156.12 Application for rental permit, annual registration, and inspections
; i 156.13 Inspection
156.14 Enforcement
·, !
156.15 Miscellaneous provisions
156.99 Penalties
§ 156. 01 TITLE.
There are hereby established rules and regulations for the repair or elimination of unfit and/or unsafe
housing conditions in the City of Nappanee, Indiana which shall be known as "The Minimum Housing
Code of the City of Nappanee, Indiana" and will be referred to hereafter as the "Code".
(Ord. 1362, passed 6-21-04)
§ 156.02 PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide minimum requirements to prevent the decay and
deterioration of places of human habitation or intended for human habitation for the protection of life,
limb, health, property, safety, and welfare for the general public and the owner and occupants of all
habitable buildings within the city.
(Ord. 1362, passed 6-21-04)
91
92 Nappanee - Land Usage
§ 156.03 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following defmitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
APARTMENT HOUSE. Any dwelling that is designed, built, rented, leased, let, or hired out to
be occupied, or which is occupied as the home or residence of three or more families living
independently of each other in dwelling units.
BOARDING HOUSE. See ROOMING HOUSE.
CEHJNG HEIGHT. The clear vertical distance from the finished floor to the fmished ceiling.
CITY. City of Nappanee, Indiana
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. Any employee of the city whose assigned duties include the
enforcement of one or more of the provisions of this chapter.
DEMOLISH. The tearing down and dt.sposal of the entire dwelling in a lawful manner, leaving the
property free and clear of any debris and without holes or pockets.
DETERIORATED. A building that is unfit for human habitation or unsafe and can be repaired,
altered, or improved to comply with all of the standards established by this chapter at a cost not in excess
of 50 % of its value, as determined by the findings of the Code Enforcement Officer.
DILAPIDATED. A building that is unfit for human habitation or unsafe and cannot be repaired,
altered, or improved to comply with all of the standards established by this code at a cost in excess of
50 % of its value, as determined by findings of the Code Enforcement Officer.
DWEIJ..JNG. A building that is wholly or partly used or intended to be used as a year round
residence, including manufactured and modular homes which are either permanently affixed to a
foundation or by nature of their design do not require a permanent foundation but not including a tent,
trailer. or other structure, other than a manufactured or modular home, that is designed to be
transportable.
DWEJ.LING UNIT. Any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling and forming a single
habitable unit with facilities which are used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking, and
eating.
EXIT. A clear and unobstructed way of departure from the interior of a dwelling to the exterior at
street or grade level.
FAMILY. An individual, or two or more persons related by blood, marriage, or adoption, or a
group of not more than three persons, not related by blood, marriage, or adoption, living together as a
single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit.
,_/
Minimum Housing Code 93
GARBAGE. The waste produced by the handling, processing, preparation, cooking and
consumption of animal or vegetable products used for human consumption. It consists of, but not limited
to all household and kitchen waste, such as discarded food or food residues, tin cans, bottles, and waste
paper or any material before or after decay may serve as feeding or breeding material for animals or flies
or other insects.
GUEST. A person who is a temporary resident (less than 25 % of the time) of a dwelling unit and
does not utilize the unit as a legal address for any purpose.
HABITABLE ROOM. A room or enclosed floor space used or intended to be used for living,
sleeping, or cooking purposes, excluding bathrooms, laundries, pantries, foyers, hallways, closets, and
storage spaces.
HOTEL. A building or structure kept, used, maintained, advertised or held out to the public to be
an inn, motel, lodge, donnitory, bed and breakfast or place where sleep or rooming accommodations
are furnished for hire or are used or maintained for the accommodation of guests or lodgers.
HOTEL ROOM. A room or rooms within a hotel which comprise a single unit and which unit is
let to a specific individual or individuals.
INSPECTION CERTIFICATE. A certificate issued by the Building Department, which documents
that, a rental unit has passed inspection and the owner is permitted to rent or lease the unit.
INSPECTION OFFICERS. The following persons, working separately or together, who shall
enforce the provisions of this chapter:
(1) Code Enforcement Officer or other designated officer or individual designated by the city;
(2) County Health Officer;
(3) City Electrical Inspector; or
(4) Building Inspector employed or contracted by the city.
LANDLORD.
(1) The owner, lessor, or sublessor of a rental unit or the property of which the unit is a part;
or
(2) A person authorized to exercise any aspect of the management of the premises, including
a person who directly or indirectly:
(a) Acts as rental agent; or
(b) Receives rent or any part of the rent other than as a bona fide purchaser.
94 Nappanee - Land Usage
NUISANCE. Whatever is;
(1) Injurious to health;
(2) Indecent;
(3) Offensive to the senses; or
( 4) An objection to the free use of property;
so as to essentially interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property.
OCCUPANT. Any person, living, sleeping, cooking, or having actual possession of a dwelling unit
or rooming unit; or any person having actual possession of any building or structure other than a
dwelling unit or rooming unit.
OWNER. Any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others:
(I) Shall have legal title to any dwelling, dwelling unit, or any other building or structure,
whether or not they occupy the same;
(2) Shall have charge, care or control of any dwelling, dwelling unit, or any other building or
structure, as owner or agent of the owner, or as executor, executrix administrator, administratrix, trustee
or guardian of the estate of the owner, any such person representing the actual owner shall be bound to
comply with the provisions of this chapter, to the same extent as if he or she were the owner; or
(3) Shall be the purchaser under a recorded land contract of any dwelling, dwelling unit or any
other building or structure, whether or not they occupy the same.
PERSON. Any entity, including any individual, firm, corporation, association, partnership or
limited liability company.
PLUMBING. Any of the following supplied facilities and equipment: gas pipes, gas-burning
equipment, water pipes, garbage disposal units, waste pipes, toilets, sinks, installed dishwashers,
bathtubs, showers, installed clothes-washing machines, catch basins, building drains, sewer drains,
vents, and .any other similar supplied fixtures, together with all connection to water, sewer or gas lines.
REGISTRATION FEE. The amount paid to the office of the Clerk-Treasurer when registering a
rental unit with the city.
REGISTRATION RECEIPT. The receipt issued by the office of the Clerk-Treasurer which
documents that a dwelling unit has been registered and the owner has paid the appropriate registration
fee.
•
Minimum Housing Code 95
RENTAL UNIT.
(1) A structure, or the part of a structure, that is used as a home, residence, or sleeping unit,
by:
(a) One individual who maintains a household; or
(b) Two or more individuals who ni.aintain a common household; or
(2) Any grounds, facilities, or area promised for the use of a residential tenant, including the
following:
(a) An apartment unit.
(b) A boarding house.
(c) A rooming house.
(d) A mobile home space.
(e) A single or two family dwelling.
RENTAL UNIT COMMUNITY. One or more parcels of contiguous real property upon which are
located one or more structures containing rental units, if:
(1) The combined total of all rental units in all of the structures is five or more rental units;
and
(2) The rental units are not occupied solely by the owner of the owner's family.
ROOMING HOUSE. A dwelling, or part of a dwelling containing one or more rooming units, in
which space is let by the owner or the owner's representative to persons who are not husband, wife, son,
daughter, mother, father, sister or brother of the owner or the owner's representative and which does
not satisfy the definition herein of a hotel.
ROOMING UNIT. A room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit used or intended to
be used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking purposes and which does not satisfy the defmition
herein of a hotel.
SOUD WASTE. All solid and semi-solid wastes, including garbage, litter, trash, refuse, and
rubbish.
SUBSTANTIAL PROPERTY INTEREST. Any right in real estate susceptible of being affected
in a substantial way by action authorized by this chapter, including a fee interest, life estate interest,
future interest, present possessory interest, or equitable interest of a contract purchaser.
96 Nappanee - Land Usage
TENANT. Any person who alone or jointly or severally with others occupies a dwelling under an
oral or written lease or holds a legal tenancy in a dwelling.
UNSAFE BUILDING. A building or structure, or any part of a building or structure, that is:
(1) In an impaired structural condition that makes it unsafe to a person or property;
(2) A fire hazard;
(3) Hazard to the public health;
(4) A public nuisance;
(5) Dangerous to a person or property because of a violation of a statute or ordinance
concerning building conditions or maintenance; or
(6) Vacant and not maintained in a manner that would allow human habitation, occupancy, or
use under the requirements of a statute or an ordinance.
UNSAFE PREMISES. The tract of real estate on which an unsafe building is located.
(Ord. 1362, passed 6-21-04; Am. Ord. 1485, passed 7-7-14)
§ 156.04 MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR ALL STRUCTURES.
No building, accessory building, or garage, whether used fur residential, commercial, industrial or
other purposes, shall fail to comply with the following requirements:
(A) Every supplied facility, piece of equipment, or utility which is required under this chapter shall
be so constructed or installed that it will function safely and effectively, and shall be maintained in
satisfactory working condition.
(B) Every foundation, floor, wall, ceiling, and roof shall:
(1) Be reasonably weather tight and rodent proof;
(2) Be capable of affording privacy; and
(3) Be kept in good repair.
(C) The roof and flashing shall be sound, tight and not have defects that admit rain. Roof drainage
shall be adequate to prevent dampness or deterioration in the walls or interior portion of the building.
Roof drainage, gutters and down spouts shall be maintained in good repair and free from obstructions.
Roof water shall not be discharged in a manner that creates a hazard on the premises of adjacent property
that is contrary to other city ordinances and provisions.
Minhnum Housing Code 97
(D) Every window, exterior door, and basement hatchway shall be reasonably weather tight and
rodent proof, and shall be kept in sound working condition and good repair. All glazing materials shall
be maintained free from cracks and holes.
(E) Every inside and outside stair, every porch, and every appurtenance thereto shall be so
constructed as to be safe to use and capable of supporting the load that normal use may cause to be
placed thereon, and shall be kept in sound condition and good repair. Metal fire escapes shall be
maintained in a rust free condition.
(F) Every handrail and guard shall be firmly fastened and capable of supporting normally imposed
loads and shall be maintained in good condition.
(G) All wood and metal surfaces, including but not limited to, window frames, doors, door frames,
cornices, porches and trim shall be maintained in good condition. Peeling, flaking, and chipped paint
shall be eliminated and surfaces repainted.
(H) All cornices, belt coursed, corbels, terracotta trim, wall facings and similar decorative features
shall be maintained in good repair with proper anchorage and in a safe condition.
(I) All canopies, marquees, signs, metal awnings, fire escapes, standpipes, exhaust ducts, and
similar overhang extensions shall be maintained in good repair and be properly anchored so as to be kept
in a sound condition. When required, all exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be protected from the
elements against decay or rust by periodic application of weather-coating materials, such as paint or
similar surface treatment.
(J) Any pipes, ducts, conductors, fans, or blowers shall not discharge gases, steam, vapor, hot air,
grease, smoke, odors, or other gaseous or particulate wastes directly upon abutting or adjacent public
or private property or that of another tenant.
(K) All additions or improvements to any building or structure must be made in accordance with
the city Building Code.
(L) All premises shall be graded and maintained to prevent the erosion of soil and to prevent the
accumulation of stagnant water thereon or within any structure located thereon.
(M) All sidewalks, walkways, stairs, driveways, parking spaces and similar areas shall be kept
in a proper state of repair and maintained free from hazardous conditions.
(N) Any portion, member or appurtenance of a building shall not be likely to fail, to become
detached, dislodged or to collapse and thereby injure persons or damage property.
(0) The building or structure shall not be unsafe for the purpose for which it is being used.
_/ (P) The building or structure shall not be in such a condition that it is likely to partially or
completely collapse due to:
98 Nappanee - Land Usage
(1) Dilapidation, deterioration, or decay;
(2) Faulty construction; or
(3) The removal, movement or instability of any portion of the ground necessary for the
purpose of supporting such building; or the deterioration, decay or inadequacy of its foundation.
(Q) Exterior walls or other vertical structural members shall not list, lean or buckle to such an
extent that a plumb line passing through the center of gravity does not fall inside the middle one-third
of the base.
(R) The building or structure, exclusive of the foundation, shall not show 33% or more damage or
deterioration of its supporting member or members or 50% damage or deterioration of its non-supporting
members, enclosings, or outside walls or coverings.
(S) The building or structure shall not have less than 66 % of the strength, fire resisting qualities
or characteristics, or weather resisting qualities or characteristics required by law in the case of newly
constructed building of like area, height or occupancy in the same location.
(T) The building shall not be so damaged by fire, earthquake, flood or any other cause that the
structural strength and stability is materially less than it was before the catastrophe, and is less than the
minimum requirements for new buildings o~ similar structure, purpose or location.
(U) The building or structure shall not be so damaged by fire, wind, earthquake or flood that it has
become so dilapidated and deteriorated as it becomes freely accessible to persons.
(V) The building or structure shall not, because of obsolescence, dilapidated condition,
deterioration, damage, lack of sufficient fire resistive construction, electrical wiring, gas connection, or
heating apparatus become a fire hazard.
(W) A portion of the building or structure shall not remain on the real estate more than three months
after demolition or destruction.
(Ord. 1362, passed 6-21-04; Am. Ord. 1485, passed 7-7-14)
§ 156.05 MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR BASIC EQUIPMENT AND FACILITIES.
No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy, any dwelling or dwelling
unit, for the purpose of living therein, which does not comply with the following requirements:
(A) Every dwelling unit shall contain a kitchen sink in good working condition and properly
connected to a water system and sewer system, approved by the city.
(B) Every dwelling unit, except as otherwise permitted under division (D), shall contain a room,
which affords privacy to a person within said room, and which is equipped with a flush toilet and a
.... \ ' '
.Minllnum Housing Code 99
bathroom sink in good working condition, properly connected to a water and sewer system approved by
the city.
(C) Every dwelling unit, except as otherwise permitted under division (D), shall contain within a
room which affords privacy to a person within said room, a bathtub or a shower in good working
condition and properly connected to a water and sewer system approved by the city.
(D) The occupants of a dwelling containing not more than two dwelling units may share a single
flush toilet, a single bathroom sink, and a single bathtub or shower if:
(1) Neither of the two dwelling units contains more than two rooms; provided, that for the
purposes of this subsection, a kitchenette or an efficiency kitchen with less than 60 square feet floor area
shall not be counted as a room; and
(2) The habitable area of each of the dwelling units shall equal not more than 250 sci.uare feet
of floor area; and
(3) The toilet, bathroom sink and bathtub or shower shall be in good working condition and
properly connected to water and sewer systems approved by the city.
(E) Every kitchen sink, bathroom sink, and bathtub or shower required under the provisions of this
section shall be properly connected with both hot and cold water lines when used for rental or lease
occupancy.
(F) Every dwelling when used for rental or lease occupancy shall have supplied water-heating
facilities which are properly installed, maintained in a safe and good working condition, properly
connected with the hot water lines required under the provisions of division (E), and are capable of
heating water to such temperature as to permit an adequate amount of water to be drawn at every
required kitchen sink, bathroom sink, bathtub or shower at a temperature of not less than 120°
Fahrenheit. Such supplied water heating facilities shall be capable of meeting the requirements of this
section when the dwelling unit heating facilities required under the provisions of§ 156.06(H) are not in
operation.
(G) Every dwelling unit shall have the correct house or apartment number displayed in numerals
as required by §§ 150.55 et seq. as may be amended from time to time.
(H) Every dwelling unit shall be supplied with adequate solid waste disposal facilities and storage
container.
(Ord. 1362, passed 6-21-04)
§ 156.06 MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR LIGHT, VENTILATION, EGRESS AND HEATING.
No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling
unit, for the purpose of living therein, which does not comply with the following requirements:
100 Nappanee - Land Usage
(A) Every window, other than a fixed window, shall be easily operable and capable of being held
in position by window hardware.
(B) Every habitable room shall have at least one window or skylight facing directly to the outdoors.
The minimum total window area, measured between stops, for every habitable room shall be 8 % of the
floor area of such room. Whenever walls or other portions of structures face a window of any such room
and such light-obstruction structures are located less than three feet from the window and extend to a
level above that of the ceiling of the room, such a window shall not be included as contribution to the
required minimum total window area. Whenever the only window in a room is a skylight-type window
in the top of such room, the total window area of such skylight shall equal at least 15% of the total floor
area of such room.
(C) Every habitable room shall have at least one window or skylight which Can be easily opened,
or such other device as will adequately ventilate the room. The total of operable window area in every
habitable room shall be equal to at least 45 % of the minimum window area size or minimum
skylight-type window size, as required in division (B), except where there is supplied some other device
affording adequate ventilation and approved by the Inspection Officer.
(D) Every bathroom with tub and or shower shall comply with the light and ventilation requirements
for habitable rooJJJJl contained in § 156.06(B) and (C), except that no window or skylight shall be
required in adequately ventilated bathrooms equipped with an operable ceiling electrical exhaust fan.
(E) In order to provide for the safe ventilation and provide for the safety of children, dwelling units,
which do not have central air conditioning systems, shall have fitted screens in good repair on all
operable windows. Windows in rooms used for sleeping purposes must have screens. Every window
and door opening to the outdoor space, used or intended to be used for ventilation, shall likewise be
supplied with screens unless the entire dwelling unit is adequately air-conditioned.
(F) Every basement or cellar window used or intended to be used for ventilation, and every other
opening to a basement which might provide an entry for rodents and/or insects shall be supplied with
a screen or such other device as will effectively preven~ their entry.
(G) Every dwelling unit shall have at least one safe, unobstructed means of egress leading to a safe
and open space at ground level; and every bedroom shall have at least one operable egress window or
exterior door. The sill height of an egress window shall not be higher than 44 inches above the floor.
The minimum opening area for an egress window shall be 5. 7 square feet. The m:inllnum clear opening
height of all egress windows shall be 22 inches, and the minimum width of all egress windows shall be
20 inches.
(H) Every dwelling shall have heating facilities which are properly installed, maintained in safe and
good worldng condition, and are capable of safely and adequately heating all habitable room, bathrooms,
and rooms in every dwelling unit located therein to a temperature of at least 68E Fahrenheit, at a point
three feet above the floor and two feet from exterior walls.
' i
Minimum Housing Code 101
(I) Every public hall and stairway in every dwelling containing three or more dwelling units shall
be adequately lighted at all times. Every public hall and stairway in structures devoted solely to dwelling
occupancy and containing not more than three dwellings units shall be supplied with conveniently located
light switches controlling an adequate lighting system which may be turned on when needed instead of
full-time lighting.
(Ord. 1362, passed 6-21-04)
§ 156.07 SAFE AND SANITARY MAINTENANCE.
No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy any dwelling unit, for
the purpose of living therein. which does not comply with the following requirements:
(A) The exterior doors, including any exterior basement entrance, and every exterior window shall
be supplied with a lock. The owner must supply locks and the owner and occupant shall have the right
to the keys for entry to the leased space.
(B) Every plwnbing fixture and water and waste pipe shall be properly installed and maintained
in good sanitary working condition, free from defects, leaks, and obstructions.
(C) Every toilet room floor and bathroom floor surface shall be constructed and maintained so as
to be reasonably impervious to water and so as to permit such floor to be easily kept in a clean and
sanitary condition.
(D) No owner, operator, or occupant shall cause any service, facility, equipment or utility which
is required under this chapter to be removed from, shut off from, or discontinued from any occupied
dwelling let or occupied by him or her, except for such temporary interruption as may be necessary when
acrual repairs or alterations are in process, or during temporary emergencies when discontinuance of
service is approved by the Inspection officer. Provided, however, that this division is not intended to
require an owner to continue to serve utilities or heat to a premises occupied by a tenant who has not
paid his or her rent or utilities.
(E) Every dwelling unit shall have its own metering system for natural gas, water, electricity or any
other utility provided in the dwelling. If this requirement is not met, the owner of the dwelling must have
the utilities that are not metered separately in his or her own name. Separation of water meters must
comply with the provisions of§§ 50. 15 et seq.
(Ord. 1362, passed 6-21-04)
§ 156.08 MINIMUM SPACE, USE AND LOCATION REQUIREMENTS.
No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy any dwelling unit, for
_i, ; the purpose of living therein, which does not comply with the following requirements:
102 Nappanee - Land Usage
(A) Every dwelling unit shall contain at least 150 square feet of floor space for the first occupant
thereof, and at least 100 additional square feet of floor space to be calculated on the basis of total
habitable room area.
(B) A habitable room, other than a kitchen, shall not be less than seven feet in any plan dimension.
Kitchens shall have a clear passageway of not less than three feet between counter fronts and appliances
or counter fronts and walls.
(C) At least one-half of the floor area of every habitable room shall have a ceiling height of at least
seven feet; and the floor area of that part of any room where the ceiling height is less than five feet shall
not be considered as part of the floor area of the room for the purpose of determining the maximum
permissible occupancy thereof.
(D) In every dwelling unit of two or more rooms, every room occupied for sleeping purposes by
an occupant shall contain at least 70 square feet of floor space, and every room occupied for sleeping
purposes by more than one occupant shall contain. at least 50 square feet of floor space for each occupant
thereof.
(E) No dwelling or dwelling unit containing two or more sleeping rooms shall have such room
arrangements that access to a sleeping room can be had only by going through another sleeping room
or a bathroom or toilet room if said arrangements are deemed to be unsafe,
(F) No basement space shall be used as a habitable room or dwelling unit unless:
(1) The floor and wall are impervious to leakage of underground and surface runoff water and
are insulated against dampness;
(2) The total window area in each room is equal to at least the minimum window area sizes as
required in § 156,06(B);
(3) The required minimum window area is located entirely above the grade of the ground
adjoicing such window area; and
(4) The total operable window area in each room is equal to at least the minimum as required
under § 156.06(C), except where there is supplied some other device affording ventilation, which is
approved by the Inspection Officer.
(Ord. 1362, passed 6-21-04; Am. Ord. 1485, passed 7-7-14)
§ 156.09 RESPONSIBILITIES OF OWNER AND OCCUPANTS.
(A) Every owner of a dwelling containing two or more dwelling units shall be responsible for
maintaining in a clean and sanitary condition the shared or public areas of the dwelling and premises
thereof.
) '
Minimum Housing Code 103
(B) Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall keep in a clean and sanitary condition that part of the
dwelling unit and premises thereof in which be or she occupies and controls.
(C) Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall keep all plumbing fixtures therein in a clean and sanitary
condition, and shall be responsible for the exercise of reasonable care in the proper use and operation
thereof.
(D) Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall be responsible for hanging all screens and
double doors, storm doors, and windows whenever the same are required under the provisions of this
chapter, except where the owner has agreed to supply such service.
(E) Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall be responsible for the extermination of any
insects, rodents, or other pests therein or on the premises, and every occupant of a dwelling unit in a
dwelling containing more than one dwelling unit shall be responsible for such extermination whenever
his or her dwelling unit is the only one infested. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this section,
whenever infestation is caused by failure of the owner to maintain a dwelling in a rat proof or reasonably
insect proof condition, extermination shall be the responsibility of the owner. Whenever infestation exists
in two or more dwelling Units, extermination thereof shall be the responsibility of the owner.
(F) Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall dispose of all his or her solid waste,
appliances, furniture and bulky items in a sanitary manner. This provision does not relieve the owner
of the responsibility to maintain his or her property in a clean and sanitary condition.
(G) Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall dispose of all his or her solid waste, which
might provide food for rodents in a clean and sanitary manner by placing it in solid waste disposal
facilities or solid waste storage containers required by § 156 .OS(H). It shall be the responsibility and duty
of the owner of any building containing more than one dwelling unit to supply the required solid waste
disposal facilities and solid was'te container as provided in§ 156.05(H). In all other cases, it shall be
the responsibility of the occupant to furnish such facilities or containers.
(Ord. 1362, passed 6-21-04)
§ 156.10 HOTELS AND ROOMING HOUSES.
No person shall operate a hotel or rooming house, or shall occupy or let to another for occupancy
any rooming unit in any hotel or rooming house, except in compliance with the provisions of every
section of this chapter, except the provisions of§§ 156.05 and 156.09. In addition to the provisions set
forth in this chapter for all rental properties, the following requirements must be met;
(A) At least one flush toilet, bathroom sink, and bathtub or shower properly connected to the water
and sewer systems of the city and in good working condition shall be supplied for every eight persons,
or fraction thereof, residing within a hotel or rooming house, including members of the operator's family
whenever they share the use of such facilities; provided, that in a hotel or rooming house where rooms
are let to males, flush urinals may be substituted for not more than one-half the required number of
toilets. All other facilities shall be so located within the building as to be reasonably accessible from the
104 Nappanee c Land Usage
common hall or passageway to all persons sharing such facilities. Every bathroom sink, and bathtub or
shower shall be supplied with hot water at all times. No such facilities shall be located in a basement.
(B) The operator of every hotel or rooming house shall change supplied bed linens and towels
therein at least once each week, and prior to the letting of any room to any occupant, the operator shall
be responsible for the maintenance of all supplied bedding in a clean and sanitary manner.
(C) Every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one person shall contain at least 70 square feet
of floor space and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one person shall contain at
least 50 square feet of floor space for each occupant thereof.
(D) Every rooming unit shall have a safe, unobstructed means of egress leading to a safe and open
space at ground level as required by the law of the State of Indiana and the ordinances of the city.
(E) The operator of every hotel or rooming house shall be responsible for the sanitary maintenance
of all wall, floors and ceilings and the maintenance and sanitary conditioll of every other part of the hotel
or rooming house, including where the entire structure or building is leased or occupied by the operator.
(Ord. 1362, passed 6-21-04)
§ 156.11 SMOKE DETECTORS.
(A) All dwellings and dwelling units, including rental units and rental unit communities, and all
hotels, hotel rooms, rooming houses, rooming units and any other buildings of mixed occupancy having
any residential units, shall be equipped with approved smoke detectors.
(B) Every owner, manager or agent of any dwelling and dwelling unit, including any rental unit and
rental unit community, and any hotels, hotel rooms, rooming houses, rooming units and any other
building of mixed occupancy having any residential units, shall install, in every dwelling unit, including
any rental unit, hotel room or rooming unit, not less than one approved smoke detector on the ceiling,
not less than six inches from any wall, or on a wall, located from six to 12 inches from the ceiling, and
within 15 feet of all rooms used for sleeping purposes.
(C) All approved smoke detectors req_uired in this chapter shall be an ionization or photoelectric
type, either battery powered or 110 volt AC, and shall comply with all the requirements of the National
Fire Protection Association Chapter (NFPA) 72. Smoke detectors shall bear the label of nationally
recognized standards testing laboratory that indicates that the smoke detectors have been tested and listed
under the requirements of NFPA 72.
(D) Every owner, manager, or agent of any dwelling and dwelling unit, including any rental unit
and rental unit conununity, any hotel, hotel room, rooming house, rooming house and any other building
of mixed occupancy having any residential units, shall install not less than one approved smoke detector
on the uppermost ceiling, not less than six inches from any wall, or on a wall, located from six to 12
inches from the uppermost ceiling of all interior stairwells.
•
.··" \
Minimum Housing Code 105
(E) At every change of tenant in a rental unit, it shall be the responsibility of the owner, manager,
or agent to test and ascertain that the approved smoke detectors are in operable condition. It is the
tenants' responsibility to replace batteries, as needed, while they occupy the unit and report to the owner,
manager or agent any repairs needed to any smoke detector.
(F) It shall be unlawful for any person, except in the case of fire or for the purpose of repair or
maintenance, to remove or tamper with the frre extinguishers, fire escapes, fire hoses, nozzles, or other
fire control or fire extinguishing equipment, including smoke detectors systems, in or about any building
or other premises in the city.
(Ord. 1362, passed 6-21-04; Am. Ord. 1485, passed 7-7-14)
§ 156.12 APPLICATION FOR RENTAL PERMIT, ANNUAL REGISTRATION, AND
INSPECTIONS.
(A) No owner of real estate within the city shall allow the real estate to be leased for any purpose
involving any person using the premises as their living quarters until a rental permit is issued covering
each rental unit in the building if the rental unit is not part of a rental unit community or, in the case of
a rental unit community, a permit for the rental unit community bas been obtained except that no permit
shall be required for a manufactured or modular home occupied by the owner of same who does not own
the real estate on which the manufactured or modular home is located.
(B) A rental permit shall be obtained by applying for the rental permit from the City ClerkTreasurer
or the Clerk-Treasurer's nominee. At the time application is made for the rental permit, the
owner of the real estate shall supply the Clerk-Treasurer or the Clerk-Treasurer's nominee with the
name of the owner, any landlord, the address of each owner and landlord, street address of the property
being registered, the nature of the rental building or unit, the use to which the property shall be put, and
any other information which may be required to aid the Inspection Officer in carrying out the purpose
of this chapter. No fee shall be charged to obtain a rental permit. Except when there is a change of
ownership of the real property on which a rental unit is located, a rental permit does nc;;it expire. The city
may require a new owner of the real property on wbich a rental unit is located to obtain a new permit.
Only one rental permit is required for a rental unit community,
(C) Each rental unit community and rental unit not a part of a rental unit community shall be
registered with the city as rental property and the owner of same shall at all times hold a valid rental
registration receipt from the city during the time that any such unit is leased. Registration shall be on an
annual basis with an annual registration fee of $5 to be paid to the city by the owner. In order to apply
for a rental registration receipt, the owner shall provide all information required on the registration form
obtainable from the City Clerk-Treasurer or the Clerk-Treasurer's nominee and shall sign same and
provide such signed registration form to the City Clerk-Treasurer together with the $5 registration fee.
The registration fee covers all the rental units in a rental unit community. However, if a rental unit is
not part of a rental unit community, a registration fee may be imposed for each separate parcel of real
property on which a rental unit is located. If the ownership of a rental unit community or the ownership
,J' of a parcel of real property on which a rental unit is located changes, a political subdivision may require
the new owner of the rental unit community or new owner of the real estate parcel to:
106 Nappanee - Land Usage
(1) Pay to the City Clerk-Treasurer or the Clerk-Treasurer's nominee an annual registration
fee of $5; and
(2) Provide updated registration information to the political subdivision.
(D) (1) Except as provided at division (0)(2) below, on or before five business days after
submitting an application for a rental registration to the City Clerk-Treasurer or the Clerk-Treasurer's
nominee, the owner shall submit an inspection fee of $20 to the City Clerk-Treasurer or the
Clerk-Treasurer's nominee. An Inspection Officer shall conduct an inspection of the rental unit
community or rental unit not a part of a rental unit community and which is the subject of the rental
permit application, within 15 business days of the date of the initial submission of an inspection fee to
ascertain that the facility conforms to all requirements of this chapter, any other applicable ordinance,
and all applicable Jaws of the State of Indiana. For subsequent years, the inspection shall be completed
prior to the date which is one year from the date of the last inspection certificate.
(2) Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this division (D), the city may not inspect a
rental unit or charge an inspection fee if the rental unit satisfies all of the following:
(a) The rental unit is:
1. Managed by; or
2. Part of a rental unit community that is managed by a professional real estate
manager.
(b) During the previous 12 months, the rental unit has been inspected or is part of a rental
unit community that has been inspected by either of the following:
1. By or for:
A. The United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, the
Indiana Housing and Community Development Authority, or another federal or state agency; or
B. A fmancial institution or insurance company authorized to do business in
Indiana.
2. By an inspector who:
A. Is a registered architect; or
B. A professional engineer
and which inspector may not be an employee of the owner or landlord of the rental unit in question.
' / '
Minimum Housing Code 107
(c) A written inspection report of the inspection under division (D)(2)(b) above has been
issued to the owner or landlord of the rental unit or rental unit community (as applicable) that verifies
that the rental unit or rental unit community is safe and habitable with respect to:
I. Electrical supply and electrical systems;
2. Plumbing and plumbing systems;
3. Water supply, including hot water;
4. Heating, ventilation, and air conditioning equipment and systems;
5. Bathroom and toilet facilities;
6. Doors, windows, stairways, and hallways;
7. Functioning smoke detectors; and
8. The structure in which a rental unit is located.
(d) The inspection report issued under division (D)(2)(c) above is delivered to the city on
or before the date each year at which the owner submits the owner's application for a rental registration
receipt.
(E) After an inspection is complete and the Inspection Officer determines that the rental unit
conforms to all applicable ordinances and statutes, the City Clerk-Treasurer or the Clerk-Treasurer's
nominee shall issue to the owner of every registered rental unit or rental unit community an inspection
certificate.
(F) Each registration receipt shall be valid for a period of one year. Each registration receipt shall
be renewed by its expiration date by submitting the registration fee to the City Clerk-Treasurer or the
Clerk-Treasurer's nominee. In the event that the registration fee is not paid within 30 days after the
expiration date, a late fee will be assessed and the renewal will be retroactive to the prior expiration date.
Any registration receipt issued shall be valid for the annual period commencing on the anniversary date
of the original expiration date and not as of the date of payment. Payment of the registration fee shall
not be considered a defense to any action filed by the city to enforce the provisions of this chapter if such
action was filed prior to payment of the registration fee.
(G) The registration receipt applies to the rental unit and not to the owner of the property. However,
within 30 days of the sale of the equitable or legal title to any property registered under this chapter, any
person acquiring equitable or legal title shall notify the City Clerk-Treasurer or the Clerk-Treasurer's
nominee of their name and address. No new registration fee shall be due until the expiration date of the
current registration receipt.
108 Nappanee ~ Land Usage
(H) Each owner of a rental unit warrants at each change of tenant that the rental unit meets the
registration and inspection requirements set forth in this chapter. This warrant is implied in the very act
of renting the unit and liability for it may not be removed by any act or agreement, either written or
verbal of either the owner or the prospective tenant.
(I) Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, in the event that the city has either reason
to believe or receives a complaint that a rental unit does not comply with applicable requirements of this
chapter or any other ordinance of the city, including any code adopted by the city pursuant to ordinance
enactment, the city may inspect the rental unit in question and, if the inspection reveals a violation of
this, or any other ordinance of the city, and such violation is not timely corrected after the giving of a
reasonable period for same, then the city may _pursue enforceme.nt of such ordinance, including the
seeking of any fine provided for such a violation together with the recovery of costs and any attorney
fees incurred in such enforcement and the collection of which is allowed by applicable law.
(Ord. 1362, passed 6-21-04; Am. Ord. 1380, passed 2-22-05; Am. Ord. 1485, passed 7-7-14)
§ 156.13 INSPECTION.
(A) The Inspection Officers are authorized and directed to make inspections to determine the
condition of dwellings, dwelling units, rooming units, and any other building or structure, and premises
within the city in order that they may perform their duties of safeguarding the health and safety of the
occupants and the general public.
(1) The Inspection Officers are authorized to enter, examine and survey, at all reasonable
times, all rental units. The owner or the owner's representative, and/or occupant of every rental unit
shall give the Inspection Officer free access to such rental unit and its premises at all reasonable times
for the purpose of such inspection, examination and survey, provided, however, that such Inspection
Officer has, prior to entry thereof, positively identified hims elf or herself as a person authorized pursuant
to this chapter to enter upon said premises. At the time of each inspection, all pets must be controlled
so that the Inspection Officer can move about the dwelling and surrounding property without
interruption.
(2) The owner or the owner1s representative shall be entitled to 72 hours written notice from
the Inspection Officer prior to conducting the inspection, examination or survey. The owner or the
owner's representative shall be responsible for notifying the occupant of the rental unit of the inspection
when he or she receives notice of the intent to inspect from the Inspection Officer.
(3) This provision shall not be construed to limit or restrain the right of the Inspection Officer
to make an inspection of any other building or premises pursuant to any of the provisions of l.C.
36-7-9-1 et al.
(B) Except as provided at division (A)(2) above, every rental unit operated and maintained in the
city shall be inspected by the Code Enforcement Officer or his designee at least one time during the term
Minimum Housing Code 109
of each annual rental registration every year. The inspection shall be made to ascertain that the facility
conforms to all requirements of this chapter, and any other ordinance of the city and all statutes of the
State of Indiana regarding such facilities.
(C) Every occupant of a rental unit shall give the owner thereof or the owner1 s representative access
to any part of such dwelling or rental unit or its premises at all reasonable times for the purpose of
making such repairs or alterations as are necessary to effect compliance with the provisions of this
chapter.
(D) The Clerk-Treasurer or the Clerk-Treasurer's nominee shall issue to the owner of every
registered and inspected rental unit an inspection certificate as proof that the unit passed inspection. The
inspection certificate shall be valid until the next inspection.
(E) At each change of occupancy, every owner or the owner's representative shall provide the
occupant with a copy of the inspection certificate. The copy shall become part of warranty of habitability
of the premises provided for in division (I) of this section. In the case of hotel or rooming house, the
inspection certificate shall be posted in a conspicuous place within the facility.
(F) If an Inspection Officer finds that a dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house, rooming unit, or
any other building or structure fails to comply with any other ordinance of the city, or any statute of the
State of Indiana, he or she shall give notice of the alleged violation to the owner of the dwelling,
dwelling unit, rooming house, rooming unit, or any other building or structure. The notice shall be in
writing and shall reasonably describe the violation found. The notice shall further specify the date by
which the violation must be corrected. The notice shall be served upon the owner or the owner's
representative and the occupant of the dwelling, dwelling unit rooming house, rooming unit or any other
building or structure. Service will be deemed sufficient if made in accordance with J.C. 36~7-9-25.
(G) A building that the Inspection Officer finds to be unsafe shall be repaired so that it meets
acceptable standards within 15 days of the notice described in division (F) of this section. Any other
violations shall be repaired within 30 days of the notice of a violation described in division (F) of this
section. If the violations cited are not corrected, a reinspection fee shall be levied against the person
(either owner or occupant) responsible for correcting the violation cited. Reinspection may continue until
the violations are corrected. The reinspection fee may be waived if the Inspection Officer fmds that
substantial progress has been made with regards to each separate violation noted or that the failure to
correct the violation is not within the control of the person responsible for correcting the violation cited.
(H) If a dwelling, dwelllng unit, rooming house, rooming unit or any other building or structure is
cited for violations of this chapter, no new violations shall be cited at the time of the reinspection for the
original violation unless such new violations make the property unsafe.
(I) Upon notification that a rental unit has not obtained the necessary registration receipt, the
Inspection Officer may inspect such premises upon 24 hour notification to the owner of the property, for
the purpose of determining if any inspection certificate is required. If access cannot be obtained, the
Inspection Officer may obtain an inspection warrant pursuant to the provisions of I.C. 36-7-9-16.
110 Nappanee - Land Usage
(J) Nothing in the preceding division should be construed to require an investigation by the
Inspection Officer or any city employee prior to the city filing a complaint against the owner of real
estate who fails to obtain a required registration receipt.
(Ord. 1362, passed 6-21-04; Am. Ord. 1380, passed 2-22-05; Am. Ord. 1485, passed 7-7-14)
§ 156.14 ENFORCEMENT.
(A) If a cited violation is not corrected within the designated time, and the Code Enforcement
Officer finds that the building is unsafe within the meaning of I.C. 36-7-9-4, the Code Enforcement
Officer may issue an order requiring any of the following:
(I) Vacating of an unsafe building;
(2) Removal of an unsafe building;
(3) Removal of part of an unsafe building;
(4) Sealing an unsafe building against intrusion by unauthorized persons;
(5) Requiring, for an unsafe building that will be sealed for a period of more than 90 days:
(a) Sealing against intrusion by unauthorized persons and the effects of weather;
(b) Exterior improvements to make the building compatible in appearance with other
buildings in the area; and
(c) Continuing maintenance and upkeep to the building and premises;
(6) Extermination of vermin in and about the unsafe premises;
(7) Removal of trash, debris or fire hazardous material in and about the unsafe premises; or
(8) Repair or rehabilitation of an unsafe building to bring it into compliance with standards for
building condition or maintenance required for human habitation, occupancy, or use prescribed by a
statute or this chapter.
(B) The order supercedes any permit relating to the building or land use, whether that permit is
obtained before or after the order is issued.
(C) The order issued pursuant to division (A) shall contain the following:
(1) The name of the person to whom the order is issued;
(2) The legal description or address of the unsafe premises that is the subject of the order;
Minimum Housing Code 111
(3) The action that the order requires;
(4) The period of time in which the action is required to be accomplished, measured from the
time when the notice of the order is given;
(5) If a hearing is required, a statement indicating the exact time and place of the hearing, and
stating that a person to whorn the order was issued is entitled to appear at that hearing with or without
counsel, present evidence, cross-examine opposing witness, and present arguments;
(6) If a hearing is not required, a statement that an order under this section becomes final ten
days after notice is given, unless a hearing is requested in writing by a person holding a fee interest, a
life estate interest or an equitable interest of a contract purchased in an unsafe premises, and the request
is delivered to the Clerk-Treasurer1s Office before the end of the ten day period;
(7) A statement briefly indicating what action can be taken by the COde Enforcement Officer
if the order is not complied with;
(8) A statement indicating the obligation created by I.C. 36-7-9-27 relating to the notification
of subsequent interest holders and the Code Enforcement Officer; and
(9) The name, address and telephone number of the Code Enforcement Officer.
(D) The order must allow a sufficient time, at least ten days from the time when the notice of the
order is given, to accomplish the required action.
(E) A hearing before the Board of Public Works and Safety must be held relative to each order of
the Code Enforcement Officer, except for an order issued under division (A)(4), (6) and (7). A hearing
shall be conducted before the Board of Public Works and Safety for all other orders to the Code
Enforcement Officer under this section.
(F) The hearing shall be held on a business day no earlier than. ten days after notice of the order is
given. The Board of Public Works and Safety shall grant a continuance of the scheduled hearing if
requested in writing by a person holding a substantial property interest in the affected real estate, if such
request is received not later than five days after the notice is given. Such continuance shall before a
period of not more than 14 days past the original date of the hearing.
(G) If, at a hearing, a person to whom an order has been issued requests an additional period to
accomplish action required by the order, and shows good cause for this request to be granted, the Board
of Public Works and Safety may grant the request. However, as a condition for allowing the additional
period, the Board of Public Works and Safety may require that the person post a performance bond to
be forfeited if the-action required by the order is not completed within the additional period.
(H) Notice to the owner and all other holders of a substantial property interest shall be deemed
sufficient if the notice is given pursuant to the provisions of LC. 36-7-9-25.
112 Nappanee - Land Usage
(I) The Board of Public Works and Safety, after having given notice of the time and place of a
public hearing by publication in accordance with I.C. 5-3-1, shall adopt a schedule setting forth the
maximum amount of performance bonds applicable to the various types of ordered action. The Board
of Public Works and Safety shall use this schedule to fix the amount of the performance bond required
under the previous division.
(J) At the conclusion of any hearing before the Board of Public Works and Safety, the hearing
authority may make findings and take action to affirm the Code Enforcement Officer's order, rescind
the Code Enforcement Officer's order, or modify the Code Enforcement Officer's order. However,
unless the person to whom the order was issued or counsel for the person to whom the order was issued
is present at the hearing, the Board of Public Works and Safety may not modify the order so that it is
more stringent than the Code Enforcement Officer's original order.
(K) The findings made and action taken by the Board of Public Works and Safety shall be in writing
and shall be available to the public upon request. However, neither the Code Enforcement Officer nor
the Board of Public Works and Safety is required to give any notice of the findings and action to other
than those persons having a substantial property interest.
(L) If the Code Enforcement Officer finds it necessary to take emergency action concerning unsafe
premises in order to protect life, public safety or property, he or she may take that action without issuing
an order or giving notice to any person having a substantial property interest, However, this emergency
action must be limited to removing any immediate danger. Such action shall be taken only when it is not
feasible to give notice and hold hearings as provided by division (C). Any person to whom such
emergency action is directed shall comply therewith but shall be afforded a hearing before the Board of
Public Works and Safety as soon as possible.
(M) The Board of Public Works and Safety may recover the costs incurred by taking emergency
action, by filing a civil action in the Circuit or Superior Courts of Elkhart County against persons who
held a fee interest, life estate interest, or equitable interest of a contract purchaser in the unsafe premises
at the time the Code Enforcement Officer found it necessary to take the emergency action.
(N) Any person required to vacate an unsafe premises under the emergency action of this section
may challenge the emergency action to vacate in the Circuit or Superior Courts of Elkhart County by
challenging the Code Enforcement Officer's determination that there is an immediate danger to life or
safety of any person. The Code Enforcement Officer shall have the burden of providing that an
emergency action is necessary to prevent immediate danger to the life and safety of any person occupying
or using nearby property.
(0) If a cited violation is not corrected within the designated time period and the Code Enforcement
Officer finds the building is unsafe within the meaning of J.C. 36-7-9-4, the city may file a complaint
with the Elkhart Superior Courts, or Elkhart Circuit Courts to assess any fine provided by this code, to
seek an injunction as provided by I.C. 36-7-9-18, or any sanction allowed by J.C. 36-7-9-1 through I.C.
36-7-9-28 inclusive.
.. \
' I
Minimum Housing Code 113
(P) If a cited violation is not corrected within the designated time period and the Code Enforcement
Officer does not find that the building is unsafe within the meaning ofI.C. 36-7-9-4, the city may file
a complaint with Elkhart Superior Courts or the Elkhart Circuit Courts to assess any fme provided by
this chapter.
(Q) Any rental unit for which the Code Enforcement Office has issued an order finding the building
or premises to be unsafe shall be so designated and placarded by the Inspection Officer.
(R) No rental unit, which is placarded as unsafe, shall again be used for human habitation until the
written approval is secured from the Code Enforcement Office, Board of Public Works and Safety, or
a court of law. The Inspection Officer shall remove the placard whenever the defect or defects upon
which the finding that the building is unsafe have been eliminated.
(S} No person shall deface or remove any notification of the Inspection Officer that any rental unit
has been declared unsafe for human habitation.
(T) The order of the Board of Public Works and Safety expires two years after the notice of order
is given unless one or more of the following events occur within that two year period:
(1) A complaint requesting judicial review is filed by any party having a substantial property
interest;
(2) A contract for action required by the order is let at public bid; or
(3) A civil action concerning the property is filed either by the city or any per.son having a
substantial property interest.
(U) This chapter specifically adopts the provisions of the Indiana Unsafe Building Law, which are
included in I.C. 36-7-9-1through36-7-9-28 inclusive.
(Ord. 1362, passed 6-21-04)
§ 156.15 MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS.
(A) Notice of orders by the Board of Public Works and Safety, notice of statements of public bid
are to be let, and notices of claims for payment must be given by:
(1) Sending a copy of the order or statement by registered or certified mail to the residence,
place of business or employment of the person to be notified, with a return receipt requested;
(2) Delivering a copy of the order or statement personally to the person to be notified; or
(3) Leaving a copy of the .order or statement at the dwelling or usual place of abode by the
person to be notified.
114 Nappanee - Land Usage
(B) In the event that service is not obtained by the foregoing methods, the alternate means of service
described in I.C. 36-7-9-25 may be used.
(Ord. 1362, passed 6-21-04)
§ 156.99 PENALTIES.
(A) Any person who commits any of the following acts commits a violation and is subject to a fine
not to exceed $500. Each day a violation of this chapter continues shall constitute a separate offense,
including:
(1) A person who fails to obtain a registration receipt as required by this chapter;
(2) A person who fails to correct a violation cited in accordance with this chapter, whether or
not such violation makes the premises an unsafe premises, or whether the violation is a violation of this
chapter, or another provision of the city; and
(3) A person who removes or defaces the notification of the Inspection Officer that a rental unit
has been determined to be unsafe.
(B) Any building or prelllises which is unsafe within the meaning of!. C. 36-7-9-4 shall be subject
to any other sanction provided in I.e. 36-7-9-1 through I.e. 36-7-9-28 inclusive.
(C) A person failing to comply with an order of the Board of Public Works and Safety issued
pursuant to this chapter in CoDllection with an unsafe building or premises will be subject to any other
sanction provided in I.e. 36-7-9-28 inclusive.
(Ord. 1362, passed 6-21-04; Am. Ord. 1485, passed 7-7-14)
)
I
b ook 1
CITY OF NAPPANEE, INDIANA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2016 S-1 Supplement contains local legislation
current through Ord. 1516 passed 2-16-16
St ate legislation current through 2015 A.LS. Pamphlet #5
Published by:
AMERICAN LEGAL PUBLISIDNG CORPORATION
One West Fourth Street '¢- 3rd Floor <¢- Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588 ~ www.atnlegal.cotn
COPYRIGHT <ID 2016
AMERICAN LEGAL PUBLISHING CORPORATION
ORDINANCE NO. 1495
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING A CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE CITY OF
NAPPANEE, REVISING, AMENDING, RESTATING, CODIFYING AND COMPILING
CERTAIN EXISTING GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE CIVIL CITY OF NAPPANEE
DEALING WITH SUBJECTS EMBRACED IN SUCH CODE OF ORDINANCES, AND
DECLARING AN EMERGENCY.
WHEREAS, the present general and permanent ordinances of the Civil City of Nappanee are
inadequately arranged and classified and are insufficient in form and substance for the complete·
preservation of the public peace, health, safety and general welfare of the municipality and for the proper
conduct of its affairs;
WHEREAS, the Acts of the Legislature of the State of Indiana empower and authorize the Civil
City of Nappanee to revise, amend, restate, codify and compile any existing ordinances and all new
ordinances not heretofore adopted or published and to incorporate such ordinances into one ordinance
in book form;
WHEREAS, the Common Council of the Civil City of Nappanee has authorized a general
compilation, revision and codJfication of the ordinances of the Civil City of Nappanee of a general and
permanent nature and publication of such ordinance in book form; and
/ WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the municipality and for the
immediate.preservation of the public peace, health, safety and general welfare of the municipality that
this ordinance take effect at an early date.
NOW, THEREFORE BE IT ORDAINED BY THE COMMON COUNCIL OF THE CIVIL
CITY OF NAPPANEE;
SECTION 1. The general ordinances of the Civil City of Nappanee as revised, amended,
restated, codified and compiled in book form are hereby adopted as and shall
constitute the "Code of Ordinances of the Civil City of Nappanee."
SECTION 2. Such Code of Ordinances as adopted in Section 1 shall consist of the following
Titles:
Chapter
2016 S-1
NAPPANEE, INDIANA
TABLE OF CONTENTS
TITLE 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
10. General Provision
11. City Standards
Appendix: City Seal
3
4 Nappanee - Adopting Ordinance
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
30. General Governmental Organization
31. City Council
Appendix: Amending Ordinance Form
32. City Officials
33. City Courts
34. City Policies
35. Boards, Commissions and Departments
36. Ordinance Violation Bureau
37. Bonds
38. Fees
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
50. Water
51. Sewers
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
70. General Provisions
71. Traffic Rules
72. Pedestrians and Non-Motorized Vehicles
73. Parking Regulations
74. Traffic Schedules
75. Parldng Schedules
TITLEIX: GENERALREGULATIONS
90. Alarm Systems
91. Fair Housing
92. Fire Prevention
93. Health and Sanitation; Nuisances
94. Abandoned or Junk Vehicles
95. Streets and Sidewalks
96. Street Tree Regulations
97. Parks and Recreation
98. Anhnals
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
110. General Licensing Procedures
111. Business Licensing
2016 S-1
Table
Adopting Ordinance
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENCES
130. General Offenses
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
150. Building Regulatiom: Construction
151. Electrical Installation Regulations
152. Unsafe Buildings and Structures
153. Historic Preservation
154. Flood Plain Management
155. Zoning and Subdivision Control
156. Minimum Housing Code
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
I. Annexations
II. Vacations of Streets and Alleys
ill. Franchise Agreements
IV. Zoning Map Changes
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Indiana Code
References to 1983 Code
References to Ordinances
INDEX
5
SECTION 3. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated in such Code of Ordinances
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this ordinance except
as they are included and preordained in whole or in part in such Code; provided,
such repeal shall not affect any offense committed or penalty inctrrred or any right
established prior to the effective date of this ordinance, nor shall such repeal affect
the provisions of ordinances levying taxes, appropriating money, annexing or
detaching territory, establishing franchises, or granting special rights to certain
persons, authorizing public improvements, authorizing the issuance of bonds or
borrowing of money, authorizing the purchase on sale of real personal property,
granting or accepting easements, plat or dedication of land to public use, vacating
or setting boundaries of streets or other public places; nor shall such repeal affect
any other ordinance of a temporary or special nature or pertaining to subjects not
contained in or covered by the Code.
2016 S-1
6 Nappanee - Adopting Ordinance
SECTION 4. Such Code shall be deemed published as of the day of itB adoption and approved
by the Common Council of the Civil City of Nappanee and the Clerk-Treasurer
of the Civil City of Nappanee is hereby authorized and ordered to file a copy of
such Code of Ordinances in the Office of the Clerk-Treasurer.
SECTION S. Such Code shall be in full force and effect as provided in Section 6, and such
Code shall be presumptive evidence in all courts and places of the ordinance and
all provisions, sections, penalties and regulations therein contained and of the date
of passage, and that the same is property signed, attested, recorded and approved
and that any public hearings and notices thereof as required by law have been
given.
SECTION 6. This ordillance is declared to be an emergency measure necessary for the
immediate preservation of the peace, health, safety and general welfare of the
people of this municipality, and shall take effect at the earliest date provided by
law.
PASSED AND ADOPTED by the Common Council of the Civil City of Nappanee on this 6th day
of April, 2015.
YEAH NAY
Jacob Dermott
Samuel Lee Beachy
Micheal Stull
PRESENTED TO ME AND APPROVED BY ME ON THIS 6th DAY OF APRIL, 2015.
\s\ Larry L Thompson
Larry L Thompson, Mayor
ATIESTED: \s\ Kathy L Brown
Kathy L Brown, Clerk-Treasurer
2016S-1
•
CITY OFFICIALS
Philip W Jenkins, Mayor
Kathy L Brown, Clerk-Treasurer
Christopher G Walter, City Judge
Tod Nunemaker, Common Council
Kim Ingle, Common Council
Sam Beachy, Common Council
Dana Hollar, Common Council
Jacob Dermott, Common Council
Brian L Hoffer, City Attorney

PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Indiana Code
References to 1983 Code
References to Ordinances
I
2 Nappanee M Parallel References
2016 S-1
REFERENCES TO INDIANA CODE
l.C. Cite
1-1-1-5
1-1-1-7
1-1-1-8
1-1-4-5
1-1-5-1
1-1-6-1 '
4-21.5-1
4-21.5-3-7
5-3-1
5-4-1-18
5-22
6-1.1-18.5
8-1-2.2'
8-1.5-3-9.1
8-1.5-3-11
8-14-16-5
8-22-2
8-22-3.5
9-13-2-1
9-17 et seq.
9-21-9-3
9-21-9-4
9-22-1-1-9-22-1-32
9-22-1-11
9-25-4-4
9-29 et seq.
14-21-1 et seq.
14-28-1
14-28-1-26
15-2.1-6-1-15-2.1-6-13
15-20
22-9-1-4 et seq.
22-9.5-1 et seq.
22-9.5-2-2
3
Code Section
10.04
10.12
10.06
10.05
10.11
10.08
152.34, 153.51
151.04
34.42, 152.17, 152.37, 156.14
Chapter 32, 32.01
34.20
37.08
37.13
Chapter 50
37.13
37.10
35.01
37.08
Chapter 94, 94.01
70.20
70.03
70.03
Chapter 94
94.01
70.03
70.20
153.50
154.044
154.044
98.09
98.13
91.02
91.01
91.02
4 Nappanee M Parallel References
I.e. Cite Code Section
22-9.5-2-3 91.02
22-9.5-2-4 91.02
22-9.5-2-8 91.02
22-9.5-2-9 91.02
22-9.5-2-11 91.02
22-9.5-2-13 91.02
22-9.5-3 91.03
22-9.5-3 et seq. 91.04
22-9.5-4-8 91.31
22-9.5-5 91.02
22-9.5-5-2 91.03
22-9.5-6 91.02, 91.31
22-11-14-1 92.60
22-12 151.04
22-12-7 150.40
22-13 151.04
22-13-2-7 151.04
22-13-2-11 '150.40
22-14 151.04
22-15 151.04
25-28.5-1-2-25-28.5-1-38 50.04
25-39 50.90
33-36-1 et seq. 36.01
33-35-1 Chapter 33
33-35-2 Chapter 33
35-46-3 98.13
35-46-3-0.5 98.01
35-46-3-6 98.13
35-47-2 34.04
36-1-3-8(a)(!O) 10.99
36-1-3-8(a)(!O)(B) 51.171
36-1-3-8(5) Chapter 38
36-1-6-9 93.05, 151.33
36-1-7 37.10
36-1-12-1 34.44
36-1-12-3 34.44
36-1-12-4 34.42
36-1-12-16 34.41
36-1-12-19 34.41
36-2-7-10 152.38
364-5 30.01, 32.02
364-5-1-36-4-5-7 Chapter 32
364-5-5 Chapter 110
2016 S-1
2016 S-1
References to Indiana Code
I.C. Cite
36-4-6
36-4-6-1
36-4-6-2
36-4-6-4
36-4-6-5
36-4-6-7
36-4-6-8
36-4-6-9
36-4-6-10-36-4-6-17
36-4-6-11
36-4-6-13
36-4-6-14-36-4-6-17
36-4-9-8
36-4-9-12
36-4-10
36-4-10-1-36-4-10-5
36-4-10-5(10)
36-4-11-2
36-4-11-4
36-5-9-2
36-7-4
36-7-4-207
36-7-4-902 et seq.
36-7-5
36-7-9-1 et al.
36-7-9-1- 36-7-9-28
36-7-9-4
36-7-9-14
36-7-9-16
36-7-9-18
36-7-9-25
36-7-9-27
36-7-9-28
36-7-10.l
36-7-10.1-4
36-7-12
36-7-14
36-7-14-3
36-7-14.5
36-7-15.1
36-7-30
36-8-2-2
Code Section
30.01
Chapter 31
Chapter 31
31.01
Chapter 31, 31.01
Chapter 31
31.03
31.02
31.03
31.08
31.25
31.25
Chapter 32
35.02
30.01, 32.03
Chapter 32
Chapter 110
35.02
32.03
35.02
154.001
35.01
35.01
37.10
156.13
156.14, 156.99
156.14, 156.99
152.35
156.13
156.14
156.13, 156.14, 156.15
156.14, 156.15
156.99
Chapter 93
93.05
35.01
37.08
Chapter 35
37.08
37.08
37.08
Chapter 35
5
6 Nappanee - Parallel References
J.C. Cite
36-8-2-3
36-8-2-5
36-8-2-8
36-8-3-10
36-8-3-20
36-8-6
36-8-8
36-8-14-1-36-8-14-4
36-8-16
36-9-2-4
36-9-16-1-36-9-16-6
36-10-1 et seq.
36-10-3
36-10-3-16
36-10-3-21
Code Section
Chapter 35
Chapter 98
Chapter 93
Chapter 110
Chapter 35
35,01
35.01
Chapter 37
34.03
Chapter 111
Chapter 37
35.16
35.01
Chapter 32
37.01
REFERENCES TO 1983 CODE
1983 Code Section 2002 Code Section
1-5 11.01
1-11 34.06
1-13 34.05
2-1 30.01
2-2 32.02
2-3 32.03
2-4 35.02
2-5 32.01
2-9 35.01
2-10 35.15
2-11 35.16
2-12 35.17
2-13 35.18
2-14 35.19
2-20 35.21
2-21 35.22
2-22 35.23
2-26 34.02
2-29 37.01
2-30 37.02
2-31 37.03
2-32 37.04
2-33 37.05
2-40 36.01
2-41 36.02
2-42 36.03
2-43 36.04
2-44 36.05
3-1 31.01
3-2 31.04
3-3 31.02
3-4 31.03
3-5 31.05
3-6 31.06
7
8 Nappanee - Parallel References
1983 Code Section 2002 Code Section
3-7 31.25
3-8 31.07
3-9 31.08
3-10 31.09
3-11 31.10
3-12 31.11
3-13 31.40
3-14 31.41
3-15 31.42
3-20 31.26, 31.42
3-21 31.12
3-26 33.01, 33.02
3-27 33.03
4-1 38.01
4-2 110.01
4-3 110.02
4-4 38.15
4-5 38.15, 70.16
4-7 38.15, 70.20
4-8 34.04, 38.15
4-9 34.03, 38.15
4-11 38.15, ll!.01-lll.07
4-12 111.40
4-13 38.15, 111.20-111.26
4-16 111.50
4-17 111.51, 111.52
4-25 38.15, 90.01
4-26 90.15-90.17
4-27 90.30
4-28 90.02
4-29 90.18
4-30 90.19
4-31 90.31
4-32 90.32
4-33 90.33
4-34 90.01
5-1 97.01
5-2 97.02
5-3 97.03
.'"'~" References to 1983 Code 9
1983 Calk SectWn 2002 Code Section
5-4 97.16
5-5 97.17
5-6 97.18
5-7 97.19
5-8 97.04
5-9 97.20
5-10 97.21
5-11 97.22
5-12 97.23
5-13 97.35
5-14 97.36
5-15 97.37
5-16 97.38
5-17 97.39, 97.40
5-18 97.15
6-16 92.01
6-17 92.02
6-18 92.03
6-19 92.45
6-20 92.46
6-21 92.47
6-22 92.48
6-31 92.30
6-32 38.15, 92.31
6-33 92.32
6-34 92.33
6-35 93.26
6-39 130.01
6-40 130.02
6-41 130.03
6-42 93.03
6-43 93.04
6-45 93.01
6-46 38.15, 93.05
6-47 92.15
6-48 93.06
6-49 93.02
6-51 72.24
6-52 72.25; Chapter 74, Schedule IV
6-53 72.26
-- \ 6-55 92.16
6-56 93.07
10 Nappanee w Parallel References
1983 Code Section 1002 Code Section
6-57 38.15, 94.01
6-60 91.01
6-61 91.02
6-62 91.03
6-63 91.15
6-64 91.16
6-65 91.17
6-66 91.18
6-67 91.30
6-68 91.04
6-69 91.31-91.33
6-75 96.01
6-76 96.15
6-77 96.16
6-78 96.17
6-79 96.18
6-80 96.19
6-81 96.30
6-82 96.31
6-83 96.32
6-84 96.33
6-85 96.34
6-86 96.45
6-87 96.46
6-88 96.47
6-89 96.48
6-90 96.49
6-91 96.50
6-92 38.15, 96.02
6-93 96.03
6-94 96.04
7-1 95.01
7-2 95.02
7-3 95.03
7-4 95.04
7-5 95.05
7-6 95.06
7-21 50.04
7-23 50.55-50.57
7-24 50.56
7-25 50.57
7-33 95.20
2016 S-1
1983 Code Section
7-34
7-35
7-36
7-37
7-38
7-39
7-40
7-42
7-43
7-45
7-46
7-47
7-48
7-51
7-53
7-54
7-54a
7-55
7-56
7-57
7-58
7-59
7-60
7-61
7-62
7-63
7-64
7-65
7-66
7-67
7-68
7-69
7-70
7-71
7-72
7-73
7-74
7-76
. 7-77
7-78
7-79
References to 1983 Code
2002 Code Section
95.21
95.22
95.22
95.23
95.24
95.25
95.26
95.27
95.28
95.40
95.42
95.42
95.44
95.40
95.41
95.43
95.45, 95.46
152.01
152.01
152.15
152.16
152.17
152.18
152.30
152.31
152.32
152.33
152.34
152.35.
152.35
152.36
152.50
152.51
152.52
152.53
152.54
152.55
152.57
152.37
152.38, 152.39
152.02
11
12 Nappanee - Parallel References
1983 Code Section 2002 Code Section
7-80 152.03
7-81 150.01
7-82 150.02
7-83 150.03
7-84 150.04
7-85 150.05
7-86 150.22
7-87 150.20
7-88 150.21
7-89 38.17, 150.20
7-90 150.23
7-91 150.35
7-92 150.36
7-93 150.37
7-94 150.38
7-95 150.06
7-96 150.39
7-97 150.40
7-98 150.41
7-99 150.41
7-110 150.55
7-111 150.55
7-112 150.56
7-113 150.57, 150.58
7-114 150.59
7-115 150.60
7-120 151.01
7-121 151.15, 151.16
7-122 151.17
7-123 151.18
7-124 151.30, 151.31, 151.33
7-125 151.32, 151.34
7-126 151.45
7-127 151.46
7-128 151.47
7-129 151.65
7-130 38.15, 151.66
7-131 38.15, 151.67
7-132 151.68
7-133 151.69
7-134 151.70
7-135 151.71
~' References to 1983 Code 13
1983 Code Section 2002 Code Section
7-136 151.72
7.137 151.48
7-138 38.15, 151.49
7-139 151.50
7-140 151.51
7-141 151. 73
7-142 151.02
7-143 151.03
8-1 70.01
8-2 70.02
8-3 70.15
8-4 70.16
8-5 70.16
8-6 70.16
8-7 70.17
8-8 70.18
8-9 70.19
8-10 71.002
8-11 71.001
8-12 71.003
8-13 72.21
8-14 72.22
8-15 71.005
8-16 71.015
8-17 71.016
8-18 71.004
8-19 71.030
8-20 71.031
8-21 71.032
8-22 71.033
8-23 71.034
8-24 71.036
8-25 71.035
8-26 71.037
8-27 71.038
8-28 71.039
8-29 71.039
8-30 71.040
8-31 71.041
8-32 71.055
8-33 71.056; Chapter 74, Schedule I
8-34 71.057
14 Nappanee - Parallel References
1983 Code Section 2002 Code Section
8-35 71.058
8-36 71.070
8-37 71.071
8-38 71.072
8-39 71.073
8-40 71.085
8-41 71.086; Chapter 74, Schedule 11
8-42 71.087
8-43 Chapter 74, Schedule 1II
8-44 71.100
8-46 71.101
8-47 71.102
8-49 71.103
8-50 71.104
8-51 71.105
8-52 71.017
8-53 71.018
8-54 71.120
8-55 71.121
8-56 71.122
8-57 71.123
8-58 71.124
8-59 71.125
8-60 71.126
8-61 72.23
8-62 72.01
8-63 72.03
8-64 72.04
8-65 72.05
8-66 72.06
8-67 72.02
8-68 72.07
8-69 72.08
8-70 72.09
8-71 73.01
8-72 73.03
8-73 73.04
8-74 73.05
8-75 73.06
8-76 73.07
8-77 73.08
8-78 73.09
2016 S-1
1983 Code Section
8-79
8-80
8-81
8-82
8-83
8-84
8-85
8-86
8-87
8-88
8-89
8-90
8-91
8-92
8-93
8-94
8-95
8-96
8-97
8-98
8-100
8-101
9-1
9-2
9-3
9-4
9-6
9-60
9-61
9-62
9-63
9-64
9-65
9-66
9-67
References to 1983 Code
2002 Code Section
73.46
Chapter 75, Schedule I
73.25
73.25
73.02
73.10
73.60
73.60
73.26
73.40
73.41
73.42
73.43
73.44
73.43
73.45
73.11
73.12
73.27; Chapter 75, Schedule II
71.127
73.61
38.15, 72.20
50.01
50.15
50.02
50.03
50.16
50.70
50.70
50.71
50.72
50.73
50.74
50.75
50.76
15
16 Nappanee ~ Parallel References
2016 S-1
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
102 1938 38.15
178 1951 38.15
503 1973 38.15
882 1981 38.15
937 11-7-83 34.06
939 11-9-83 38.15, 70.20
940 11-7-83 34.04, 38.15
969 8-20-84 37.01
975 12-17-84 152.01-152.03, 152.15, 152.17, 152.18,
152.30-152.37' 152.39' 152.50-152.55,
152.57
997 7-15-85 93.05
1027 6-2-86 50.55-50.57
1045 2-2-87 150.01-150.04, 150.06, 150.20-150.23,
150.35-150.41
1070 10-19-87 34.01
1071 10-19-87 150.05
1081 5-16-88 38.15, 90.01, 90.02, 90.15-90.19,
90.30-90.33
1082 5-16-88 38.15, 70.20
1091 11-21-88 130.01
1095 3-20-89 50.16
1096 2-20-89 50. 70-50. 76
1100 4-17-89 36.01-36.05, 73.60, 93.03, 111.07,
130.02
1106 9-11-89 93.26
1115 12-18-89 38.15, 94.01
1139 7-1-91 34.03, 38.15
1148 1-20-92 35.23
1156 7-20-92 38.15
1159 10-5-92 72.24-72.26; 73.61; Chapter 74,
Schedule N
17
2016 S-1
18 Nappanee - Parallel References
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
1160 11-16-92 95.40, 95.41, 95.43, 95.45, 95.46
1163 12-21-92 31.12
1166 1-25-93 96.01, 96.15-96.17
1168 4-19-93 38.15, 91.01-91.04, 91.15-91.18,
91.30-91.33, 96.02-96.04, 96.18,
96.19, 96.30-96.34, 96.45-96.50
1179 12-20-93 38.17' 150.20
1185 4-5-94 38.15, 151.01-151.03, 151.15-151.18,
151.30-151.34, 151.45-151.51,
151.65-151.73
1190 7-6-94 150.55-150.60
1202 2-6-95 T.S.O. I
1203 2-6-95 T.S.0. IV
1205 3-6-95 38.15, 153.01, 153.02, 153.15-153.19,
153.30-153.37, 153.50, 153.51
1206 3-6-95 T.S.O. IV
1213 8-7-95 50.90-50.95
1226 11-18-96 93.26
1233 3-3-97 37.06, 38.15
1234 3-3-97 37.07
1235 4-21-97 T.S.O. IV
1242 10-6-97 T.S.O. I
1243 10-6-97. T.S.O. IV
1244 10-6-97 T.S.O. I
1245 10-6-97 T.S.O. IV
1254 6-15-98 34.20-34.27
1256 7-20-98 34.01
1260 10-5-98 95.42
1262 10-5-98 T.S.O. IV
1263 10-19-98 T.S.0. II
1264 10-19-98 38.15
1265 10-26-98 T.S.0. I
1266 10-26-98 T.S.O. I
1267 10-26-98 T.S.O. I
1268 10-26-98 T.S.O. I
1271 4-5-99 T.S.O. IV
1278 7-19-99 T.S.O. IV
1286 1-17-00 T.S.O. II
2016 S-1
References to Ordinances 19
___ ,, ~
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
1287 12-20-99 T.S.O. III
1290 3-20-00 T.S.O. III
1292 5-15-00 T.S.O. III
1299 9-6-00 T.S.O. IV
1300 9-6-00 T.S.O. IV
1301 9-6-00 T.S.O. IV
1302 9-18-00 130.15-130.19
1306 5-7-01 T.S.O. I
1307 5-7-01 T.s.o. 1
1309 4-16-01 T.S.O. IV
. 1310 5-7-01 T.S.O. IV
1316 8-6-01 72.40-72.44
1317 9-6-01 93.20-93.25
1318 9-6-01 T.S.O. IV
1326 3-4-02 50.17-50.28, 50.40-50.42
1328 3-4-02 38.16
1331 7-1-02 93.05
1343 3-3-03 38.15
1350 8-18-03 50.18-50.20, 50.27, 50.28
/ 1358 1-5-04 37.08
1360 3-1-04 37.09
1361 3-15-04 38.16
1362 6-21-04 156.01-156.15, 156.99
1366 8-2-04 92.17
1374 10-4-04 38.15
1375 12-6-04 38.15
1378 1-10-05 151.01, 151.02, 151.04, 151.15,
151.16-151.18, 151.32-151.34,
151.45-151.47, 151.67-151.69, 151.72
1380 2-22-05 156.12, 156.13
1382 4-18-05 Adopting Ordinance
1382-A 8-15-05 T.S.O. I
1387 11-21-05 T.S.O. I
1391 12-19-05 T.S.O. IV
1392 1-17-06 T.S.O. I
1394 12-19-05 35.02
1396 2-21-06 T.S.O. IV
1399 6-19-06 T.S.O. IV
1404 10-2-06 34.04
1405 11-6-06 37.10
·--J 1407 12-4-07 73.13
1409 12-18-06 50.18, 50.22, 50.40, 50.41
2016 S-1
20 Nappanee - Parallel References
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
1410 3-19-07 38.15, 70.16
1414 12-3-07 37.11
1416 4-21-08 T.S.O. II
1417 5-5-08 50.18, 50.22, 50.40, 50.41
1419 6-16-08 T.S.O. IV
1426 2-17-09 T.S.O. IV
1436 1-4-10 T.S.O. II
1438 5-17-10 98.01-98.15, 98,99
1440 6-21-10 T.S.O. II
1442 9-7-10 70.03
1443 9-9-10 38.16
1447 11-15-10 50.18-50.22, 50.26, 50.40, 50.41
1449 4-4-11 111.60-111.68, 111.99
1456 10-3-11 T.S.O. IV
1458 12-12-11 37.12
1462 5-21-12 70.03
1467 12-3-12 31.12
1468 . 4-15-13 T.S.O. IV
1472 10-21-13 92.60-92.62
1479 3-17-14 Ch. 7 5, Schedule III
1481 6-2-14 34.20, 34.25, 34.27
1482 6-2-14 38.16
1483 7-7-14 T.S.O. I
1484 6-16-14 34.40-34.44
1485 7-7-14 156 .03, 156.04, 156.08, 156. 11-156.13,
156.99
1489 8-8-14 T.S.O. I
1490 8-8-14 T.S.O. IV
1491 11-20-14 T.S.O. I
1493 8-18-14 T.S.O. I
1494 3-2-15 T.S.O. I
1495 4-6-15 Adopting Ordinance
1498 7-7-15 T.S.O. I
1506 11-2-15 T.S.O. II
1507 9-21-15 154.001-154.013, 154.025-154.027,
154.040-154.047, 154.060-154.066,
154.999
1512 12-14-15 37.13
1516 2-16-16 51.001-51.004, 51.020-51.028,
51.040-51.043, 51.055-51.061,
51.075-51.082, 51.095-51.107, 51.115,
51.116, 51.130, 51.145, 51.160-51.174,
51.185-51.189, 51.200-51.202
2016 S-1
INDEX
I
2 Nappanee ~ Index
INDEX
ABANDONED OR JUNK VEHICLES, 94.01 (See also PARKING; TRAFFIC)
ADVERTISEMENTS AND HANDBILLS, 130.02
ALARM SYSTEMS
Administration and Enforcement
Delinquent permit fee payment, 90. 31
False alarms, 90.32
Right of inspection, 90.30
Violations, 90.33
Definitions, 90.01
Permit Requirements
Annual fee, 90.18
Application, 90.16
Approval; conditions, 90. 17
Exemptions, 90.19
Permit required, 90.15
Telephone numbers restricted, 90.02
ANIMALS
Actions by animals affecting circumstances off the owner's property, 98.03
Animal handling procedures, 98.13
Animal bites, 98.09
Animals in motor vehicle, 98.05
Confinement by other than city officials; notice required, 98.12
Dangerous animal requirements, 98 .14
Defmitions, 98.01
General animal care requirements, 98.02
Interference with the Police Department or animal control officer prohibited, 98.11
Maximum number of dogs or cats, which may be located on a premises, 98.07
Motor vehicle accidents involving animals, 98.04
Owners or agents responsible for removing animal wastes, 98.08
Penalty, 98.99
Poisoning of animals, 98.06
Requirements to possess a dangerous animal, 98 .15
Vaccination of dogs, cats and ferrets required, 98.10
ANNEXATIONS, T.S.O. I
3
4 Nappanee~ Index
BICYCLE AND PEDESTRIAN PATHWAY
Alcoholic beverages prohibited, 72.43
Application, 72.40
Littering prohibited, 72.42
Loitering prohibited, 72.44
Vehicles restricted on pathway, 72.41
BICYCLES (See NON-MOTORIZED VEHICLES)
BOARD OF PUBUC WORKS AND SAFETY (See WATER)
BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, AND DEPARTMENTS
Boards and commissions established, 35.01
Executive departments, 35.02
BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION (See also UNSAFE BUILDINGS AND
STRUCTURES)
Building Code
Application, 150.04
Authority, 150.03
Purpose, 150.02
Standards, 150.06
State regulations adopted by reference, 150.05
Title, 150.01
Building Code; Administration and Enforcement
Certificate of occupancy; compliance required, 150.38
Inspections, 150.35
Remedies, 150.41
Right of appeal, 150.40
Right of entry, 150.36
Stop order, 150.37
Violations, 150.39
Building Permits
Application review, 150.23
Compliance with other ordinances, 150.21
Permit application, 150.22
Permit required; fees, 150.20
Street Address Numbering
Address changes; numeral requirements, 150.58
Defmitions, 150.55
Existing numbers; replacement, 150.59
New structures; numeral requirements, 150.57
Street numbers required; numeral specifications, 150.56
Violation; time to correct, 150.60
Index
BUSINESS LICENSING
Complaints; license suspension and revocation, 110.02
License issuance and inspection, 110.01
CITY COUNCIL
Appeal from decision of presiding offlcer, 31. 08
City Council; composition and authority, 31.01
Clerk of the Council, 31.02
Four Councihnanic Districts; member at large, 31.12
Meetings; behavior, 31.06
Meetings; date and time, 31.04
Order of business, 31.05
Ordinances and Resolutions
Amendments to code; form, 31.26
Ordinances and resolutions; introduction and adoption, 31.25
Presiding officer, 31. 03
Questions of order, 31.07
Robert's Rules of Order, 31.10
Special meetings, 31.11
Standing Committees of the City Council
Amending Ordinance Form, Chapter 31 Appendix
Committee on By-Laws, Ordinances, and Resolutions, 31.42
Committee on Finance, 31.41
Establishment; committee member appointment, 31.40
suspension of order of business, 31.09
CITY COURT
City Court established, 33.01
City JUdge; election, 33.02
City JUdge; powers and authority, 33 .03
CITY OFFICIALS
Clerk-!reasurer; Deputy, 32.03
Mayor; Deputy Mayor, 32.02
Public officials; surety bonds, 32.01
CITY POLICIES
Contracting Public Works Projects, Procedure for
Competitive bidding, 34.42
Process for obt:alltlng quotes, 34.41
Purchasing agency; powers and duties, 34.40
Special purchases, 34.43
Use of municipality's own work force, 34.44
5
6 Nappanee - Index
CITY POLICIES (Cont'd)
Copies of code on ftle, 34.06
Copies of code; city property, 34.05
Enhanced emergency telephone system, 34.03
Handgun policy; permit and fee; Firearms Training Fund, 34.04
Organization memberships; funds authorized, 34.02
Personnel Policy and Procedure Manual adopted by reference, 34.01
Purchasing Procedure
Delay of opening offers, 34.24
Discussions with offerers; response to request fur proposals, 34.23
Evidence of financial responsibility, 34.25
Modification and termination of contracts, 34.26
Protection of offers; public record status, 34.22
Purchase of services, 34.27
Purchase of supplies manufactured in the United States, 34.21
Purchasing agency; powers and duties, 34.20
CITY STANDARDS
City Seal, 11.01
City Seal, Chapter 11 Appendix
CODE OF ORDINANCES; GENERAL PROVISIONS
Application to future ordinances, 10.03
Construction of code, 10.04
Errors and omissions, 10.09
General penalty, 10.99
Interpretation, 10.02
Limitation periods, 10.12
Ordinances unaffected, 10.13
Ordinances which amend or supplement code, 10.14
Preservation of penalties, offenses, rights, and liabilities, 10.16
Reasonable time, 10.10
Reference to offices; name designations, 10.08
Reference to other sections, 10.07
Repeal or modification of code section, 10.11
Rules of interpretation; definitions, 10.05
Section histories; statutory references, 10.15
Severability, 10.06
Title of code, 10.01
COMMISSIONS (See BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, AND DEPARTMENTS)
CURFEW
Definitions, 130.15
Prohibited acts, 130.16
Enforcement, 130.17
Violations, 130.18
School and Home Safety Fund, 130.19
Index
DEPARTMENT OF PARKS AND RECREATION, 35.16 (See also BOARDS, COMMISSIONS,
AND DEPARTMENTS)
DEPARTMENT OF REDEVELOPMENT; REDEVELOPMENT COMMISSION, 35.23 (See also
BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, AND DEPARTMENTS)
DEPARTMENT OF STREETS AND SANITATION, 35.18 (See also BOARDS, COMMISSIONS,
AND DEPARTMENTS)
7
DEPARTMENT OF WASTEWATER TREATMENT, 35.20 (See also BOARDS, COMMISSIONS,
AND DEPARTMENTS)
DEPARTMENTS (See BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, AND DEPARTMENTS)
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION, 35.15 (See also BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, AND
DEPARTMENTS)
ELECTRICAL INSTALLATION
Application, 151.01
Electrical Examining Board
Board of Review and Appeals, 151.33
Electrical licensing examinations, 151.34
Establishment and organization, 151.30
Meetings, 151.32
Records, 151.31
Electrical Inspector
Appointment and instatement; compensation; removal, 151.16
Authority, 151.18
Duties; assistants; restrictions, 151.17
Qualifications, 151.15
Electrical Licensing
Application procedure, 151.67
Certificate of license, 151.72
Change of representative; notification required, 151.71
Examinations; conduct, 151.68
Failure to pass; re-examination, 151.69
8 Nappanee - Index
ELECTRICAL INSTALLATION (Cont'd)
Electrical Licensing (Cont'd)
Holder of license, 151. 70
License classes, 151.65
License fees and expiration, 151.66
Non-transferability; grounds for suspension or revocation, 151.73
Installation Requirements
Connections; approval required, 151.51
Electrical equipment standards, 151.46
Electrical equipment; installation standards, 151.45
Electrical work; license requlled; exceptions, 151.47
Inspections; approval; notice to correct, 151.50
Permit fees, 151.49
Permit required; exceptions, 151.48
Liability for damages, 151.03
Right to appeal, 151.04
Violations; injunctive relief; license suspension, 151.02
EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES DEPARTMENT, 35.17 (See also BOARDS,
COMMISSIONS, AND DEPARTMENTS)
FAIR HOUSING
Administration and Enforcement
City organizations to provide support, 91. 32
Enforcement authority, 91.31
Information on remedies, 91.33
Violations, 91.30
Application, 91.03
Definitions, 91.02
Exemptions, 91. 04
Policy, 91.01
Unlawful Practices
FEES
Discrimination in provision of brokerage services prohibited, 91.17
Discrimination in residential real estate related transactions prohibited, 91.16
Discrimination in sale or rental of housing prohibited, 91.15
Interference, coercion, and intimidation prohibited, 91.18
Fee Schedules
Construction permits; inspection fees, 38.17
Emergency medical services; fee schedule, 38.16
Fee schedule, 38.15
License fees authorized, 38.01
•
Index
FIRE PREVENTION
Administration and Enforcement
Authority; Chief of Fire Department, 92.45
Inspections, 92.46
No fire inspection fee, 92.47
Violations, 92.48
Fire Limits
Constrnction in fire limits; materials restricted, 92.02
Fire limits boundaries, 92.01
Removal of frame buildings, 92.03
Incinerators
Application, 92.33
Definition, 92.30
Pennit requirements, 92.31
Violations; remedies, 92.32
Unlawful Acts
Burning of combustible substances prohibited, 92.17
Leaf burning on public property prohibited, 92.15
Storage of gasoline, naphtha, and benzine restricted, 92.16
FIREARMS, 130.01
FIREWORKS
Enforcement; penalty, 92.62
Permits, 92.61
Use, discharge or ignition prohibited, 92.60
FLOOD HAZARD AREAS
Abrogation and greater restrictions, 154.010
Administration
Designation of Administrator, 154.025
Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator, 154 .027
Permit procedures, 154.026
Basis for establishing regulatory flood data, 154.007
Compliance, 154.009
Definitions, 154.005
Discrepancy between mapped floodplain and actual ground elevations, 154.011
Establishment of floodplain development permit, 154 .008
Findings of fact, 154.002
Interpretation, 154.012
Lands to which these regulations apply, 154.006
Objectives, 154.004
Penalty, 154.999
2016 S-1
9
10 Nappanee - Index
FLOOD HAZARD AREAS (Cont'd)
Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
Critical facility, 154.043
General standards, 154.040
Specific standards, 154.041
Standards for identified floodways, 154.044
Standards for identified fringe, 154.045
Standards for SFHAs without established base flood elevation and/or floodways/fringes,
154.046
Standards for Flood Prone Areas, 154.047
Standards for subdivision proposals, 154.042
Statement of purpose, 154.003
Statutory authorization, 154.001
Variance Procedures
Conditions for variance, 154.063
Designation of variance and Appeals Board, 154.060
Duties of Variance and Appeals Board, 154.0<?l
Historic structure, 154.065
Special conditions, 154.066
Variance notification, 154.064
Variance procedures, 154.062
Warning and disclaimer of liability, 154.013
FOOD CONCESSIONS
Location of concession, 111.63
Notice of permit failure, 111.67
Operation during Apple Festival, 111.68
Operation of concessions, 111.65
Penalty, 111. 99
Permit application, 111.61
Permit fee, 111. 62
Permit required, 111.60
Restrictions for locations, 111.64
Termination and expiration of permit, 111.66
FRANCHISE AGREEMENTS, T.S.O. III
FUNDS
Cumulative Capital Development Fund, 37.01
Cumulative Capital Improvement Fund, 37 .02
Cumulative Fund for Firefighting Equipment, 37.03
ECCF Tornado Assistance Grant Fund, 37 .11
Golf Course Capital Outlays Fund, 37 .06
2016 S-1
Index
FUNDS (Cont'd)
Major Moves Construction Fund, 37. 10
Parks and Recreation Special Non-Reverting Fund, 37.04
Rainy Day Fund, 37 .09
Rental Housing Registration Fee Non-Reverting Fund, 37.12
Riverboat Revenue Sharing Fund, 37 .08
Special Non-Reverting Day Camp Fund, 37.07
Special Recreation Fund, 37.05
Water Utility Cash Reserve Fund, 37.13
GARAGRAND YARD SALES
Definitions, 111.01
License display required, 111.06
Pen:nit requirements, 111.05
Policy, 111.02
Signs; display restrictions, 111.04
Three-day limit, 111.03
Violations, 111.07
GOLF CARTS, USE OF, 70.03
GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATION, 30.01
HANDBILLS, 130.02
HEALTH AND SANITATION; NUISANCES
Accumulation of junk or dangerous or obnoxious matter prohibited, 93.07
Carrying trash into city prohibited, 93.06
Nuisances prohibited, 93.01
Violations; abatement, 93.02
HISTORIC PRESERVATION
Administration and Enforcement
Interested parties; right of action, 153.50
Violations; remedies; judicial review, 153.51
Historic Districts; Construction and Development
Action on certificate application, 153.33
Building permits; certificate of appropriateness required, 153.31
Certificate application and fee, 153.32
Demolition pen:nit; appeal provisions, 153.37
Development standards, 153.34
District regulations; relationship to zoning districts, 153.30
Maintenance, 153.35
Visual compatibili1y; factors, 153.36
2016 S-1
11
12 Nappanee - Index
HISTORIC PRESERVATION (Cont'd)
Historic Districts; Designation
Additional surveys and maps, 153.17
Commission powers and duties; historic districts, 153 .15
Council approval required, 153.16
Historic districts; establishment; right of objection, 153.18
Record of boundaries, 153.19
Historic Preservation Commission
Definitions, 153.01
Establishment and organization, 153.02
JUNK STORES AND JUNK YARDS
Definition, 111.20
Hours restricted, 111.25
License application and fee, 1.11.22
License required, 111.21
Records required, 111.24
Standards and restrictions, 111.23
Violations a nuisance; remedies, 111.26
JUNK VEHICLES, 94.01 (See also PARKING; TRAFFIC)
LIQUORRETAILERS, 111.40
LOITERING, 130.03
MlNlMUM HOUSING CODE
Application for rental permit, annual registration, and inspections, 156.12
Definitions, 156.03
Enforcement, 156. 14
Hotels and rooming houses, 156.10
Inspection, 156, 13
Minimum space, use and location requirements, 156.08
Minimum standards for all structures, 156.04
Minimum standards for basic equipment and facilities, 156.05
Minimum standards for light, ventilation, egress and heating, 156.06
Miscellaneous provisions, 156.15
Penalties, 156.99
Purpose, 156.02
Responsibilities of owner and occupants, 156.09
Safe and sanitary maintenance, 156.07
Smoke detectors, 156.11
Title, 156.01
Index
NOISE
Community noise level standards; measurement, 93.21
Definitions, 93 .20
Exemptions, 93.23
Noise level standards; motor vehicles and sound amplification systems, 93.22
Specific prohibited noises, 93.26
Undue hardship; temporary permit, 93.24
Violations, 93.25
NON-MOTORIZED VEHICLES
Bicycles; light and license tag required, 72.20
Clinging to vehicle prohibited, 72.23
Push carts, animals, and animal drawn vehicles, 72.21 -
Skateboard violations; community service, 72.26
Skateboards defined, 72.24
Skateboards; prohibited areas, 72.25
Use of rollerskates, coasters, and the like restricted, 72.22
NUISANCES (See HEALTH AND SANITATION; NUISANCES)
ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS BUREAU
Civil penalties, 36. 05
Established, 36.01
Schedule of violations and fines adopted by reference, 36.04
Violations Clerk; appointment, 36.02
Violations Clerk; duties, 36.03
PARKING (See also ABANDONED AND JUNK VEHICLES; TRAFFIC)
Administration and Enforcement
Payment of penalty, 73.60
Police Department duties, 70.15
Vehicle impoundment; authority; procedure, 73.61
Congested traffic areas, Chapter 75, Schedule I
Defmitions, 70.02
Designated Parking Spaces and Loading Zones
Designated bus stops and taxicab stands authorized, 73.26
Individual parking spaces; designation and use, 73.25
Public off-street parking lot; restrictions, 73.27
No parking zones, Chapter 75, Schedule I
Parking Restrictions
Obstruction of street traffic prohibited, 73 .03
Parking adjacent to schools, 73.07
Parking in alleys; obstruction prohibited, 73.04
13
14 Nappanee - Index
PARKING (Cont'd)
Parking Restrictions (Cont'd)
Parking mobile homes, semi-trailers, and the like restricted, 73.11
Parking near fire hydrants prohibited, 73.02
Parking on narrow streets restricted, 73.08
Parking on one-way streets, 73.09
Parking purposes restricted, 73.06
Parking unlicensed vehicles prohibited, 73, 12
Prohibited parking areas, 73.13
Stopping, standing, parking; prohibited places, 73.01
Street parking; 48-hour limit, 73.05
Unlawful acts, 73 .10
Parking Restrictions in Designated Areas
Application, 73 .40
Designated limited time parking, 73 .45
Designated no parking zones, 73.42
Designated no parking zones for maintenance, 73.44
Designated no stopping zones; restricted hours, 73.43
Regulations not exclusive, 73.41
Stopping in designated hazardous or congested areas prohibited, 73.46
Public off-street parking lot, Chapter 75, Schedule I
Special parking conditions, Chapter 75, Schedule I
Title, 70.01
PARKS AND RECREATION
Park Usage and Conduct Regulations
Advertising restricted, 97.16
Alcoholic beverages and dangerous drugs prohibited, 97.23
Animals at large probJbited, 97 .22
Camping restricted, 97.19
Disorderly conduct prohibited, 97. 17
Explosives, weapons, and missiles prohibited, 97 .18
Kites and toy airplanes, boats, and automobiles restricted, 97 .21
Park hours restricted, 97.15
Swimming restricted, 97.20
Protection of Park Facilities, Plants, and Wildlife
Damage or removal of parks property prohibited, 97.01
Damage or removal of trees and plants prohibited, 97 .02
Injury, disturbance, or removal of animals prohibited, 97 .04
Littering, dumping, and pollution prohibited, 97 .03
Traffic Regulations
Careless driving prohibited, 97 .37
Driving off roadways prohibited, 97 .38
~··
Index
PARKS AND RECREATION (Cont'd)
Traffic Regulations (Cont'd)
Obedience to police and traffic-control devices required, 97 .35
Restricted vehicles, 97.36
Soliciting on roadways prohibited, 97.39
Speed limit, 97.40
PEDESTRIANS (See also BICYCLE AND PEDESTRIAN PATHWAY)
Crossing in business districts restricted, 72.06
Crossing outside crosswalk; pedestrian to yield, 72,05
Crosswalk right-of-way, 72.03
Drivers to exercise due care, 72.09
Obedience to railroad crossing signals, 72.02
Obedience to traffic-control signals, 72.01
Pedestrians along roadways, 72.07
Soliciting rides or business restricted, 72.08
Use right half of crosswalk, 72.04
POLICE RESERVE UNIT, 35.21 (See also BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, AND DEPARTMENTS)
PUBLIC WORKS PROJECTS, PROCEDURE FOR CONTRACTING
Competitive bidding, 34.42
Process for obtaining quotes, 34.41
Pmchasing agency; powers and duties, 34.40
Special purchases, 34.43
Use of municipality's own work force, 34.44
SENIOR CITIZEN CENTER, 35.22 (See also BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, AND
DEPARTMENTS)
SEWERS
Abbreviations, 51.003
Administration, 51.002
Affirmative Defenses to Discharge Violations
Bypass, 51.202
Prohibited discharge standards, 51.201
Upset, 51.200
Compliance Monitoring
Right of entry: inspection and sampling, 51.115
Search warrants, 51.116
Confidential Information, 51.130
Definitions, 51.004
2016 S-1
15
16 Nappanee - Index
SEWERS (Cont'd)
Enforcement
Cease and desist orders, 51.165
Civil penalties, 51.171
Compliance orders, 51.164
Consent orders, 51.162
Effective date of notice, order of statement, 51. 174
Emergency suspensions, 51.167
Injunctive relief, 51.170
Minor infraction, 51.160
Notification of violation, 51. 161
Remedies nonexclusive, 51.172
Revocation order, 51.166
Right of appeal; Board of Public Works and Safety, 51.169
Service, 51.173
Show cause order and hearing, 51.163
Termination of discharge, 51.168
General Sewer Use Requirements
City1s right of revision, 51.027
Construction and connections, 51.020
Dilution, 51.028
National categorical pretreatment standards, 51.023
Pollutant concentration guidelines and limits, 51.025
Prohibited discharge standards, 51.022
Prohibited uses, 51.021
State pretreatment standards, 51.024
Waste strength and content; surcharges, 51.026
Industrial Reporting Requirements
2016 S-1
Analytical requirements, 51.104
Baseline monitoring reports, 51.095
Compliance schedule progress reports, 51.096
Notice of violating repeat sampling a.pd reporting, 51.102
Notification of the discharge of hazardous waste, 51.103
Periodic compliance reports, 51.098
Record keeping, 51.107
Reports from unpermitted users, 51.101
Reports of changed conditions, 51.099
Reports of potential problems, 51.100
Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline, 51.097
Sample collection, 51.105
Timing, 51.106
.J
Index
SEWERS (Cont'd)
Industrial Wastewater Discharge Permit Application
Application signatories and certification, 51.060
Industrial wastewater discharge permitting: existing connections·, 51.057
Industrial wastewater discharge permitting: new connections, 51.058
Industrial wastewater discharge permit application contents, 51.059
Industrial wastewater discharge permit requirement, 51.056
Industrial wastewater discharge permit decisions, 51.061
Industrial wastewater analysis, 51.055
Industrial Wastewater Discharge Permit Issuance Process
Regulation of waste received from other jurisdictions, 51.082
Wastewater discharge permit appeals, 51.077
Wastewater discharge permit modifications, 51. 078
Wastewater discharge permit transfer, 51. 079
Wastewater discharge permit revocation, 51.080
Wastewater discharge permit reissuance, 51.081
Wastewater discharge permit contents, 51.076
Wastewater discharge permit duration, 51.075
Pretreatment of Wastewater
Accidental discharge/ slug control plans, 51.042
Additional pretreatment measures, 51.041
Hauled wastewater, 51.043
Pretreatment facilities, 51.040
Publication of Users in Significant Noncompliance, 51.45
Purpose and policy, 51.001
Supplemental Enforcement Actioli
Contractor listing, 51.189
Liability insurance, 51. i86
Performance bonds, 51.185
Public nuisances, 51. 188
Water supply severance, 51.187
SIDEWALKS (See STREETS AND SIDEWALKS)
SKATEBOARDS (See NON-MOTORIZED VEHICLES)
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Driveways; Curb and Gutter Modification
Bond requirement, 95.05
Compliance required, 95.02
2016 S-1
16A
16B Nappanee - Index
'
' , i ,
Index
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS (Cont'd)
Driveways; Curb and Gutter Modification (Cont'd)
Damages and violations; liability, 95.06
Definition, 95.Dl
Permit required for construction, 95.03
Permit review, 95.04
Sidewalks
Construction deadline, 95.43
Construction specifications, 95.42
Exceptions, 95.41
Required sidewalks, 95.40
Role of Streets and Sanitation Superintendent, 95.44
Variances, 95.46
Violations, 95.45
Sidewalks; snow, ice, dirt, and garbage removal, 93.03
Streets and Alleys; Excavations
Backfill; notice and inspection required, 95.24
Barricades and lights required, 95.25
Continuing bond, 95.23
Excavation permit required; emergency exception, 95.21
Excavation petition procedure, 95.22
Records, 95.27
Rerouting of traffic, 95.26
Unauthorized excavations prohibited, 95.20
Violations, 95.28
Streets and sidewalks; animals and animal drawn vehicles restricted, 93.04
Vacations of Streets and Alleys, T.S.0. Il
SUBDIVISIONS (See ZONING AND SUBDIVISION CONTROL, 155.Dl)
TAXICABS
Definitions, 111.50
License application; inspection, 111.52
License required, 111.51
TRAFFIC (See also ABANDONED AND JUNK VEHICLES; NON-MOTORIZED VEHICLES;
PARKING; PEDESTRIANS)
Additional Driving Rules
Driving on sidewalk prohibited, 71.123
Funeral and other processions, 71.120
Load restrictions on certain highways, 71.127
Opening vehicle doors, 71.125
Procession driving, 71.121
17
18 Nappanee - Index
TRAFFIC (Cont'd)
Additional Driving Rules (Cont'd)
Procession permission requirement, 71.122
Restrictions on backing, 71.124
Riding on motorcycles, 71.126
Annual traffic safety report, 70 .17
Application to public employees, 71.005
Chief of Police; traffic-control duties, 70.18
Compliance with traffic and parking laws required, 71.001
Defmitions, 70.02
Designated through streets, Chapter 74, Schedule III
Emergency and experimental regulations, 70.19
Emergency Vehicles and Equipment
Authorized emergency vehicles; exemptions and regulations, 71.015
Crossing frre hose prohibited, 71.018
Following fire apparatus prohibited, 71.017
Vehicles approaching authorized emergency vehicle, 71.016
Golf carts, use of, 70.03
Immediate notice of accident, 71.004
Obedience to Police and Fire Department officials required, 71.003
One-way streets and alleys, Chapter 74, Schedule II
One-Way Streets and Alleys
Designating signs required, 71.085
Temporary one-way traffic designation authorized, 71.087
Traffic direction restricted, 71.086
Police and Fire Department officials; authority, 71.002
Police Department duties, 70.15
Records, 70.16
Skateboards prohibited area, Chapter 74, Schedule IV
Speed limits, Chapter 74, Schedule I
Speed Regulations
Decrease of maximum permitted speed, 71.056
Speed limits on school properties, 71.058
Speed regulation by traffic signals, 71.057
State speed laws applicable, 71.055
Stops and Yields
Approaching stop intersection, 71.102
Approaching train; stop at railroad crossing, 71.105
Designated through streets; signs and signals required, 71.100
Emerging from alley, driveway, or building, 71.103
Stop signs; standards, 71.101
Stop when traffic obstructed, 71.104
Title, 70.01
I
Index
TRAFFIC (Cont'd)
Traffic-Control Devices and Controlled Zones
Crosswalks and safety zones; designation authority, 71.040
Flashing signals, 71.035
Installation authority, 71.030
Interference with official traffic-control devices prohibited, 71.038
Manual and specifications, 71.031
Obedience required, 71.032
Pedestrian-control signals, 71.036
Play streets, 71.039
Signs; when required for enforcement, 71.033
Traffic lanes, 71.041
Traffic-control signal lights, 71.034
Unauthorized signs, signals, and markings prohibited, 71.037
Turning Movements
Compliance with restricted turn signs required, 71.073
Restricted turn signs, 71.072
Turning at intersection; method, 71.070
Turning markers and indications, 71.071
Vehicle inspections, 70.20
TREES
Arborists; license and bond required, 96.02
City Tree Board
Compensation, 96 .17
Duties and responsibilities, 96.18
Establishment; organization, 96.15
Members; term of office, 96.16
Operation, 96.19
Definitions, 96.01
Review by City Council; right of appeal, 96.03
Tree Care and Maintenance
City authority to plant, maintain, or remove, 96.45
Dead or diseased tree removal on private property, 96.48
Interference with city agents unlawful, 96.50
Pruning; clearance requirements, 96.47
Removal of stumps, 96.49
Unlawful acts, 96.46
Tree Planting Regulations
Desirable and undesirable tree species; size classes, 96.30
Distance from curb and sidewalk, 96.32
Distance from street corner and frreplug, 96.33
19
20 Nappanee - Index
TREES (Cont'd)
Tree Planting Regulations (Cont'd)
Distance from utility wires, 96.34
Spacing, 96.31
Violations, 96.04
UNSAFE BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES (See also BUILDING REGULATIONS;
CONSTRUCTION)
Administration and Enforcement Action
Action required by order; liability for costs, 152.33
Action to enforce orders; grounds for action, 152.31
Emergency action; cost recovery; challenge of emergency, 152.30
Inspection warrants, 152.36
Interested person; terms, 152.39
Notice requirements, 152.37
Performance of work required by order; pro~ures; public bids, 152.32
Records, 152.38
Unpaid costs; notice, hearing, and judgment, 152.34
Unsafe Building Fund; deposits and expenditures, 152. 35
Defuritions, 152.01
Orders to Correct
Hearings; extensions; records, 152.17
Judicial review, 152.18
Modification or rescission of order, 152.16
Order of action; notice requirements; expiration, 152.15
Property transfer by person not complying with orders; requirements, 152.02
Unsafe Buildings; Court Proceedings
Appointment of receiver, 152.53
Civil action authorized, 152.50
Civil forfeitures, 152.52
Court order authorizing performance of work; judgment for costs, 152.54
Emergency action; court order authorizing action; judgment for costs, 152.55
Injunctions, 152.51
Priority of actions, 152.56
Violations, 152.03
WATER
Abandoned Water Wells; Sealing
Compliance with federal, state, and local regulations, 50.94
Exception; temporary absence, 50.92
Responsibility and supervision, 50.91
Sealing report required, 50.93
Sealing required; state standards apply, 50.90
Violations; remedies, 50.95
-·::--_
)
Index
WATER (Cont'd)
Board of Public Works and Safety to control, 50.02
Plumber licensing; state regulations, 50.04
Private Wells
Injunctive relief, 50.57
Private wells for non-consumption uses, 50.56
Private wells restricted, 50.55
Protection of Water System
Cross connection and interconnection prohibitions, 50.70
Discontinuance of service, 50. 73
Emergency discontinuance, 50.74
Hazardous users; backflow preventors required, 50.75
Inspections of potential cross connections, 50. 71
Regulations supplemental, 50.76
Right of entry; information required, 50. 72
Role of Clerk-Treasurer, 50.03
Use Regulations
Grounds for service discontinuance, 50.41
Prohibited acts, 50.40
Water use on construction site, 50.42
Water Usage; Rates and Charges
Billing; discontinued service, 50.27
Connection charges, 50.21
Fire protection; annual charges, 50.20
Inspection and meter charges, 50.22
Metered usage rate, 50. 18
Minimum monthly charge, 50.19
Other charges; equipment and expenses, 50.26
Rates and charges authorized, 50.15
Rates and charges established, 50.17
Reconnection charge, 50.24
Seasonal water meters, 50.25
Temporary users, 50.23
Unpaid charges; new service restricted, 50.28
Water Utility removed from IRC jurisdiction, 50.16
Water Utility Department and Waterworks authorized, 50.01
WATER UTILITY DEPARTMENT, 35.19 (See also BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, AND
DEPARTMENTS)
WEEDS, 93.05
YARD SALES {See GARAGE AND YARD SALES)
21
22 Nappanee - Index
ZON1NG AND SUBDIVISION CONTROL, 155.01
ZON1NG MAP CHANGES, T.S.O. IV
,
Unified Zoning &
Subdivision Control Ordinance
City of Nappanee
Indiana
lVIARCH 1998
(AMENDED JANUARY 2000)
Prepared by the Nappanee
Advisory Plan Commh::>ion
fVith tlte Assistance of
~R
G R 0 U P

- ..
City Of Nappa~nee
Indiana
Unified Zoning and
Subdivision Control Ordinance
March 1998.
Prepared by the Nappanee Advisory Plan Commission
With the Assistance of
BONAR
G R 0 U P
TABLE OF CONTENTS
SECTION I
SECTION II
SECTION 111
SECTION IV
GENERAL PROVISIONS AND ENFORCEMENT
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
1.6
1.7
1.8
1.9
1.10
1.11
1.12
Title
Purpose
Jurisdiction
Interpretation
Application
Saving Provision
Compliance
Severability
Repealer
Amendments
Enforcement, Violation, and Penalties
Administrative Officer
DEFINITIONS
2.1
2.2
General
Specific
DISTRICTS
3.1
3.2
3.3
3.4.
Establishment
Official Zoning Map
Boundaries
Subdivisions, Cluster Developments,
Planned Developments, Condominiums,
and Zero Lot Une Developments
AUTHORIZED USES
4.1
4.2
4.3
4.4
4.5
Principal Uses
Accessory Uses
Nonconforming Uses and Structures
A.
B.
C.
0.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
Intent
Incompatibility
Avoidance of Undue Hardship
Single Nonconforming Lots
Nonconforming Lots in Combination
Nonconforming Uses of Land
Nonconforming Structures
Structures and Land in Combination
Repairs and Maintenance
Garage or Yard Sa/es
Other Outdoor Sales
A.
B.
C.
0.
General
Roadside Sa/es
Sidewalk Sa/es
Automobiles, Boats, Motorcycles, Etc.
\\BGVALPO\SDSK\sdsk\WORDPROCIBONARI 1567\ZONI NG\TOContents.doc (1-1-00)
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
2
2
2
2-3
3
4
4-39
40-41
41
41-42
42
43
43
43-46
43
44
44
44
45
45
45
46
46
46-47
47-48
47
47
48
48
TABLE OF CONTENTS
SECTION V
4.6
4.7
4.8
Districts in Which Uses are Permitted
Residential Uses
Agricultural Uses
Industrial Uses
Public Facilities
Communication I Utilities
Business Uses - Automobile
Business Uses - Clothing
Business Uses - Electronics
Business Uses - Food and Drink
Business Uses - Office
Business Uses - Personal Services
Business Uses - Recreation
Business Uses - Retail Sales
Business Uses - Miscellaneous
Tatoo Parlor
Adult Bookstore I Adult Entertainment Business
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
5.1 General
5.2 Lot I Yard Regulations
A. Conflicts
B. Setbacks I Min. Yard Requirements
C. Lot Width
D. Lot Coverage
E. Lot Area
F. Minimum Size of Single Family Dwelling
5.3 Height Regulations
5.4 Loading
A. General
B. Location
C. Size
D. Access
E. Surfacing
F. Space Allowed
G. Off Street Loading Berths
5.5 Parking
A. General
B. Parking Spaces
C. Parking Areas
0. Recreational Vehicle Parking
5.6 Entrances I Driveways
A. Spacing
B. Width
ii
\IBGVALPOISDSK\sdsk\WORDPROCIBONARI 1567\ZONING\TOContents.doc (1-1-00)
48-59A
50
50
51
52
53
53
54
54
55
56
56
57
58
59A
59B
59C
60
60-63
60
60-62
62
62
62
62
63-64
64
64
64
64
64
64
64
64-65
65-68
65
65-66
66-67
67
69
69
69
TABLE OF CONTENTS
SECTION VJ
5.7
5.8
5.9
Miscellaneous Restrictions
A. Through Lots
8. Access to Public Streets
C. Satellite and Digital Dish Systems
D. Fences
Environmental Regulations
A. General
8. Surface Water
C. Drainage
D. Permanent Structures
E. PreseNation of Natural or Historic Features
F. Landscaping
G. Cut/Fill Grade
H. Erosion Prevention
I. Alterations to Shoreline
J. Code Compliance/Hazardous Waste
K. Code Compliance/Environmental Quality
L. Waste Disposal
M. Fuel Storage
N. Debris/Refuse
0. Treatment of Fill
P. Improvement Location Permit
Buffering
A.
8.
C.
D.
E.
F.
General
Application
Determining Requirements
Additional Standards
Exceptions
Responsibility
5.10· Industrial Performance Standards
A.
8.
C.
0.
General
Exceptions
Interpretation
Application
PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS
6.1 Intent
6.2 Classification
6.3 Organization of Proposals
6.4 Filing Procedure
6.5 Preliminary Development Plan
6. 6 . Preliminary Plan Hearing
6. 7 Approval of Final Detailed Plan
6.8 Covenants and Maintenance
iii
\\BGVALPO\SDSK\sdsk\WORDPROC\BONAR\ 1567\.ZONING\TOContents.doc (1-1-00)
69-70
69
69
69-70
70
70-72
70
70
70
71
71
71
71
71
71
71
71
72
72
72
72
72
73-75
73
73
73
74
74
74
76-788
76
76
76-77
77-788
79
79
80
80
80-81
81
81-82
82-83
-:.-
TABLE OF CONTENTS
6.9 Recording
6.10 Permit
6.11 Construction
6.12 · Extension, Abandonment, and Expiration ·
6.13 Rules of Procedure
6.14 Limitations of Rezoning
SECTION VII SIGN REGULA T/ON
7.1 General
7.2 Definitions
7.3 Permits and Fees
A. Required
B. Application
C. Fees
D. Effect of Issuance
E. Nullification
F. Exceptions
G. Variances
7.4 Inspection, Removal, and Safety
A. Inspection
B. Removal
C. Maintenance
D. Abandoned Signs
E. Street Improvement Projects
F. Assurance of Discontinuance
7.5 Nonconforming Uses and Signs
7.6 Prohibited Signs
7.7 Exemptions
7.8 Temporary Signs
7.9 Illumination
7.10 Sign Standards
7.11 Residential District Standards
A. Single Family Residential District (R-1)
B. Two-Family and Multi-Family Districts
(R-2 and R-3)
c. Office Residential District (R-4)
D. Location
7.12 Business I Commercial District Standards
A. General
B. Free-Standing Single Use Buildings
C. Shopping Centers
D. Commerce and Industrial Parks
7.13 Industrial District Standards
A. Ground Signs
B. Wall Signs
IV
llBGVALPOISDSK\sdsk\WORDPROC\BONAR\1567\ZONI NGITOContents.doc (1-1-00)
83-84
84
84
84
84
84
85
85
85-86
85
85
85
86
86
86
86
86-87
86
86-87
87
87
87
87
87-88
88-89
89-90
90-92
92-93
93
93-95
93-94
94
94-95
95
95-97A
95
95-96
96-97A
97A
97A-97B
97A-97B
97B
.. __
TABLE OF CONTENTS
c. Entrance Signs 978
SECTION V/11 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
8.1 General 98-100
A. Title 98
B. Intent and Purposes 98
C. Jurisdiction 98
D. Policy and Interpretation 99-100
E. Replats 100
8.2 Administration and Definitions 101 .~
A. Inspections and Permits 101
B. Definitions 101
8.3 Procedure 101-110
A. General 101
B. Application for Subdivision 101-102
c. Notice of Public Hearing 102-103
D. Primary Plat Procedure 103-105
E. Primary Plat Approval 105-106
F. Secondary Plat Procedure 106-108
G. Secondary Plat Approval 108-109
H. Construction Plans 109-110
I. Minor Plats 110
8.4 Surety 110-112
A. Performance Bonds 110-111
B. Release of Performance Bond 111-112
C. Other Forms of Surety 112
8.5 Principles and Standards of Design 113-118
A. General 113-114
B. Street Standards 114-115
C. Block Standards 115
D. Lot Standards 116
E. Easements 116
F. Open Space 116-117
G. Subdivision and Street Names 117
H. Mobile Home or Manufactured Housing Parks 117-119
8.6 Standards for Improvements and Installations 119-128
A. Street Improvements 119-121
B. Stormwater and Subsurface Drainage 121-124
c. Curbs and Gutters 124-125
D. Sewers 125-126
E. Water Supply 126
v
\\BGVALPO\SDSK\sdsk\WORDPROC\BONAR\ 1567\ZONING\TDContents.doc (1-1-00)
TABLE OF CONTENTS
SECTION IX
SECTIONX
SECTION XI
8.7
8.8
F.
G.
H.
I.
Monuments and Markers
Sidewalks
Street Signs and Street Lighting
Utilities
Drainage, Erosion, and Sediment Control
A.
B.
c.
D.
E.
General
Performance Principles
Grading for Drainage
Responsibility for Drainage and Erosion
Compliance
Commercial and Industrial Subdivisions
A. General Requirements
BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS
9.1
9.2
9.3
9.4
9.5'
9.6
"9.7
9.8
Membership
Terms of Office
Jurisdiction
Rules and Procedures
Duties and Powers
Conflict of Interest
Hearings
Appeals
ADVISORY PLAN COMMISSION
10.1
10.2
10.3
10.4
10.5
10.6
10.7
10.8
10.9
Membership
Terms of Office
Jurisdiction
Rules and Procedures
Duties and Powers
Conflict of Interest
Meetings and Minutes
Public Hearings
Amendments
ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES
11.1 Improvement Location Permit
A.
B.
c.
D.
E.
F
Permits Required
Application
Expiration
Construction According to Plans
Schedule of Permits
Schedule of Petition
11.2 Certificate of Occupancy
11.3 Special Exceptions
vi
\\BGVALPO\SOSK\sdsk\WORDPROC\BONAR\ 1567\ZONING\TOContents.doc (1-1-00)
126-128
128
128
128
129-133
129
129-130
130-131
131-132
132
132-133
132-133
134
134
134
134
134
135
135
135
136
136
136
136
1.36-137.'
137
137
137
138
139-140
139
139
139
139
140
140
140-141
141-142
••• •-<!
TABLE OF CONTENTS
11.4 Variances 142-143
11.5 Schedule of Fees 143
11.6 Enforcement and Penalties 143
11.7 Effect on A.nnexation and Vacation 143-144
11.8 Exclusion 144
11.9 Historic Preservation Overlay Districts 144-145
11.10 Establishment of a Local Landmark 145
11.11 Regional Corridor Overlay District 145-146
SECTION XII HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION
12.1 Establishment 147
12.2 Powers and Duties 147
12.3 Adoption of a Book of Standards 147
SECTION X//I TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES
13.1 Purpose 148
13.2 Definitions 148
13.3 General Requirements 148-149
13.4 Registration of Carriers and Providers 149-150
13.5 Agreement 150
13.6 Nonexclusive Grant 150
13.7 Rights Granted 150
13.8 Exempt Facilities - Basic Requirements 150-151
13.9. Mini Facilities • Basic Requirements 151
13.10 Minor Facilities • Basic Requirements 151-152
13.11 Minor Facilities - Referral 153
13.12 Application Requirements 153
13.13 Standard Agreements Required 153-155
13.14 Life of Permits 155
13.15 Structural Requirements 155
13.16 Basic Tower and Building Design 156
13.17 Critical Disaster Response Facilities 156-157
13.18 Location 157-158
13.19 Height 158
13.20 Co-Located and Multiple User Facilities 158-159
13.21 Lighting 159
13.22 Access and Parking 159
13.23 Vegetation Protection and Screening 159-160
13.24 Fire Prevention 160-161
13.25 Environmental Resource Protection 161
13.26 Noise and Traffic 161-162
13.27 Visual Compatibility 162
13.28 NIER Exposure 162-163
13.29 Telecommunications Facilities. Exceptions 163
13.30 Public Notice 163-164
13.31 Appeal 164
13.32 Severability 164
vii
l\BGVALPO\SDS Klsdsk\WORDPROCIBONAR\ 1567\ZONINGITOContents.doc (1·1-00)
----
GENERAL PROVISIONS AND ENFORCEMENT SECTION I
1.1 TITLE
rhese regulations shall be known and cited as the Unified Zoning & Subdivision ·control Ordinance
of Nappanee, Indiana.
1.2 PURPOSE ·
This Ordinance is intended to encourage the growth and development of the City in accordance with
the Comprehensive Plan for the City of Nappanee. The Comprehensive Plan and all amendments
thereto are incorporated herein by reference with copies of the same maintained in the Office of the
Clerk-Treasurer and being open for public inspection during regular business hours.
1.3 JURISDICTION
This Ordinance shall apply to all lands within the corporate limits of the City of Nappanee, Indiana,
or as other agreements may allow.
1.4 INTERPRETATION
The provisions of this Ordinance shall be held as the minimum requirements for the protection of the
health, safety, comfort, morals, convenience, and general welfare of the people at large, and are
designed to encourage the establishment and maintenance of reasonable community standards for
the physical environment.
1.5 APPLICATION
It is not intended by this Ordinance to interfere with, abrogate or amend any existing easements,
covenants, or other agreements between parties, nor is it intended by this Ordinance to repeal,
abrogate, annul, or in any way interfere with any existing provisions of laws or ordinances (other than
previous zoning and subdivision control ordinances), or any rules, regulations, or permits previously
adopted or issued pursuant to law relating to the use of building or premises provided, however, that
where this Ordinance imposes a greater restriction upon the use of buildings or premises than is
imposed or required by such existing provisions of law or by such rules, regulations, agreements,
covenants, or permits, the provisions of this Ordinance shall control; but where private covenants,
permits, agreements, rules or regulations impose a greater restriction than is imposed by this
Ordinance, the greater restriction shall control. Such greater restrictions as may be imposed shall
not be the responsibility of the City of Nappanee for enforcement.
1.6 SAVING PROVISION
This Ordinance shall not be construed as abating any action now pending under, or by virtue of, prior
existing zoning and/or subdivision regulations, or as discontinuing, abating, modifying, or altering any
penalty accruing or about to accrue.
U ILANTZINAPP.~NEEISECT.I (12-22-97) 1.
GENERAL PROVISIONS AND ENFORCEMENT SECTION I
1,7 COMPLIANCEi
No structure shall be located, erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved, altered, converted, or
enlarged; nor shall any structure or land be used, unless in full compliance with all provisions of this
Ordinance and under the lawful issue of all permits and certificates required by this Ordinance.
1.8 SEVERABILITY
If any provision of this Ordinance is held unconstitutional or invalid by the courts, the remainder of the
Ordinance shall not be affected.
1.9 REPEALER
This Ordinance repeals all prior zoning and subdivision control ordinances and zoning maps.
1.10 AMENDMENTS
In accordance with l.C. 36-7-4-602, the legislative body may amend or partially repeal the text of this
Ordinance or they may amend the zoning maps of this Ordinance as follows:
A. The legislative body or the Plan Commission may initiate a proposal to amend or partially
repeal the text according to the procedure of J.C. 36-7-4-602(b) and J.C. 36-7-4-607 and
according to the Commission Rules and Procedures.
B. The legislative body, Plan Commission, or at least fifty percent of the affected property
owners may initiate a petition to change the zoning maps according to the procedure of J.C.
36-7-4-602(c) and l.C. 36-7-4-608 and according to the Commission rules.
C. In its review of the text and zoning map amendments, the legislative body and the Plan
Commission shall pay reasonable regard to:
1. The most recently adopted Comprehensive Plan.
2. Current conditions and the character of structure and uses in each district.
3. The most desirable use for which the land in each district is adapted.
4. The conservation of property values throughout the jurisdiction.
5. Responsible development and growth.
1.11 ENFORCEMENT, VIOLATION, AND PENALTIES
A. It shall be the duty of the Administrator to enforce these regulations and to bring any
violations or lack of compliance to the attention of the City Attorney who may file a complaint
against the person and prosecute the alleged violation.
B. The Board of Zoning Appeals by mandatory injunction in the circuit court of the county
against the owner or possessor of the real estate, may require the removal of a structure
erected in violation of this Ordinance, or the removal of any use or condition permitted in
violation of this Ordinance.
C. A use that violates this Ordinance shall be treated as if it were a common nuisance, and the
U·\LANTZ\NAPPANEEISECT I (12-22-97) 2.
GENERAL PROVISIONS AND ENFORCEMENT SECTION I
owner or possessor of the structure, land, or premises upon which the use is maintained shall
be liable for such nuisance.
D. Any person whether owner or possessor, who shall violate, or who permits or allows a
violation, of any of the provisions of this Ordinance, or who fails to comply therewith or with
any requirements thereunder, or who shall build, reconstruct, or structurally alter any building
in violation of any detailed statement or plan submitted upon which an approval or grant is
given under this Ordinance, shall upon complaint filed in any court of the county and upon
judgment finding such violation, be fined not less than ten dollars ($10.00) and not more than
two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00), and each day that such violation or
noncompliance shall be permitted to exist, shall constitute a separate violation.
E. No Improvement Location Permit or Building Permit required under the Uniform Building
Code or this Ordinance shall be issued on any property subject to this Ordinance in violation
of the provisions of this Ordinance.
F. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Ordinance to the contrary or appearing to be to
contrary, and in addition and supplementary to other provisions of this Ordinance, if the
Board of Zoning Appeals or the City is required to utilize the services of the City Attorney or
any other attorney in investigating a possible violation of this ordinance or enforcing the
provisions of this Ordinance pursuant to Section 1.11 C, 1.11 0, or 1.11 E, or any other
Section, before any board or court (including appeals), and such investigation results in a
determination ·that a violation has occurred or if the Board of Zoning Appeals or City is
successful in its enforcement of the Ordinance by way of suit, appeal or other appropriate
proceeding, the respondent, defendant, or party investigated for a violation. shall pay the
City's reasonable attorney fees and all costs related to the investigation of the violation and/or
the enforcement of this Ordinance, unless such attorney fees or costs are specifically waived
by the Nappanee City Council.
G. As to any appeal from a decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals, costs may not be allowed
against the Board of Zoning Appeals unless it appears to the court that the Board acted with
gross negligence or in bad faith in making the decision brought up for review.
H. The Administrator, his staff, or any person or persons assisting the Administrator in the
application and enforcement of this Ordinance is hereby authorized to go onto private
property for the purpose of conducting inspections required by the Ordinance or any order
of the Plan Commission and Board of Zoning Appeals, or required to determine if this
Ordinance is being violated, or required to enforce this Ordinance. Such inspection or
inspections shall occur at reasonable times and shall be conducted in a manner not to disturb
the peace.
1.12 ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER
The Nappanee Plan Commission's appointed Zoning Administrator shall have the principal
responsibility for implementation and enforcement of this Ordinance.
U:ILANTZINAPPANEEISECT.I (12-22-97) 3.

DEFINITIONS SECTION II
2.1 GENERAL
The definitions contained in this section shall be observed and applied in the interpretation of all
sections of this Ordinance, except where the context clearly indicates otherwise. Furthermore, words
used in the present tense, singular number, and masculine gender, shall also mean the future, plural,
and feminine.
2.2 SPECIFIC
The following words and terms appearing in this Ordinance shall have the following meanings:
Abandonment
The relinquishment of property or a cessation of the use of the property for a continuous period of one
year by the owner without the intention of transfe!ring rights to the property to another owner nor of
resuming the use of the property.
Accessorv Building, Structure, or Use
A building, structure, or use which:
A. is subordinate to and serves a principal building, structure, or use in area, extent, or purpose;
and
B. contributes to the comfort, convenience, or necessity of occupants of the principal buildings,
structures, or principal uses served; and
C. does not alter or change the character of the premises; and
D. is located on the same zoning lot as the principal building, structure, or use; and
E. conforms to the setback, height, bulk, lot coverage, and other requirements of this Ordinance
unless otherwise provided for by this Ordinance; and
F. may not be constructed prior to the time of construction of the principal building or structure;
and
G. is not designed for human occupancy ;;is a dwelling or commercial use; and
H. does not generate income (with the exception of carports or garages).
Administrator
The officer appointed and/or delegated the responsibility for the administration of this Ordinance's
regulations by the Mayor and approved by the City Council.
Adult Bookstore
An establishment having at least a majority of its stock in trade or its dollar volume in trade, books,
magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video
cassettes, slides, tapes, records, or other forms of visual or audio representations which are
distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to sexual
activities or sexual anatomical areas.
4.
\\BGVALPO\SDSK\sdsk\WORDPROC\BONAR\ 1567\ZONING\Section 2.doc (1-6-00)
DEFINITIONS SECTION II
Adult Entertainment Business
An adult bookstOre, adult motion picture theater, adult cabaret, adult .live entertainment arcade, or any
other use where entertainment of a sexually explicit nature is provided, regardless of whether or not
such entertainment is ongoing or periodic.
Advisory Plan Commission
A planning commission serving a single local government jurisdiction established as defined under
the Indiana Code, 36-7-1-2 (1983) as amended. The Nappanee Plan Commission is an Advisory
Plan Commission.
Aesthetics
The pleasantness of the total environment related to the perceptual aspects of the surroundings
including their appearance to the eye and the comfort and enjoyment offered to the other senses.
Agriculture
The use of land for agricultural purposes, including farming, dairying, pasturage, apiculture,
agriculture, horticulture, floriculture, viticulture, animal and poultry husbandry, and the necessary
accessory uses for packing, treating, or storing ttie produce; provided, however, that the operation
of any accessory uses shall be secondary to that of the normal agricultural activities.
"Agriculture" shall not include feed lots, stock yards, or the commercial feeding of garbage or offal to
swine or other animals.
Airport Hazard
Any structure or object of natural growth located on or in the vicinity of a public airport or any use of
land near such airport, which obstructs the air space required for the flight of aircraft in landing or
takeoff or is otherwise hazardous to aircraft.
Aisle - See "Maneuvering Space."
Alley
A public right-of-way, other than a street, road, crosswalk, or easement, that provides secondary
access to abutting properties.
Animal Hospital/Clinic - See "Veterinary Animal Hospital/Clinic."
Animal Shelter - See "Kennel."
Annexation
The process by which a municipality may add territory to itself, as specified in Indiana Code 36-4-3-1
to 36-4-3-21, as amended.
Antenna
means any system of wires, poles, rods, reflecting discs, or similar devices used for the transmission
or reception of electromagnetic waves when such system is either external to or attached to the
exterior of a structure . .Antennas shall include devices having active elements extending in any
direction, and directional beam-type arrays having elements carried by and disposed from a generally
horizontal boom that may be mounted upon and rotated through a vertical mast or tower
interconnecting the boom and antenna support, all of which elements are deemed to be a part of the
antenna. Antennas shall include cellular on wheels (COWs) and cellular on light trucks (COL Ts)
5.
\\BGVALPO\SDSK\sdsk\WORDPROC\BONAR\ 1567\ZONING\Section 2.doc (1 ·6-00)
DEFINITIONS SECTION fl
facilities; as well as dispatch carriers for Specialized M_obile Radio (SMR) services and Enhanced
SMR (ESMR).
Antenna - Building Mounted
means any antenna, other than an antenna with its supports resting on the ground, directly attached
or affixed to a building, tank, tower, building mounted mast less than 10 feet tall and 6 inches in
diameter, or structure other than a telecommunication tower.
Antenna - Directional (also known as a panel antenna)
transmits and/or receives radio frequency signals in a directional pattern of less than 360 degrees.
Antenna - Ground Mounted
means any antenna with its base, single or multiple posts, placed directly on the ground or a mast
less than 10 feet tall and 6 inches in diameter.
Antenna - Omni-directional
transmits and/or receives radio frequency signals in a 360 degree radial pattern. For the purpose of
this Chapter, an omni-directional antenna is up to fifteen feet (15') in height and up to four inches (4")
in diameter.
Antenna - Parabolic (also known as satellite dish antenna)
means any device incorporating a reflective surface that is solid, open mesh, or bar configured that
is shallow dish, cone, horn, bowl or cornucopia shaped and is used to transmit and/or receive
electromagnetic or radio frequency communication/signals in a specific directional pattern. This
definition is meant to include, but is not limited to, what are commonly referred to as satellite earth
stations, TVROs and satellite microwave antennas.
Antenna - Portable
means any device used to transmit and/or receive electromagnetic or radio frequency
communication/signals in a specific directional pattern, located on a portable or moveable base
designed to be placed either for temporary or long-term use at a given site.
Antenna - Vertical
means a vertical type antenna without horizontal cross-Sections greater than one half inch in
diameter.
Apartment
One (1) or more rooms in an apartment building or combination apartment and commercial building,
arranged, intended, designed, or occupied on a rental basis as a dwelling unit of a single family, an
individual, or a group of individuals.
Apartment Building
A multi-family housing structure designed and constructed to accommodate three (3) or more
apartments, in contrast to a single or two-family dwellings converted for multi-family use.
·Applicant
The owner, owners, or legal representative of real estate who makes application to the Plan
Commission and/or Board of Zoning Appeals for action by said commission or board affecting the real
estate owned thereby.
Arterial Street - See Street, Arterial
6.
\\BGVALPO\SDSK\sdsk\WORDPROC\BONAR\ 1567\ZONING\Section 2.doc 11-6-00)
DEFINITIONS SECTION II
Attached Building
A building that is structurally connected to another building by a found~tion, wall, or roof line.
Carports, garages, porch awnings and the like shall be corsidered attached buildings and abide by
all regulations pertaining to primary buildings.
Auto Repair. Major
Engine rebuilding or major reconditioning of worn or damaged motor vehicles or trailers; collision
service, including body, frame, or fender straightening or repair; and overall painting of vehicles.
Auto Repair. Minor
Incidental repairs, replacement of parts, and motor service to automobiles but excluding any operation
specified under "Automobile Repair, Major."
Automobile Service Station
Any building or premises used for the dispensing, sale, or offering for sale at retail to the public,
automobile fuels stored only in underground tanks and located wholly within the lot lines; lubricating
oil or grease for the operation of automobiles; and the sale and installation of tires, batteries, other
minor accessories, and minor auto repair, but not including a bulk plan~ conducting of major auto
repairs, automobile wrecking, automobile sales, or automobile laundries; provided, however, that the
washing of individual automobiles where no chain conveyor is employed may be included.
Awning
A covering mounted over doors and/or windows, usually made of canvas or other cloth material on
an aluminum frame and extending from the building not more than eight (8) feet, attached to the
building for protection from rain or for aesthetic purposes.
Barrier Curb - See "Curo, Barrier."
Bed and Breakfast Facility
An owner occupied or owner employee occupied residence containing no·more than six (6) guest
rooms for hire, for lodging by pre-arrangement for periods not to exceed three (3) consecutive weeks
and providing for occasional meals daily (usually breakfast) and not a hotel, boarding, lodging house
or motel.
Berm
A man-made, formed, earth mound of definite height and width used for landscaping and obscuring
purposes, the intent of which is to provide a transition between uses of differing intensity.
Bicycle-Compatible Roadway
A road designed to accommodate the shared use of the roadway by bicycles and motor vehicles.
Bicycle Lane
A lane at the edge of a roadway reserved and marked for the exclusive use of bicycles.
Bicycle Path
A pathway designed to be used by bicyclists and/or pedestrians.
Billboard - See "Sign, Outdoor Advertising."
Block
Property abutting on one side of a street and lying between the two (2) nearest intersecting or
intercepting streets, intersecting railroad, intersecting waterway, or the end of a dead end street.
7.
\\BGVALPO\SDSK\sdsk\WORDPROC\BONAR\ 1567\ZONING\Section 2.doc [1-6-00)
DEFINITIONS SECTION II
Blow-Off
An outfall in a pipe through which water or sediment can be discharged from a lower sewer.
Board
The City of Nappanee Advisory Board of Zoning Appeals or any division thereof, as the case may be.
Boarding House
A building, not available to transients, in which meals are regularly provided for compensation for at
least three (3) but not more than thirty (30) persons.
Bond
Any form of security including a cash deposit, surety bond, collateral, property, or instrument of credit
in an amount and form satisfactory to the Plan Commission. All bonds shall be approved by the
Commission wherever a bond is required by these regulations.
Buffer Landscaping
Any trees, shrubs, walls, fences, berms, spece, or related landscaping features required under this
Ordinance on private lots, and privately maintained, for buffering lots from adjacent properties or
public rights-of-way for the purpose of increasing privacy· and aesthetics.
Buffervards
An area adjacent to front, side and rear property lines, measured perpendicularly from adjacent
property lines and/or rightcof-way lines, intended to provide attractive spaces to reduce the impacts
of proposed uses on adjacent property or natural features and to screen incompatible uses from each
other. Buffers also help to maintain existing trees or natural vegetation, to block or reduce noise,
glare or other emissions and to maintain privacy.
Building
A structure having a roof supported by columns or walls, for the shelter, support, or enclosure of
persons, property, or animals; and when separated by division walls from the ground up and without
openings, each portion of such building shall be deemed as a separate building.
Building Area
The horizontal area of the buildings on a lot, measured from the outside exterior walls, excluding open
areas or terraces, unenclosed porches or decks, and architectural features that project no more than
two (2) feet.
Building Code
The City ordinance establishing and controlling the standards for constructing mechanical equipment,
and all forms of permanent structures and related matters within the City. Also referred to herein as
the Nappanee Building Code.
Building, Detached
A building having no structural connection with another building.
Building Footprint
The profile of a building or structure as viewed from above the roof looking downward toward ground
level.
Building Line
The line that establishes the minimum permitted distance on a lot between the building and property
lines or right-of-way (See Figure 2.1 ).
8.
\\BGVALPO\SDSK\sdsk\WORDPROC\BONAR\1 567\ZONING\Section 2.doc !1·6-00)
DEFINITIONS SECTION II
Building. Principal
A building in which is conducted the main or principal use of the lot on which said building is situated.
Where a substantial part of an accessory building is attached to the principal building in a substantial
manner, as by· a roof, such accessory building shall be counted as a part of the·principal building.
Burn Barrel
Any container used for the outdoor incineration of waste material, yard debris, etc.
Business
The engaging in the purchase, sale, barter, or exchange of goods, wares, merchandise, or services,
or the maintenance or operation of offices, recreational, or amusement enterprises.
Business District
Refers to B-1, B-2, and PD-B Districts.
BZA
The Advisory Board of Zoning Appeals of the Ci('.£ of Nappanee, Indiana.
Campground
Any site, lot, field, or tract of land·designed with facilities for short term occupancy by recreational
vehicles and other camping equipment but not including mobile homes.
Capital Improvement Plan - See "Plan, Capital Improvement."
Capped System
A completed water supply and/or sewerage system put in place for future use (contingent upon
expansion), rather than to meet immediate development needs.
Cartway
The actual road surface area from curbline to curbline, which may include travel. lanes, parking lanes,
and deceleration and acceleration lanes. Where there are no curbs, the cartway is that portion
between the edges of the paved, or hard surface, width.
Car Wash
Any permanent structure or facility used for the principal purpose of washing, cleaning, or polishing
the exterior and/or interior of motor vehicles for a fee.
Cemetery
Includes any crematory, mausoleum, or mortuary operated in conjunction with and on the same tract
as the cemetery.
Central Seweraae System
The community sewer system including collection and treatment facilities owned and maintained by
the City of Nappanee.
Central Water System
The community water supply system including existing and new wells and/or surface water sources
and intakes, treatment facilities, and distribution lines and includes such of the above facilities
established by the developer to serve a new subdivision or commercial/industrial development.
Certificate of Occupancy
A certificate stating that the occupancy and use of a building or structure complies with the provisions
of this Ordinance and the Nappanee Building Code.
9.
\\BGVALPO\SDSK\sdsk\WORDPROC\BONAR\ 1567\ZONING\Section 2.doc (1-6-00)
DEFINITIONS SECTION II
Channel
The bed and banks of a natural stream which convey the constant or intermittent fiow of the stream.
Channelization
The straightening and deepening of channels and/or the surfacing thereof to permit water to move
rapidly and/or directly.
City
The City of Nappanee, Indiana
Clinic
An establishment in which human patients are admitted for medical or dental study or treatment and
in which the services of at least two (2) physicians or dentists are provided.
Club
A building or portion thereof or premises owned or operated by a person for a social, literacy, political,
educational or recreational purpose primarily for the exclusive use of members and their guests, but
not including any organization, group or association, the principal activity of which is to render a
service usually and ordinarily carried on as a business.
Cluster Development - See "Planned Unit Development."
Collector Street - See "Street, Collector."
Co-location - see telecommunication facility - co~ocated.
Commercial Use
means a use that involves the exchange of cash, goods or services, barter, forgiveness of
indebtedness, or any other remuneration in exchange for goods, services, lodging, meals,
entertainment in any form, or the right to occupy space over any period of time.
Commission
The City of Nappanee Advisory Plan Commission.
Common Open Space - See "Open Space, Common."
Component Home - See "Manufactured Home."
Composting
A controlled process of degrading organic material by microorganisms.
Composting Facility
Any location, structure, or facility where composting takes place.
Comprehensive Plan - See "Plan, Comprehensive."
Conceptual Plan - See "Plan, Conceptual."
Conditional Use
Special provisions or requirements applicable to specific uses in certain zoning districts. If specified
conditions are met as determined in this Ordinance or by the Zoning Administrator, no further
approval is required.
. 10.
\\BGVALPO\SDSK\sdsk\WORDPROC\BONAR\ 1567\ZONING\Section 2.doc (1-6-00)
DEFINITIONS SECTION//
Condominium
Real estate lawfully subject to l.C. 32-1-6 (1-31), (the Horizontal Property Law), by the recordation
of condominium instruments, in which undivided interests in the common areas and facilities are
vested in the condominium unit owners.
Conforming Manufactured Home
Pursuant to Public Law 312, Acts of 1981 (l.C. 36-7-4-1106), a residence constructed after January
1, 1981, that exceeds nine hundred fifty (950) square feet of occupied space and which is installed
as a penmanent dwelling unit which may be placed or constructed providing it complies with setback,
side and rear yard, parking space, and minimum square footage requirements for the district in which
it is located, and the underfloor space requirements of the Nappanee Unified Zoning and Subdivision
Control Ordinance.
Construction Plan - See "Plan, Conceptual."
Contingent Use _
A use contemplated by the Ordinance, which is likely or liable but not certain to occur, and is
compatible with the essential design of a particular district although the use is contrary to the
restrictions imposed thereon.
Convenience Store
Any commercial location, facility, or structure where gasoline and groceries (including food, drink, and
household items) are sold on the same premises.
Conventional Development
Development other than planned unit development.
Council
The Common Councii' of the City of Nappanee, Indiana.
County
Elkhart County or Kosciusko County, Indiana, as may be appropriate.
Covenants
Private and legal restrictions of various kinds on the usage of lots within a subdivision which are
proposed by the subdivider and, in the case of public health, safety and welfare, by the Commission,
that are recorded wtth the plat and deed. Covenants can also be placed on commercial and industrial
developments.
Cul-De-Sac
A short street having one (1) end open to traffic and being permanently terminated by a vehicular
turn-around.
Culvert
A structure designed.to convey a watercourse not incorporated in a closed drainage system under
a road or pedestrian walk.
Curb
A vertical or sloping edge of a roadway.
Curb, Barrier
A steep-faced curb intended to prevent encroachments.
· 11
\\BGVALPOISDSK\sdsk\WORDPROC\BONAR\ 1567\ZON\NG\Section 2.doc (1-6-00)
DEFINITIONS SECTION II
Curb. Mountable
A low curb with a flat slope designed to be crossed easily without discomfort.
Day Care Center
Any institution operated for the care of children, licensed pursuant to l.C. 12-3-2-3.1, et seq., and as
defined by Indiana Code Section 12-3-2-3.
Dedication
The setting apart of land or interests in land for use by the public by ordinance, resolution, or entry
in the official minutes as by the recording of a plat.
Density
The number of buildings, offices, or housing units on a particular area of land.
Density, High
Residential development having a density in exc.,ss of ten (10) dwelling units per gross acre. Also
refers to an R-3 zoning district.
Density, Low
Residential development having a density equal to or less than six (9) dwelling units per gross acre.
Also refers to an R-1 zoning district.
Density, Medium
Residential development having a density of seven (7) to ten (10) dwelling units per gross acre. Also
refers to an R-2 zoning district.
Design Flood - See "Regulatory Flood."
Design Review Board
A group of citizens appointed by the Mayor and approved by the City Council for the purpose of
protecting visual character and community aesthetics through the recommendation and/or
establishment of design guidelines.
Desian Standards
Standards that set forth specific improvement requirements.
Design Standards Variance - See "Variance, Design Standards/Development Regulations."
Detached Building
A building that has no structural connection with the principal building.
Detention Basin
A man-made or natural water collector facility designed to collect surface and subsurface water in
order to impede its fiow and to release the same, gradually, at a rate not greater than that prior to the
development of the property, into natural or man-made outlets.
Developer
The owner or legal representative of land proposed to be subaivided for any use or utilized for
commercial or industrial purposes. Consent for making applications for development approval shall
be required from the legal owner of the premises.
Development Plan - See "Plan, Development."
12.
\\BGVALPO\SDSK\sdsk\WORDPROC\BONAR\ 1567\ZONING\Section 2.doc 11-6-00)
DEFINITIONS SECTION II
Development Regulation
Zoning, subdivision, site plan, official map, fiood plain regulation, or other governmental regulation
of the use and development of land.
Development Regulation Standards - See "Design Standards."
Development Regulation Variance - See "Variance, Design Standards/Development Regulations."
Digital Dish System
A small dish of approximately one (1) to two (2) feet (.3-.6m) in diameter installed on or adjacent to
a building for the purpose of receiving audio/video signals.
Direct Broadcast Satellite Service
is a system in which signals are transmitted directly from a satellite to a small (not exceeding 18")
home receiving dish. DBS competes with cable television.
District
A section of the City of Nappanee for which uniform zoning regulations exist governing use, height,
area, size, intensity of use of buildings and land, and open spaces about buildings, as established by
this Ordinance.
Divided Street - See "Street, Divided."
Drainage
The removal of surface water or groundwater from land by drains, grading, or other means.
Drainage Facility
Any component of ihe drainage system.
Drainage System
The system through which water flows from the land, including all watercourses, water bodies, and
wetlands.
Drive-In
An establishment selling foods, desserts, or beverages to consumers, the establishment being
designed, intended or used for the consumption of such items on the premises outside of the building
_ in which they were prepared.
Drives Private - See "Street, Private."
Duplex
Any structure which contains only two (2) dwelling units; a two-family dwelling.
Dwelling
A building or structure or portion thereof, conforming to all requirements applicable to the residential
use districts and Nappanee Building Code, used exclusively for residential occupancy, including
single-family dwelling units, two-family dwelling units, and multi-family dwelling units, but excluding
_ hotels, boarding houses, and lodging houses.
Dwelling, Multi-Family
A residential building designed for or occupied by two (2) or more families, with the number of families
in residence not exceeding the number of dwelling units provided.
13.
l\BGVALPO\SDSK\sdsk\WORDPROC\BONAR\ 1 567\ZONING\Section 2.doc 11-6-00)
, __
DEFINITIONS SECTION II
Dwelling. Single-Family
A detached residential dwelling unit designed for and occupied by one (1) family.
Dwelling. Two-Family
A detached residential building containing two (2) dwelling units designed for occupancy by not more
than two (2) families. (See also "Duplex.")
Dwelling Unit
Any structure or portion thereof designed for or used for residential purposes as a self-sufficient or
individual unit by one (1) family or other social association of persons and having permanently
installed cooking and sanitary facilities.
Easement
A grant by a property owner to specific persons, the general public, corporations, utilities, or others,
for the purpose of providing services or access to the property.
Environmental Constraints
Features, natural resources, or land characteristics that are sensitive to improvements and may
require conservation measures or the application of creative development techniques to prevent
degradation of the environment, or may require limited development, or in certain instances may
preclude development.
Equipment building. shelter or cabinet
means a cabinet or building used to house equipment used by telecommunication providers to house
equipment at a facility.
Erosion
The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments, or the wearing away of the land surface by
water, wind, ice or gravity.
Escrow
A deed, a bond, money, or a piece of property delivered to a third person to be delivered by him to
the grantee only upon fulfillment of a condition.
Essential Services
The phrase "Essential Services" means the erection, construction, alteration or maintenance by public
utilities or municipal departments or commissions of underground, surface, or overhead electrical,
gas, steam or water transmission or distribution systems, collection, communication, supply or
disposal systems, including mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, wires, cables, fire alarm boxes,
police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants, towers, poles and other similar equipment and accessories
in connection therewith, but not including buildings reasonably necessary for the furnishing of
adequate service by such public utilities or municipal departments or commissions or including
electrical substations. No permit is required for essential services.
Expressway/Freeway
Any roadway that operates at a high service level, consists of limited access, is divided, carries
region-wide traffic and is generally classified as part of an interstate system.
Family
An individual, or two (2) or more persons related by blood, marriage, or adoption, or a group of not
more than three (3) persons, not related by blood, marriage, or adoption, living together as a single
housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit.
14.
\\BGVALPO\SDSK\sdsk\WORDPROC\BONAR\1567\ZONING\Section 2.doc (1-6-00)
~ ..
DEFINITIONS SECTION II
Farm
An area used for agricultural operations, forestry, the operating of a tree or plant nursery, or the
production of livestock and poultry.
Fence
A structure designed and constructed for enclosures and/or screening. A hedge serving the same
purposes as a fence shall be considered a fence.
Fee Schedule - See "Official Fee Schedule."
Filling Station
Any establishment supplying and selling motor fuel or oil direct to motor vehicles.
Final Approval
The official action of the Plan Commission taken on a preliminarily approved major subdivision or site
plan, after all conditions, engineering plans, and o_ther requirements have been completed or fulfilled
and the required improvements have been installed, or guarantees properly posted for their
completion, or approval conditioned upon the posting of such guarantee (generally referred to as
secondary approval).
Final Plat
The final map of all or a portion of a development which is presented for final approval (generally
refered to as secondary plat.)
Flood Control
The prevention of floods, the control, regulation, diversion or confinement of flood water or flood flow,
and the protection therefrom, according to sound and accepted engineering practice, to minimize the
extent of floods, and the death, damage, and destruction caused thereby.
Flood Plain
The relatively flat area or low land adjoining the channel of a river or stream which has been or may
be covered by flood water. The flood plain includes the channel, floodway, and floodway fringe.
Flood plain boundaries are to be determined by using the Floodway- Flood Boundary Maps of the
Federal Insurance Administration.
Flood Protection Grade
The elevation of the lowest point around the perimeter of a building at which flood waters may enter
the interior of the building.
Floodway - See "Regulatory Floodway."
Floor Area
The horizontal area of all floors of buildings or structures.
Footprint - See "Building Footprint."
Foundation
The supporting member of a wall or structure.
Freeway - See Expressway
Front Line
With respect to a building, the foundation line that is nearest the front lot line.
15.
\\BGVALPO\SDSK\sdsk\WORDPROC\BONAR\ 1567\ZONING\Section 2.doc (1-6-00)
DEFINITIONS SECTION II
Front Lot Line
A For an interior or through lot, the line marking the boundary between the lot and the abutting
street right-of-way or a lake or watercourse; and
B. For a corner lot, the line marking the boundary between the lot and the shorter of the two
abutting street right-of-way segments; except as deed restrictions may otherwise specify
(See Figure 2.1 ).
Front Yard
The horizontal space between the nearest foundation of a building to the Front Lot Line, extending
to the side lines of the lot, and measured as the shortest distance from that foundation to the Front
Lot Line. The front yard of a comer lot shall be that yard abutting the street upon which the lot has
its least frontage, except as deed restrictions may otherwise specify. (See Figure 2.1)
Frontage _
All property of a lot fronting on a street right-of-way, as measured between side lot lines.
Garage, Private
An accessory building with capacity for not more than three (3) motor vehicles per family, not more
than one (1) of which may be a commercial vehicle of not more than three (3) tons GVW. A garage
designed to house two (2) motor vehicles for each family housed in a multi-family dwelling shall be
classed as a private garage.
Garage, Public
Any building, except those defined herein as a private garage, used for the storage or care of motor
vehicles, or where such vehicles are equipped for operation, repaired, or kept for remuneration, hire
or sale.
Garage Sale - See "Sale, Garage/Yard."
General Development Plan - See" Plan, General Development."
General Industrial Use
Manufacturing, processing, heavy repairing, dismantling, or storage, in which a majority of operations
are performed within enclosed buildings.
Governing Body - See "Council."
Grade
The slope of a street, or other public way, specified in percentage(%) terms.
Greenhouse, Commercial
Any location, facility, or structu.re where plants are grown indoors for sale.
Greenhouse Residential
Any accessory use, structure, or addition to a residential property where plants are grown indoors for
hobby, personal use, or personal consumption. Also, any accessory use, structure, or addition to a
residential property being primarily constructed of glass or other translucent materials.
Ground Cover
A planting of low-growing plants or sod that in time forms a dense mat covering the area, preventing
both soil from being blown or washed away and the growth of unwanted plants.
16.
\\BGVALPO\SDSK\sdsk\WORDPROC\BONAR\ 1567\ZONING\Section 2.doc 11-6-00)
DEFINITIONS
Ground Floor Area
See Building Area
Group Home
SECTION II
A. Developmentally Disabled: A residential facility for the developmentally disabled, as defined
and regulated under l.C. 16-13-21-12.
B. Mentally Disabled: A residential facility for the mentally disabled as defined and regulated
under l.C. 16-13-21-11.5.
Gutter
A shallow channel usually set along a curb or the pavement edge of a road for purposes of catching
and carrying off runoff water. ·
Hardship
A difficulty with regard to one's ability to improve land stemming from the application of the
development standards of this Ordinance, which may or may not be subject to relief by means of
variance. In and of themselves, self-imposed situations and claims based on a perceived reduction
of or restriction on economic gain shall not be considered hardships. Self-imposed situations include:
the purchase of land with actual or constructive knowledge that, for reasons other than physical
characteristics of the property, the development standards herein will inhibit the desired improvement;
any improvement initiated in violation of the standards of this Ordinance; any result of land division
requiring variance from the development standards of this Ordinance in order to render that site
buildable.
Height of Building
The vertical distance measured from the highest ground level at the foundation to the highest point
of the roof, or any projection thereof.
High Densitv - See "Density, High."
Historic District
An area related by historical events or themes, by visual continuity or character, or by some other
special feature that helps give it a unique historical identity, which may be designated as such by
local, state, or federal government.
Historic Preservation Commission
A commission of local jurisdiction created in accordance with the provisions of l.C. 18-7-22 for the
purposes of reviewing the establishment of Historic Preservation Overlay Districts, adopting and
amending development standards for Historic Preservation Overlay Districts, and identifying local
landmarks.
Historic Preservation Overlay District
A district which may be established to promote the cultural, economic, and general welfare of the
public through the preservation and protection of structures and areas of local historical and cultural
interest.
Historic Site
A structure or place of historical significance, which may be designated as such by local, state, or
federal government.
Home Occupation
A. An occupation _carried on in a dwelling by the resideni thereof, not involving:
. 17.
\\BGVALPO\SDSK\sdsk\WOROPROC\BONAR\ 1567\ZONING\Section 2.doc (1-6-00)
DEFINITIONS
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
SECTION II
retail sales as a primary function;
the employment of any additional persons in the performance of such services
except members of the immediate family residing on the premises;
the use of any mechanical equipment, other than is usual for purely domestic or
hobby purposes; or
exterior storage of equipment or materials used in connection with the home
occupation.
the use of more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the total floor area of one-story.
the substantial alteration of the "residential" appearance of the residence. ·
the paving and/or allowing of additional parking on the front, side or rear yard of a
residential property.
substantial increases in vehicular traffic to and from the Home Occupation location.
B. Permitted home occupations shall be of a personal service nature limited to domestic crafts
and professional services.
C. Permitted uses are deemed so until the Council, Commission or BZA rule the use to be a
nuisance, or until all adjacent neighbors petition to the City that the use is a nuisance.
D. A permit must be acquired to begin the conversion of a home and the start of operations as
a Home Occupation.
E. A business telephone in itself does not define a home occupation or a permitted home
occupation.
F. A home occupatiori permit is not transferrable upon the transfer of property.
Hotel
A building in which lodging or board and lodging are provided and offered to the public for
compensation and in which ingress and egress to and from all rooms is made through an inside lobby
or office supervised by a person in charge at all hours. As such, it is open to the public.
Compensation is usually assessed on a day-to-day basis.
Hospital
An institution devoted primarily to the maintenance and operation of facilities for the diagnosis,
treatment, or care for three (3) or more non-related individuals suffering from illness, disease, injury,
deformity, or other abnormal physical conditions. The term "hospital" as used in this Ordinance does
not apply to institutions operating primarily for treatment of insane persons, drug addicts, alcoholics,
and other types of cases necessitating restraint of patients, and the term "hospital" shall not include
convalescent, nursing, shelter, or boarding homes.
Impervious Surface
A surface that has been compacted or covered with a layer of material so that it is highly resistant to
infiltration by water, such as concrete, cement, asphalt, brick, paving block, rooftops, etc.
lmpoundment
A body of water, such as a pond, confined by a dam, dike, floodgate, or other barrier.
Improvement
Any man-made, immovable item which becomes part of, is placed upon, or is affixed to, real estate;
facilities which aid in land development.
18.
\\BGVALPO\SDSK\sdsk\WORDPROC\BONAR\ 1567\ZONING\Section 2.doc (1-6-00)
DEFINITIONS SECTION II
Improvement Location Permit
A permit signed by the Zoning Administrator stating that a proposed improvement complies with the
provisions of this Ordinance and such other ordinances as may be applicable.
Incinerator
A device, structure, or facility designed to reduce waste volume by combustion, consisting of refuse
handling and storage facilities, furnaces, combustion chambers, subsidence chambers, residue
handling and removal facilities, and chimneys.
Industrial District
Refers to the 1-1 and PD-I Districts.
Industrial Park
An industrial development not less than twenty (20) acres in area developed within the I or PD-I
zoning districts, in which buildings and land may be used for research, office, experimental or testing
laboratories, light industrial, manufacturing, stora_ge and distribution facilities, and other customary
uses.
In habited Area
means any residence, any other structure regularly occupied by people, or any outdoor area used
by people on a regular basis.
Integrated Center
A building containing a number of individual, unrelated and separately operated uses which share
common site facilities and services such as driveway entrances and exits, parking areas, truck
loading, maintenance, sewer and water utilities, or similar common facilities and services; or one or
more buildings containing individual, unrelated and separately operated uses, occupying a site under
one ownership of management for leave, and utilizing one or a combination of the aforementioned
common services.
Interior Lot - See "Lot, Interior."
Interstate - See "Expressway."
Island
With respect to street design, a raised area, usually curbed, placed to. guide traffic and separate
lanes, or uses for landscaping, signing, or lighting.
Junk
An automobile, truck, other motor vehicle, large appliances, furniture or like material which has been
damaged to such an extent that it cannot be operated under its own power or used and/or will require
major repairs before being made usable. This could include such a vehicle which does not comply
witti State or City vehicle laws or ordinances.
Junk Yard
A place, usually outdoors, where waste or discarded used property other than organic matter,
including but not limited to, automobiles, farm implements and trucks, is accumulated and may be
salvaged for reuse or resale; this shall not include any industrial scrap metal yard.
Jurisdiction
The territory under the regulatory control of the Nappanee Plan Commission, including all lands inside
the corporate limits of the City of Nappanee.
19.
\\BGVALPO\SOSK\sdsk\WORDPROC\BONAR\ 1567\ZONING\Section 2.doc.11-6-00)
DEFINITIONS SECTION II
Kennel
Any lot on which four (4) or more dogs, or small animals at least four (4) months of age, are kept.
Landscaping
The improvement of a lot with grass, shrubs, trees, and other vegetation and/or ornamental objects.
Landscaping may include pedestrian walks, flowerbeds, berms, fountains and other similar natural
and manmade objects designed and arranged to produce an aesthetically pleasing effect.
Lattice Tower
means a self supporting support structure, erected on the ground, which consists of metal crossed
strips or bars to support antennas and related equipment.
Limited Access Highway
A highway to which abutting properties are denied access or where access is limited to certain
locations.
Loading and Unloading Berths
"the off-street area required for the receipt or distribution by vehicles of material or merchandise,
which in this Ordinance is held to be, at minimum, a twelve (12) foot by thirty (30) foot loading space
with a fourteen (14) foot height clearance, paved with a hard surface.
Local Street - See "Street, Local."
Lodging House
A building, not available to transients, in which lodgings are regularly provided for compensation for
at least three (3) but not more than thirty (30) persons.
Lot
A parcel of land occupied or to be occupied by one (1) or more buildings and uses including the open
spaces required under this Ordinance. A lot may be land so recorded on.official records or it may
include parts or a combination of such lots when adjacent to one another, provided such ground is
used for only one (1) principle use, or may be a parcel of land described by metes and bounds.
Lot, Corner
A lot situated at the intersection of two (2) streets or which fronts a street on two (2) or more sides.
(See Figure 2.1)
Lot Coverage
The area of a lot occupied by the principal building and any accessory buildings.
Lot Depth
The horizontal distance between the front and rear Jot lines.
Lot, Interior
A lot other than a corner lot or through lot. (See Figure 2.1)
Lot Line, Front
In the case of an interior lot, a line separating the Jot from the street or place; and in the case of a
corner lot, a line separating the lot from each street or place. (See Figure 2.1)
Lot Line, Rear
A Jot line which is opposite and most distant from the front Jot line, and in case of an irregular or
triangular-shaped lot, a line ten (1 O) feet in length within the lot, parallel to and at a maximum distance
from the front lot line. (See Figure 2.1)
20.
\\BGVALPO\SOSK\sdsk\WOROPROC\BONAR\ 1567\ZONING\Section 2.doc (1-6-00)
DEFINITIONS SECTION II
Lot Line, Side
Any lot boundary line not a front lot line or a rear lot line. (See Figure 2.1)
Lot. Through
A lot fronting on two (2) parallel or approximately parallel streets and includes lots fronting on both
a street and a watercourse or lake.
Lot Width
The distance between the side lot lines as measured on the building line.
Low Density - See "Density, Low."
Main
In any system of continuous piping, the principal artery of the system to which branches may be
connected.
Maintenance Guarantee
Any security which may be required and accepted by a governmental agency to ensure that
necessary improvements will function as required for a specific period of time.
Maneuvering Space
An open space in a parking area which:
A. is immediately adjacent to· a parking space;
B. is used for and/or is necessary for turning, backing or driving forward a motor vehicle into
such parking space, but
C. is not used for the parking of storage on motor vehicles.
Manufactured Home
A single-family dwelling unit designed and built in a factory, installed as a permanent residence, which
bears a seal certifying that it was built in compliance with the Federal Manufactured Housing
Construction and Safety Standards Law (1974 U.S.C. 5401 et seq.), and which also complies with
the following specifications:
A. shall have been constructed after January 1, 1981, and must exceed nine hundred fifty (950)
square feet of occupied space per l.C. 36-7-4(d);
B. is attached to a permanent foundation of masonry construction and has a permanent
perimeter enclosure constructed in accordance with the One and Two-Family Dwelling Code;
C. has wheels, axles, and towing chassis removed;
D. has a pitched roof with a minimum rise of 2112; and
E. consists of two (2) or more sections which, when joined, have a minimum dimension of twenty
(20) feet in both length and width.
Marker (Survey)
A stake, pipe, rode, nail, or any other object which is not intended to be a permanent point for record
purposes.
. 21
l\BGVALPO\SDSK\sdsk\WORDPROC\BONARI 1567\ZONING\Seciion 2.doc {1-6-001
DEFINITIONS SECTION II
Master Plan - See "Plan, Comprehensive."
Maximum Credible Earthquake
means the maximum earthquake predicted to affect a given location based on the known lengths of
the active faults in the vicinity.
Median
That portion of a divided highway separating lanes of traffic proceeding in opposite directions.
Medium Density - See "Density, Medium."
Mobile Home
Any housing unit defined or titled by the State of Indiana as a "Mobile Home" and/or any portable
structure eight (8) feet or more wide, thirty (30) feet or more long, designed primarily for year-round
residency, was originally designed and transported with its own running gear, and by the nature of
its design does not require a permanent foundation.
Mobile Home Parks
Any site, lot, field, or tract of land under single ownership, or ownership of two or more persons upon
which two or more mobile homes to be used for human habitation are parked, either free of charge
or for revenue purposes, and shall include any street used or intended for use as part of the facilities
of such mobile home park. A mobile home park does not include a mobile home sales area on which
unoccupied mobile homes are parked for inspection or sale.
Mobile Home Park Street
A public or private way other than an alley which affords a primary means of access to abutting
property within a mobile home park.
Mobile Home Subdivision
Any site, lot, field, or tract of land under single ownership, or ownership of two or more persons, which
is to be divided into smaller sites, lots, fields, or tracts of land, which smaller sites, lots, fields, or tracts
of land are to be sold for use by the purchaser to park such purchaser's mobile homes.
Modular Home
A residence built pursuant to regulations promulgated by the Fire Prevention and Building Safety
Commission or its successor for industrialized building systems pursuant to l.C. 22-13-4-2 as
amended from time to time and which is permanently placed upon a foundation.
Monopole
is a wireless communication facility which consists of a monopolar structure, erected on the ground
to support wireless communication antennas and connecting appurtenances.
Monument (Survey)
A permanent physical structure which marks the location of a corner or other survey point.
Motel
An establishment consisting of a group of attached or detached living or sleeping accommodations
with bathroom and closet space, located on a single zoning lot, and designed for use by transient
automobile tourists. A motel furnishes customary hotel services such as maid service and laundering
of linen, telephone, secretarial, or desk service, and the use and upkeep of furniture.
Motor Vehicle
Any passenger vehicle, truck, tractor, tractor-trailer, truck-trailer, trailer, or semi-trailer propelled or
drawn by mechanical power.
. 22.
\\BGVALPO\SDSK\sdsk\WORDPROC\BONAR\1567\ZONING\Section 2.doc (1·6-00)
· ..
DEFINITIONS SECTION II
Mountable Curb - See "Curb, Mountable."
Moving Lane
Any traffic lane where traffic movement is the primary if not sole function.
Mulch
A layer of wood chips, dry leaves, straw, hay, plastic, or other materials placed on the surface of the
soil around plants to retain moisture, prevent weeds from growing, hold the soil in place, aid in plant
growth, or improve the general aesthetic quality.
NIER
means non-ionizing electromagnetic radiation (Le., electromagnetic radiation primarily in the visible,
infrared, and radio frequency portions of the electromagnetic spectrum).
Non-Conforming Building
A building, structure, or portion thereof, which was_ designed, erected, or structurally altered such that
it does not conform to the regulations of the district in which it is located.
Non-Conforming Use
A use which does not conform with the use regulations of the district in which it is located.
Nuisance
The use of land or behavior that brings harm or substantial annoyance to adjacent property owners
or the public in general.
Nursing Home - See "Rest Home."
Official Fee Schedule
Schedule of fees established by City Council and maintained in the Clerk-Treasurer's office which
specifies all current penmit fees, rates, etc.
Off-Site
Located outside the lot lines of the lot in question but within the property (of which the lot is a part) that
is the subject of a development application, or in a contiguous. portion of a street or right-of-way.
Off-Site Improvements
Any premises not located within the area of the property to be subdivided, whether or not in the same
ownership of the applicant for subdivision approval, upon which is located improvements required by
or related to the property to be subdivided.
Off-Street Parking Space - See "Parking Space, Off-Street."
·Off-Tract
Not located on the property that is the subject of a development application nor on a contiguous
portion of a street or right-of-way.
On-Site
Located on the lot in question.
On-Street Parking Space - See "Parking Space, On-Street."
On-Tract
Located on the property that is the subject of a development application or on a contiguous portion
of a street right-of-way.
23.
\\BGVALPO\SDSK\sdsk\WORDPROC\BONAR\ 1567\ZONING\Section 2.doc (1-6-001
- \
DEFINITIONS SECTION II
Open Space
An area of land not covered by buildings, parking structures, or accessory uses except for
recreational structures. Open space may include nature areas; streams and flood plains; meadows
or open fields containing baseball, football, and soccer fields; golf courses, swimming pools, bicycle
paths, etc. Open Space does not include street rights-of-way, platted lot area, private yard, patio
areas, or land scheduled for future development.
Open Space, Common
Land within or related to a development, not individually owned or dedicated for public use, which is
designed and intended for the common use or enjoyment of the residents of the development. It may
include complementary structures and improvements.
Open Space, District
Refers to an "O" District.
Open Space, Public
An open space area conveyed or otherwise dedicated to a municipality, municipal agency, board of
education, state or county agency, or other public body for recreational or conservational uses.
Outdoor Advertising - See "Sign, Outdoor Advertising."
Outdoor Cafe
Any portion of food establishment or eating or drinking place located on a public sidewalk or public
open space that provides waiter or waitress service and is unenclosed.
Outdoor Sales - See "Sales ... "
Outdoor Storage - See "Storage, Outdoor."
Owner
Any person, group of persons, finm or firms, corporation or corporations, or any other legal entity
having legal title to or sufficient proprietary interest in the land sought to be subdivided under these
regulations, or their legal representative.
Parcel
A piece of land having a legal description formally set forth in a conveyance together with a
description of its location, shape, and size, in order to make possible its easy identification.
Parking, Off-Street
A parking space provided in a parking lot, parking structure, or private driveway.
Parking, On-Street
A parking space that is located on a dedicated street right-of-way.
Parking Area, Public
An open area, other than a street or alley, designed for use or used for the temporary parking of more
than four motor vehicles when available for public use, whether free or for compensation or as an
accommodation for clients or customers, and paved with a hard surface.
Parking Lane
A lane generally located on the sides of streets, designed to provide on-street parking for vehicular
traffic.
24.
\\BGVALPO\SOSK\sdsk\WORDPROC\BDNAR\ 1567\ZONING\Section 2.doc 11-6-00)
DEFINITIONS SECTION II
Parking Space, Automobile
Space within a public or private parking area for the storage of one (1) passenger automobile or
commercial vehicle under a one and one-half (1 %) ton 'capacity.
Pavement - An asphalt, concrete, cement, brick, or clay surface.
Performance Bond
An amount of money or other negotiable security paid by the subdivider or his surety to the City which
guarantees that the subdivider will perform all actions required by the City regarding an approved plat,
and provides that if the subdivider defaults and fails to comply with the provisions of an approved plat,
the subdivider or his surety will pay damages up to the limit of the bond, or the surety will itself
complete the requirements of the approved plat.
Permanent Foundation
A structural system for transposing loads from a structure to the earth at a depth below the
established frost line without exceeding the safe qearing capacity of the supporting soil.
Permanent Perimeter Enclosure
A permanent perimeter structural system completely enclosing the space between the floor joists of
the home and the ground, except for the necessary openings, constructed in accordance with the
Nappanee Building Code.
Person
A corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization, unit of government, or any other group that
acts as a unit, as well as a natural person.
Pervious Surface
A surface that permits full or partial absorption of stormwater, such as grass and other vegetation,
soil, water bodies, gravel, approved open-center paving block, etc. Decks made of wood and other
materials shall be considered pervious if not built over an impervious slab or foundation and if slats
are spaced a minimum of 1/8-inch apart.
Plan
In reference to documentation, The Comprehensive Plan of Nappanee, Indiana, and any other
supporting or accompanying ordinances, plans, resolutions, rules, or regulations and including their
provisions, except where the context clearly indicates otherwise.
Plan, Capital Improvement
A proposed schedule of future projects listed in order of construction priority together with cost
estimates and the anticipated means of financing each project Major projects requiring the
expenditure of public funds, over and above the annual local government's operating expenses, for
the purchase, construction, or replacement of the capital improvements for the community are
included.
Plan Commission
The Advisory Plan Commission of the City of Nappanee.
Plan, Comprehensive
A long-range plan intended to guide the growth and development of the community; inclusive
physical, social, and economic analysis, recommendations, proposals, plans, and policies in written
or graphic forms for the development of the jurisdiction and adopted by the Commission pursuant to
the LC. 36-7-4-500 series and including any part and/or policies separately adopted and any
amendment to such plan or parts thereof.
25.
\\BGVALPO\SDSK\sdsk\WORDPROC\BONAR\ 1567\ZONING\Section 2.doc (1-6-001
DEFINITIONS SECTION II
Plan, Conceptual
A preliminary presentation and attendant documentation of a proposed subdivision or site plat
showing the specific location and design of improvements to be installed for the subdivision or site
in accordance with the requirements of this Plan as a condition of the approval of the plat.
Plan, Construction - See "Plan, Conceptual."
Plan, Development
A drawing, including a legal or site description of the real estate involved, which shows the location
and size of all existing and proposed easements; widths and lengths of all entrances and exits to and
from said real estate; location of all adjacent or adjoining streets; all of which presents a unified and
organized arrangement of buildings and service facilities and other improvements such as planting
areas, which shall have a functional relationship to the real estate comprising the planned
development and to the uses of properties immediately adjacent to the proposed development.
Plan, General Development _
A plan outlining general, rather than detailed, development intentions. It describes the basic
parameters of a major development proposal, rather than giving full engineering details. As such, it
allows general intentions to be proposed and discussed without the extensive costs involved in
submitting a detailed proposal.
Plan, Thoroughfare - See "Thoroughfare Plan".
Planned Unit Development (PUD) (also planned development)
A large-scale unified development meeting the requirements for zoning approval under the provisions
of Section 6 of this Ordinance.
Generally, a planned unit development consists of a parcel or parcels of land to be developed as a
single entity which does not correspond in size of lots, bulk or type of buildings, density, lot coverage,
and required open space to the regulations established in any district spedfied in this Ordinance.
This may result in more attractive and affordable development than conventional developments would
allow. Clustered housing (dwellings built in innovative lot arrangements around common open space)
and zero lot line housing (dwellings built immediately adjacent to lot lines) are possible as part of
planned developments. A planned unit development requires approval through a zoning map
amendment and development plan approval process as specified in Section 6 herein.
Plat
A map or chart that shows a division of land and is intended to be filed for record.
Plat, Primary
The primary plat, pursuant to l.C. 36-7-4-700 series, is the plat and plans upon which the approval
of a proposed subdivision are based. The primary plat and plans shall be subject to public notice and
public hearing according to law and according to Plan Commission rules. (Under former State
statutes, the primary plat was referred to as a "preliminary" plat.)
Plat. Secondary
The secondary plat, pursuant to l.C. 36-7-4-700 series, is the final plat document in recordable fomn.
A secondary plat shall substantially conform with the preceding primary plat, or section thereof. The
secondary plat and plans are not subject to public notices and public hearings. Secondary plat
approval is an administrative function to be carried out in the manner prescribed by the written rules
of the Advisory Plan Commission rules, either in public meeting or by Zoning Administrator. (Under
former state statutes, the secondary plat was referred to as the "final" plat.)
26.
\\BGVALPO\SDSK\sdsk\WORDPROC\BONAR\ 1567\ZONING\Section 2.doc (1·6-001
DEFINITIONS SECTION II
Porch
A roofed-over structure projecting out from the wall or walls of a main structure and commonly open
to the weather in part
Practical Difficultv
A difficulty with regard to one's ability to improve land stemming from regulations of this Ordinance.
A practical difficulty is not a "hardship", rather it is a situation where the owner could comply with the
regulations within this Ordinance, but would like a variance from the Development Standards to
improve his site in a practical manner. For instance, a person may request a variance from a side
yard setback due to a large tree which is blocking the only location that would meet the Development
Standards for a new garage location.
Prefabricated Home
Either a "Mobile Home", "Manufactured Home'', or "Modular Home" as defined herein.
Primarv Plat - See "Plat, Primary."
Principal Building/Structure
The building or structure in which the principal use of the lot or premises is located or conducted, with
respect to residential uses, the principal building or structure shall be the main dwelling.
Principal Use
The main use of land ·or buildings as distinguished from an accessory use. A principal use may be
either a permitted use or a special exception.
Private School
Private preprimary, primary, grade, high or preparatory school or academy.
Private Street - See "Street, Private."
Professional Office
An office used by members of a recognized profession such as architects, artists, dentists, engineers,
lawyers, musicians, physicians, surgeons or pharmacists, and realtors or insurance agents and
brokers.
Public Improvements
Any storm drainage facility, street, highway, parkway, sidewalk, pedestrian-way, tree, lawn, off-street
parking area, lot improvement, utility, or other facility for which the local government may ultimately
assume the responsibility for maintenance and operation, or which may affect an improvement for
which local government responsibility is established.
Public Open Space - See "Open Space, Public."
Public Parking Area - See "Parking Area, Public."
Public/Private Parking Area
A group of parking spaces in an open area not including any part of a street or alley, designed or used
for temporary parking of motor vehicles.
Public service use or facilitv
means a use operated or used by a public body or public utility in connection with any of the following
·services: water, waste water management, public education, parks and recreation, fire and police
protection, solid waste management, transportation or utilities.
27.
\\BGVALPO\SDSK\sdsk\WORDPROC\BONAR\ 1567\ZONING\Section 2.doc 11-6-00)
DEFINITIONS SECTION II
Public Street - See "Street, Public."
Public Structure - See "Structure, Public."
Public Utility
Any person, firm, or corporation duly authorized to furnish under public regulation to the public,
electricity, gas, steam, telephone, fiber optics, transportation, water, or sewerage systems.
Public way
means and includes all public streets and utility easements, now and hereafter owned by the City, but
only to the extent of the City's right, title, interest or authority to grant a license to occupy and use
such streets and easements for telecommunications facilities.
PUD - See "Planned Unit Development."
Quasi-Public Use
means a use serving the public at large, and operated by a private entity under a franchise or other
similar governmental authorization, designed to promote the interests of the general public or
operated by a recognized civic organization for the benefit of the general public.
Readily Visible
means an object that stands out as a prominent feature of the landscape when viewed with the naked
eye.
Rear Lot Line - See "Lot Line, Rear."
Rear Yard - See "Yard, Rear."
Recreational Vehicle
A portable vehicular structure not built to the Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety
Standards Code, designed for travel, recreation, camping or vacation purposes, whether having its
own motor power or mounted onto or drawn by another vehicle.
Recreational Vehicle Park
Any site, lot, field, or tract of land under single ownership, or ownership of two or more people,
designed with facilities for short-term occupancy by recreational vehicles only.
Recycling
A resource recovery method involving the collection and processing of a waste product for use as raw
material in the manufacture of new products.
Recycling Center
Any penmanent structure or facility where recyclable materials are stored or processed.
Recycling Drop-Off
Any structure, facility, or location, either temporary or permanent, where recyclable materials from
more than one household are left for transport to a recycling center.
Recycling, Mobile Unit
Any vehicle, wagon, cart, trailer, or moveable bin used for the collection and/or temporary storage of
recyclable materials.
28.
\\BGVALPO\SDSK\sdsk\WORDPROC\BONAR\ 1567\ZONING\Section 2.doc (1-6-00)
DEFINITIONS SECTION II
Registered Land Surveyor
A land surveyor properly licensed and registered or through reciprocity permitted to practice in the
State of Indiana.
Registered Professional Engineer
An engineer properly licensed and registered or through reciprocity permitted to practice in the State
of Indiana.
Regulatory Flood
A fiood having a peak discharge which can be equaled or exceeded on the average of once in a one
hundred (100) year period, as calculated by a method and procedure which is acceptable to and
approved by the Indiana Natural Resources Commission; this ftood is equivalent to a fiood having a
probability of occurrence of one percent (1 %) in any given year.
Regulatory Flood Profile
A longitudinal profile along the thread of a stream showing the maximum water surface elevation
attained by the regulatory fiood.
Regulatory Floodway
The channel of a river or stream and those portions of the fiood plains adjoining the channel which
are reasonably required to efficiently carry and discharge peak ftow of the regulatory fiood of any river
or stream and, is that area covered by floodwaters in significant downstream motion or covered by
significant volumes of stored water during the occurrence of the regulatory fiood.
Related equipment
means all equipment· ancillary to the transmission and reception of voice and data via radio
frequencies. Such equipment may include, but is not limited to, cable, conduit and connectors.
Residential District
Refers to an R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, or PD-R District.
Rest Home/Nursing Home
A private home for the care of the aged or infirm, or any other person in need of nursing care and
which does not contain equipment for surgical care or for treatment of disease or injury, and is not
primarily designed for mental patients, drug addicts, or alcoholics.
Resubdivision
A change in a recorded subdivision plat if such change affects any street layout or area reserved
thereon for public use or any lot line; or if it affects any map or plan legally recorded prior to the
adoption of any re.gulations controlling subdivisions.
Retaining Wall
A structure erected between lands of different elevation to protect structures and/or to prevent the
washing down or erosion of earth from the upper slope level.
Retention Basin
A pond, pool, or basin used for the permanent storage of water runoff. By definition, a retention pond
has standing water at all times.
_Right-of-Way
A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by transportation facilities, public utilities, or other
special public uses. Rights-of-way intended for any use involving maintenance by a public agency
shall be dedicated to the public use by the maker of the plat on which such right-of-way is established.
29.
\\BGVALPO\SDSK\sdsk\WORDPROC\BONAR\ 1567\ZONING\Section 2.doc (1-6-00)
DEFINITIONS SECTION II
Sale, Garage/Yard
A sale of household goods, furniture, equipment, utensils, appliances, tools, personal clothing or
effects, novelty items, glassware, farm products, or similar personal property, including, but not limited
to any sale commonly termed "PORCH SALE," "YARD SALE," "LAWN SALE," GROUP FAMILY
SALE," "RUMMAGE SALE," "WHITE ELEPHANT SALE," "FLEA MARKET SALE," or "ATTIC SALE."
Sale, Roadside
Sale of goods by one or more vendor over the age of eighteen (18), having transported such goods
or services by car, truck, bicycle, trailer, or cart to a temporary roadside location (additional conditions
specified in Section 4.5 of the Nappanee Unified Zoning and Subdivision Control Ordinance).
Sale, Sidewalk
Sale of goods or services by one or more vendor on a sidewalk or public open space immediately
outside of the commercial establishment in which such goods or services are typically sold (additional
conditions specified in Section 4.5 of the Nappanee Unified Zoning and Subdivision Control
Ordinance).
Sanitary Landfill
A site on which solid wastes are disposed of in a manner protective to the environment, such that
wastes are spread in thin layers, compacted to the smallest practical volume, and covered with soil
at the end of each work day.
Satellite Dish
An apparatus capable of receiving audio/visual broadcasts from a transmitter relay located in
planetary orbit, generally four (4) to eight (8) feet (1.2 to 2.4 m) in diameter.
Satellite Earth Station
means a telecommunication facility consisting of more than a single satellite dish smaller than 10 feet
in diameter that transmits to and/or receives signals from an orbiting satellite.
School
A public or private institution which offers instruction in any of the branches of learning and study
comparable to that taught in the public schools under the Indiana School Laws, including prekindergarten,
kindergarten, elementary school, and junior and senior high schools, but excluding
trade, business, or commercial schools.
Scrap Metal Yard
A general industrial use established independent or ancillary to and connected with another general
industrial use, which is concerned exclusively in new and salvaged metal pipes, wire, beams, angles,
rods, machinery, parts, fittings, clippings, and all other metal items of every type, and which acquires
such items incidental to its connection with the other general industrial use or by purchase,
consignment or bailment which stores, grades, processes, melts, cuts, dismantles, compresses,
cleans, or in any way prepares said items for reuse by the connected other general industrial use or
for sale and shipment and use in other industries -or businesses including open hearth, electric
furnaces and foundry operations; such an establishment shall not include junk yards, dumps, or
automobile graveyards.
The storage, dealing in or the permitting of the accumulation of significant quantities of combustible,
organic or nonmetal scrap materials such as wood, paper, rags, garbage, bones and shattered glass
on the premises of such an establishment will disqualify it from being classified as a scrap metal yard,
and the same will be classified as a junk yard.
30.
\\BGVALPO\SDSK\sdsk\WORDPROC\BONAR\ 1567\ZONING\Section 2.doc 11-6-00)
DEFINITIONS SECTION II
Seasonal Business
A temporary business operating at a non-permanent location for certain months of the year or during
special events.
Secondary Plat - See "Plat, Secondary."
Service Station - See "Automobile Service Station."
Setback
The minimum horizontal distance between the building line and a lot line or right-of-way. (See Figure
2.1)
Shared Housing
Any dwelling unit which the owner allows to be occupied by unrelated persons living as a single
housekeeping unit, provided that the number of occupants does not exceed twice the number of
bedrooms, and that the total number of occupants J:loes not exceed four (4) regardless of the number
of bedrooms.
Shoulder
The graded or paved part of the right-of-way that lies between the edge of the main pavement
(cartway) and the curb or ditch.
Side Lot Line
A lot boundary line other than a front or rear lot line. (See Figure 2.1)
Sidewalk
That portion of the road right-of-way outside the roadway, which is improved for the use of pedestrian
traffic.
Side Yard
The horizontal space between the nearest foundation of a building to the side lot line and that side
lot line, unoccupied other than by architectural appurtenances projecting not more than twenty-four
(24) inches into that space; steps or terraces not higher than the level of the first floor of the building;
and open lattice-enclosed fire escapes, fireproof outside stairways and balconies projecting not over
twenty-four (24) inches into that space. (See Figure 2.1)
Sight Triangle
A triangular-shaped portion of land established at street intersections in which nothing is erected,
placed, planted, or allowed to grow in such a manner as to limit or obstruct the sight distance of
motorists entering or leaving the intersection. ·
Sign
A name, identification, description, display, or illustration which is affixed to, painted, or represented
directly or indirectly upon a building, structure, or piece of land," and which directs attention to an
object, product, place, activity, person, institution, organization, or business.
Sign, Outdoor Advertising
A sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service, or entertainment conducted, sold,
or offered elsewhere than upon the premises where such sign is located or to which it is affixed. Also
called billboard or off-premises sign. ·
. 31.
\\BGVALPO\SDSK\sdsk\WORDPROC\BONAR\ 1567\ZONING\Section 2.doc (1-6-00)
DEFINITIONS SECTION II
Sign, Temporary
An on-premise advertising device not fixed to a permanent foundation, for the purpose of conveying
information, knowledge, or ideas to the public about a subject related to the activities on the premises
upon which it is located.
Silhouette
means a representation of the outline of the towers and antenna associated with a telecommunication
facility, as seen from an elevation perspective.
Special Exception
The authorization of a use that is designated as such by this ordinance as being permitted in the
district concerned if it meets special conditions, and upon application, is specifically authorized by the
Plan Commission per Section 11.3 of this Ordinance.
Storage, Outdoor
The outdoor accumulation of goods, junk, vehicles. equipment, products, or materials for permanent
or temporary holding.
Story
That portion of a building included between the surface of any fioor and the surface of the fioor next
above it, or if there be no fioor above it, then the space between the fioor and the ceiling next above
it. Any portion of a story exceeding fourteen (14) feet in height shall be considered as an additional
story for each fourteen (14) feet or fraction thereof.
Street
Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct, drive, or other roadway.
Street, Arterial
A street designed for high volume traffic.
Street, Collector
A street designed to facilitate the collection of traffic from local streets and to provide circulation within
neighborhood areas and convenient ways to reach arterial streets.
Street. Divided
A street having an island or other barrier separating moving lanes.
Street Furniture
Man-made, above-ground items that are generally found in street rights-of-way, including benches,
kiosks, plants, canopies, waste receptacles, shelters, and phone booths.
Street Hardware
The mechanical and utility systems within a street right-of-way, such as hydrants, manhole covers,
traffic lights and signs, utility poles and lines, and parking meters.
Street, Local
A street designed primarily to provide access to abutting properties and discourage through traffic.
Street, Private
Vehicular streets and driveways, paved or unpaved, which are wholly within private property except
where they intersect with other streets within public rights-of-way and are maintained by the owner(s).
32.
\\BGVALPO\SDSK\sdsk\WOROPRDC\BONAR\ 1567\ZONING\Section 2.doc 11-6-00)
DEFINITIONS SECTION II
Street, Public
All property dedicated or intended for public highway, freeway, or roadway purpose or subject to
public easements therefor.
Strip Development
Uncoordinated and often unsightly development that generally occurs along main highways and
thoroughfares leading into and out of a community. Strip development often includes fast food
restaurants, filling stations, used car lots, and shopping centers.
Structure
Any building or thing, constructed or erected, which requires location on the ground or attachment to
something having a location on the ground.
Structural Alterations
Any change in the supporting members of a building or structure such as bearing walls, partitions,
columns, beams or girders, or any substantial cbange in the footprint or increasing size of living
space.
Structure Ridgeline
means the line along the top of a roof or top of a structure, if it has no roof.
Subdivision
The division of a parent tract or other piece of land into at least two (2) smaller lots or the combination
of two or smaller lots into one lot so that either now or in the future the subdivider can do any of the
following with one or more of the subdivided lots:
A transfer ownership
B. construct buildings
C. create new building sites for leasehold.
The actual location, shape and size of a parent tract to be divided is determined by the official record
of the last transfer of its ownership transacted before the Nappanee Unified Zoning and Subdivision
Control Ordinance enacted or by its last conditional transfer of ownership by recorded contract
transacted before the Nappanee Unified Zoning and Subdivision Control Ordinance was enacted.
The following kinds of divisions are not subdivisions and are exempt from the rules of the Nappanee
Unified Zoning and Subdivision Control Ordinance:
A. A division of land into two (2) or more tracts, all of which are at least ten (10) acres in size;
B. A division of land for the transfer of a tract or tracts to correct errors in an existing legal
description •. provided that no additional principal use building sites are created by the division;
C. A division of land for federal, state or local government to acquire street right-of-way; and
D. A division of land for the transfer of a tract or tracts between adjo.ining lots provided that no
additional principal use building sites are created by the division. The lots so created
hereunder shall have only one principal use building site each.
E. Property legally divided prior to adoption of this Ordinance.
Survey Marker - See "Marker."
33.
\\BGVALPO\SDSK\sdsk\WORDPROCIBONAR\ 1567\ZONING\Section 2.doc 11-6-00)
DEFINITIONS SECTION I/
Survey Monument - See "Monument."
Swimming Pool
A self-contained body of water at least eighteen (18) inches deep and eight (8) feet in diameter or
width and used for recreational purposes. It may be above or below ground level, and shall be
considered an accessory structure and use.
Tattoo Parlor
A place of business where tattooing is performed, also including the instruction, schooling, or
education of tattooing. Tattooing means the placement in human tissue of any indelible design, letter,
scroll, figure or symbol or other mark placed with the aid of needles or other instruments: or any
design, letter, scroll, figure or symbol done by scarring upon or under the skin.
Telecommunication Facility
means a facility that transmits and/or receives electromagnetic signals. It includes antennas,
microwave dishes, horns, and other types of eguipment for the transmission or receipt of such
signals, telecommunication towers or similar structures supporting said equipment, equipment
buildings, parking area, and other accessory development.
Telecommunications Facility - Exempt
include, but are not limited to, the following unless located within a recognized Historic District:
A. A single ground or building mounted receive-only radio or television antenna including any
mast, for the sole use of the tenant occupying a residential parcel on which the radio or
television antenna is located; with an antenna height not exceeding twenty-five feet (25');
B. A ground-or building mounted citizens band radio antenna including any mast, if the height
(post and antenna) does not exceed thirty-five feet (35');
C. A ground, building, or tower mounted antenna operated by a federally licensed amateurradio
operator as part of the Amateur Radio Service, if the height (post and antenna) does not
exceed thirty-five feet (35').
D. A ground or building mounted received only radio or television satellite dish antenna, which
does not exceed thirty-six inches (36") in diameter, for the sole use of the resident occupying
a residential parcel on which the satellite dish is located; provided the height of said dish does
not exceed the height of the ridgeline of the primary structure on said parcel.
E. All citizens band radio antenna or antenna operated by a federally licensed amateur radio
operator as part of the Amateur Radio Service which existed at the time of the adoption of
this Ordinance.
F. Mobile services providing public information coverage of news events of a temporary nature.
G. Hand held devices such as cell phones, business-band mobile radios, walkie-talkies, cordless
telephones, garage door openers and similar devices as determined by the Zoning
Administrator.
H. City government owned and operated receive and/or transmit telemetry station antennas for
supervisory control and data acquisition (SCADA) systems for water, flood alert, traffic control
devices and signals, storm water, pump stations and/or irrigation systems, with heights not
exceeding thirty-five feet (35').
34.
\\BGVALPO\SDSK\sdsk\WORDPROC\BONAR\ 1567\ZONING\Section 2.doc 11-6-00)
DEFINITIONS SECTION II
Telecommunications Facility - Major
are all telecommunication facilities not clearty set forth and included in the definition of exempt, minor
or mini facilities.
Telecommunication Facility - Mini
is an attached wireless communication facility consisting, but not limited to, the following unless
located on a structure recognized as a Historic landmark:
A. A single ground or building mounted receive-only radio or television antenna including any
mast, for the sole use of the tenant occupying the parcel on which the radio or television
antenna is located; with an antenna height not exceeding fifty feet (50');
B. A ground or building mounted citizens band radio antenna including any mast, if the height
(tower, support structure, post and antenna) does not exceed seventy feet (70');
-
C. A ground, building, or tower mounted antenna operated by a federally licensed amateur radio
operator as part of the Amateur Radio Service, if the height (post and antenna) does not
exceed seventy feet (70').
D. A ground or building mounted received only radio or television satellite dish antenna, with
diameter exceeding thirty-six inches (36") but less than 8' in diameter, for the sole use of the
resident occupying a residential parcel on which the satellite dish is located; provided the
height of said dish does not exceed the height of the ridgeline of the primary structure on said
parcel.
E. Exempt telecommunication facility located with a recognized Historic District.
F. City owned and operated antennae used for emergency response services, public utilities,
operations and maintenance if the height does not exceed seventy feet (70'). If a facility does
not meet these criteria then it is considered either an "exempt", "minor'', or "major"
telecommunication facility.
Telecommunication Facility - Minor
means any of the following:
A. Antenna which meet the definition of "mini"; with the exception of the height limit.
B. Telecommunication facilities less than thirty-five feet (35') in height and that adhere to Section
13.10 of this Ordinance.
C. A single ground or building mounted whip (omni) antenna without a reflector, less than four
inches (4") in diameter whose total height does not exceed thirty-five feet (35'); including any
mast to which it is attached, located on commercial and/or industrial zoned property.
D. A ground or building mounted panel antenna whose height is equal to or less than four feet
(4') and whose area is not more than 480 square inches in the aggregate (e.g.: one foot (1')
diameter parabola or 2' x 1.5' panel) as viewed from any one point, located on commercial
or industrial zoned property. The equipment cabinets shall be designed, placed and screened
to be unobtrusive and effectively unnoticeable.
E. More than three (3) antennas, satellite dishes (greater than 3' in diameter), panel antennas,
or combination thereof, are proposed to be placed on the commercial or industrial parcel,
including existing facilities. ·
35.
\\BGVALPO\SDSK\sdsk\WOROPROC\BONAR\ 1567\ZONING\Section 2.doc (1-6-00J
-..
DEFINITIONS SECTION II
F. Building mounted antennas which, in the opinion of the Zoning Administrator, are unobtrusive
or undetectable by way of design and/or placement on the building, regardless of number,
when located on commercial or industrial zoned property.
G. Telecommunication facilities less than fifty feet (50') in height, in compliance with the
applicable Sections of this Chapter, located on a parcel owned by the City of Nappanee and
utilized for public and/or quasi-public uses where it is found by the Zoning Administrator to
be compatible with the existing City uses of the property.
H. Telecommunication facilities, including multiple antennas, in compliance with the applicable
Sections of this Chapter, located on an industrial parcel and utilized for the sole use and
purpose of a research and development tenant of said parcel, where it is found by the Zoning
Administrator to be aesthetically compatible with the existing and surrounding structures.
I. Telecommunication facilities located on astructure recognized as a Historic Landmark. If a
facility does not meet these criteria then it is considered a "major' telecommunication facility.
Telecommunication Facility - Co-Located
means a telecommunication facility comprised of a single telecommunication tower or building
supporting one or more antennas, dishes, or similar devices owned or used by more than one public
or private entity.
Telecommunication Facility - Commercial
means a telecommunication facility that is operated primarily for a business purpose or purposes.
Telecommunication Facility - Multiple User
means a_ telecommunication facility comprised of multiple telecommunication towers or buildings
supporting one or more antennas owned or used by more than one public or private entity, excluding
research and development industries with antennas to serve internal uses only.
Telecommunications Facility - Non Commercial
means a telecommunication facility that is operated solely for a non business purpose.
Telecommunications Tower
means a mast, pole, monopole, guyed tower, lattice tower, free-standing tower, or other structure
designed and primarily used to support antennas. A ground or building mounted mast greater than
ten feet (10') tall and six inches (6") in diameter supporting one or more antenna, dishes, arrays, etc.
shall be considered a telecommunications tower.
Television Antenna
A metal tower located on or adjacent to a residence or other structure, for the purpose of receiving
broadcast messages from signal and/or relay towers.
Temporary Business
Any business operating at or within a moveable location or structure, or any business operating at a
location which lacks permanent infrastructure including full utilities, parking, permanent signage, etc.
Temporarv Sign - See "Sign, Temporary."
Territorial Jurisdiction - See "Jurisdiction."
36.
\\BGVALPO\SDSK\sdsk\WOROPROC\BONAR\ 1567\ZONING\Section 2.doc 11-6-00)
DEFINITIONS SECTION II
Thoroughfare Plan
The portion of the comprehensive plan, now and hereafter adopted, which includes the identification
and discussion of existing transportation systems, as well as the future needs of the community with
respect to roads and streets.
Trade or Business School
A secretarial or business school or college that is not publicly owned, is not owned, conducted, or
sponsored by a religious, charitable, or non-profit organization, and is not a school conducted as a
commercial enterprise for teaching instrumental music, dancing, barbering, hairdressing, or the
industrial or technical arts and like skills.
Tree
A woody perennial plant that reaches a mature height of at least eight (8) feet (2.4 m).
Use
The purposes of which land, building, or structure thereon is designed, arranged, or intended, or for
which it is occupied, maintained, let, or leased.
Utility - See "Public Utility."
Variance. Use
The approval of a use other than that prescribed by this Ordinance; an act granted by 1.C. 36-7-4-
918.3. (See Section 11.4)
Variance, Development Regulations/Design Standards
A specific approval granted by a Board of Zoning Appeals in the manner prescribed in Section 11.4
of this Ordinance, to deviate from the development standards (such as height,- bulk, area) that the
Ordinance otherwise prescribes.
Veterinarv Animal Hospital or Animal Clinic
A place used for the care, diagnosis and treatment of sick, ailing, infirm or injured animals, and those
who are in need of medical or surgical attention, and may include overnight accommodations on the
premises for treatment, observation and/or recuperation. It may also include boarding that is
incidental to the principal activity or use.
Vision Clearance on Corner Lots - See "Sight Triangle."
Yard
A space on the same lot with a principal building that is open and unobstructed except as otherwise
authorized by this ordinance.
Yard Front
The horizontal space between the nearest foundation of a building to the Front Lot Line, extending
to the side lines of the lot, and measured as the shortest distance from that foundation to the Front
Lot Line. The front yard of a corner lot shall be that yard abutting the street upon which the lot has
its least frontage, except as deed restrictions may otherwise specify. (See Figure 2.1)
Yard Rear
The horizontal space between the nearest foundation of a building to the rear lot line and that rear lot
line, extending to the side lines of the lot, and measured as the shortest distance from the nearest
foundation to the rear lot line. The rear yard of a comer lot shall be that yard at the opposite end of
the lot from the front yard. (See Figure 2.1)
37.
l\BGVALPO\SDSK\sdsk\WORDPROC\BONAR\ 1567\ZONING\Section 2.doc 11-6-00)
DEFINITIONS SECTION II
Yard, Side
The horizontal space between the nearest foundation of a building to the side lot line and that side
lot line, unoccupied other than by architectural appurtenances projecting not more than twenty-four
(24) inches into that space; steps or terraces not higher than the level of the first fioor of the building;
and open lattice-enclosed fire escapes, fireproof outside stairways and balconies projecting not over
twenty-four (24) inches into that space. (See Figure 2.1)
Zone - See "District"
Zoning Administrator - See "Administrator"
Zoning District - See "District"
Zoning Map
The official zoning map of the City of Nappanee, lndiana, .denoting zoning districts.
Zoning Ordinance
A set of development guidelines, specifications, and regulations enacted by the Council to create
districts which permit certain land uses and character specifications and prohibit others; in reference
to documentation, the Nappanee Unified Zoning and Subdivision Control Ordinance, and any other
supporting or accompanying ordinances, plans, resolutions, rules, or regulations and including their
provisions, except where the context clearly indicates otherwise.
Zoo
A permanent location, building, or structure where more than one exotic animal is kept, indoors and/or
outdoors, as an attraction, and where admission is collected.
38.
\\BGVALPO\SOSK\sdsk\WORDPROC\BONAR\ 1567\ZONING\Section 2.doc (1-6-00)
DEFINITIONS
FIGURE 2.1
ALLEY
SIDE LOT LINE
J !5/0E 8LOG LINE I I I I
SECTION II
---.------------,- I /{)£BLOG Lit~ I
I I _.i2 _______ 2~ -~---------------- ! I I I I
l:!J I l I . I I
~I l>.JI l>.JI l>.JI l>.JI
-e.ll1' ~l!J.1 ~I ~l!!J ~I ...ii~ -...ti -.ii~ '3;1 id: }S:-~ ~: ~:~ i!i: ._: il:i:~ il:i: ii:il~ ii:il
~: ~i~ ~i ~i~ ~i ~I 'f\1'\f) 'f\1 \f'i1\f\ \f'\1
L-----------L .1----------'- -.!----------------
FRONT BLOG LJNEi ~C!VT BLOG :
I I I
I I I
FRONT LOT LINE I 'RONT LOT L I
5 TREET RIGHT-OF-WAY
I I I
I FRON/ I l
YAW ' I I YARD I 1
~ ~- ~c ~~::~t---------------
tt ~ ~~~·~~·
A : ~~ ~: -~~: J--------~------- -t -~+- I R£AE ~ I I --- S/CE YAJ<I/ l..l I YA© ~ I I
ALLEY
A - FRONT YA© MINIM.JM AS SPEC/FIE[) IN sccnav 5.2 TAtJLE 15
15 - REAR YA© MINIMUM AS SPECIFIED IN SECTIC!V 5.2 TAl5LE CJ
C: S/CE YA© MINIM.JM AS PECIFIED IN SECTION 5.2 TAtJLE C
39.
\\BGVALPO\SDSK\sdsk\WORDPROC\BONAR\ 1567\ZONING\Section 2.doc (1-6-00)
~--
DISTRICTS SECTION/II
3.1 ESTABLISHMENT
The City is divided into the following districts for purposes as stated:
O: Open Space District
The purpose of the Open Space District (0) is to provide areas for public and quasi-public
uses, areas for passive and active recreation, and conservation of unique and/or
environmentally sensitive natural areas.
R~ 1: Low Density Residential District
This district (R-1) is established for low density single-family residential development with a
density of six (6) dwelling units or less per gross acre. The regulations applicable to this
district are intended to promote the new development of larger lot housing opportunities
within the community.
R-2: Medium Density Residential District
This district (R-2) is established for medium density, single-family and two-family residential
development with a density of seven (7) to ten (10) dwelling units per gross acre. This district
applies to a large portion of Nappanee's existing residential areas. It is the intent of the
regulations applicable to this district to promote the development and redevelopment of
housing which is supportive in character and proportion to existing residential development
adjacent to downtown areas.
R-3: High Density Residential District
This district (R-3) is established for relatively high density single-family, two-family, and multifamily
residential development with a density of more than ten (1 O) or more dwelling units per
gross acre. The regulations applicable to this district are intended to facilitate a wide variety
of multi-family housing opportunities.
R-4: Residential-Office District
This district (R-4) is established to facilitate the responsible development of residential, office
and other compatible uses adjacent to the U.S. 6, S.R. 19, and other important arterial
corridors throughout the jurisdiction.
B-1: Limited Business District
This district (B-1) is established for the purpose of promoting the responsible development
and operatic~ .of small business establishments which primarily serve the limited shopping
and service needs of surrounding residential neighborhoods.
B-2: General Business District
The General Business (B-2) District is established to promote and regulate a variety of urban
uses within the downtown area and other commerc_ial nodes which will preserve and promote
a level of vitality necessary for the regional attraction of commerce.
1-1: Industrial District
The Industrial District (1-1) designates areas for the development and expansion of general
industrial. manufacturing, and wholesale business establishments which are clean, quiet, and
free of hazardous or objectional elements.
HPOD: Historic Preservation Overlay District
This overlay district (HPOD) is established to promote the cultural, economic, and general
welfare of the public through the preservation and protection o(structures and areas of
h.istorical and cultural interest.
U:LANTZ\NAPPANEE\SECT.111 (3-16-98) 40.
DISTRICTS SECTION /II
RCOO: Regional Corridor Overlay District
This overlay district (RCOD) is established to promote the welfare and safety of the public
through the protection of local portions of transportation corridors of regional importance.
The Regional Corridor Overlay District (RCOD) designation is given to areas within the local
jurisdiction along corridors having increased significance for regional travel and commerce.
Generally, front yard requirements are greater in such a district, and curb cuts are effectively
minimized.
P 0: Planned Development Districts
These districts (PO-R, PO-B, PD-I, and PD-E) may be established by a zoning map
amendment in order to provide greater design flexibility in the development of land when
consistent with the Comprehensive Plan and the intent of the Zoning and Subdivision Control
Ordinance. The intent of these districts, as well the classifications, procedures, and other
requirements for establishing a PO district are set forth in Section 6 herein.
3.2 OFFICIAL ZONING MAP
The zoning map of the City of Nappanee is hereby included as part of this Ordinance. The map shall
be known as the Official Zoning Map of the City of Nappanee, Indiana.
A The Zoning Map is a public document with the original map located in the Nappanee
Municipal Building.
B. The Zoning District boundaries shall be shown on the Zoning Map. The abbreviations for the
zoning districts appearing throughout this Ordinance shall be used to identify the zoning
districts on the map. Planned developments shall also be shown on the map and shall be
identified by the number and date of passage of the Ordinance approving the Planned
Development.
C. The Zoning Map shall be revised annually, or as the Plan Commission determines, with
certified copies made thereof, to show the amendments adopted by the City Council during
the previous year. Such revisions may correct drafting or other errors or omissions in the
prior map, but shall not have the effect of amending the Zoning Map except as adopted by
the City Council during the previous year. Such revisions shall be necessary only to correct
previous errors.
0. In the event that the Zoning Map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost or difficult to interpret
because of the nature or number of changes and additions, the City Council may, by
reso'lution, adopt a new Zoning Map which shall supersede the prior Zoning Map.
3.3 BOUNDARIES
District boundaries on the Zoning Maps shall meet the following standards:
A. District boundaries shown within the lines of roads, easements,, and transportation rights-ofway
shall be deemed to follow the centerlines.
B. Boundaries indicated as following section or fractional section lines, platted lot lines, or City
corporation lines shall be construed as following such lines.
C. Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of above features shall be so construed as
so.
U:LANTZINAPPANEEISEC_T.111 (3-16-98) 41.
DISTRICTS SECTION Ill
D. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerline of streams, rivers, or other
bodies of water shall be construed to follow such centerlines as established on the effective
date of this Ordinance.
E. Where a district boundary line divides a lot in single or joint ownership of record at the time
such line is adopted, the regulations for the less restricted portion of such lot shall extend not
more than fifty feet into the more restricted portion, provided the lot has frontage on a street
in the less restricted district.
F. The vacation of streets and roads shall not affect the location of such district boundaries.
G. When the Zoning Administrator cannot definitely detenmine the location of a district boundary
by such centerlines, by scale or dimensions stated on the Zoning Map, or by the fact that it
clearly does not coincide with a property line, the Administrator shall refuse action and the
Plan Commission shall interpret the location of the district boundary with reference to the
scale of the Zoning Map and the purposes set forth in all relevant provisions of this
Ordinance. If subject to appeal, the BZA shall interpret.
H. Where existing physical or cultural features are at conflict with those shown on the Zoning
Map, or in other circumstances not covered by subsections A through G above, the Plan
Commission shall interpret the district boundaries. If subject to appeal, the BZA shall
interpret.
3.4 SUBDIVISIONS, CLUSTER DEVELOPMENTS, PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS,
CONDOMINIUMS AND ZERO LOT LINE DEVELOPMENTS
The subdivision of land pursuant to the requirements of Section 8 herein shall be permitted in all
districts, provided that the intended principal use or uses of the land to be subdivided is in accordance
with the provisions of this ordinance. The intended principal use of each of the proposed lots within
a proposed subdivision shall govern the specific district or districts appropriate to the land to be
subdivided, as defined in Section 4.1 of this Ordinance.
Planned Developments shall also be permitted in all districts, per Section 6 of this Ordinance. In
order to provide greater design flexibility, and to encourage innovative land development techniques
and a more efficient use of land, the design and development of uses within these districts may
deviate from the standards prescribed in Sections IV and V herein.
Condominiums, as defined and regulated in IC 32-1-6 (the Horizontal Property Law), cluster
residential developments, zero lot line residential developments, and all developments of the minimum
sizes specified in Section 6.2 of this Ordinance and larger, shall be considered for zoning purposes
to be Planned Developments.
U:LANTZ\NAPPANEE\SECT.111 (3-16-98) 42.

AUTHORIZED USES SECTION IV
4.1 PRINCIPAL USES
Principal uses authorized.in the districts established under section 3.1 are shown by a "P" in Table
A at the end of this section. Where designated with an "S", the use is permitted in that district only
if the special use has been approved according to the procedure established under Section 11.3.
4.2 ACCESSORY USES
Accessory uses such as the following are authorized in all districts subject to the provisions of any
and all recorded restrictive covenants nunning with the land:
A. Bird Baths and bird houses
B. Accessory buildings/garages
C. Curbs
D. Driveways
E. Fences and Hedges
F. Lamp posts
G. Mail boxes
H. Name plates
I. Parking spaces
J. Private, in-ground swimming pools enclosed by a 5-foot high fence or a private, aboveground
pools.which are integral with a 5-foot vertical enclosure
K. Public utility installations for local service (such as poles, lines, hydrants, pump stations and
telephone booths) ·
L. Retaining walls
M. Trees, shnubs, plants, and flowers
N. Walks
0. Temporary toilets•
4.3 NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES
•
A. Intent
Within the districts established by this ordinance or by amendments that may later be
adopted, there may exist:
Temporary toilets may be placed and maintained at any constnuction site for the duration of construction
activities without a permit. In all other cases, a permit must be obtained, prior to the placement of any
temporary toilet, from the Zoning Administrator for a fee specified in the Official Fee Schedule maintained
in the office of the Clerk-Treasurer.
U:\LANTZ\NAPPANEE\SECT.IV (3-16-96) 43.
AUTHORIZED USES SECTION JV
1. Nonconforming lots;
2. Nonconforming structures;
3. Nonconforming uses of land;
4: Nonconforming uses of land and structures in combination; and
5. Nonconforming characteristics of use.
These were lawful before this ordinance was passed or amended, but they are prohibited,
regulated or restricted under the temns of this ordinance or may be under future amendments
hereto. It is the intent of this ordinance to pemnit these nonconfomning uses to continue until
they are removed but not to encourage their prolonged existence. It is further the intent of
this ordinance that nonconforming uses shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended,
nor be used as grounds for adding other structures or uses which are prohibited elsewhere
in the same district. (Note; Illegal uses existing at the time this ordinance is enacted shall not
be validated by virtue of its enactment.)
B. Incompatibility of Nonconforming Uses
Nonconforming uses are declared by this ordinance to be incompatible with pemnitted uses
in the districts in which such use is located. A nonconfomning use of a structure, a
nonconfomning use of land, or a nonconforming use of a structure and land in combination
shall not be extended or enlarged after passage of this ordinance by attachment on a building
or premises of additional signs intended to be seen from off the premises, or by the addition
of other uses of a nature which would be generally prohibited in the district in which such use
is located.
C. Avoidance of Undue Hardship
To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this ordinance shall be deemed to require a change in
the plans, construction, or designated use of any building or development on which actual
construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of adoption or amendment of this
ordinance and upon which actual building construction has been carried on diligently. Where
demolition or removal of an existing building has been substantially begun preparatory to
rebuilding, such demolition or removal shall be deemed to be actual construction, provided
that the work shall be carried on diligently. Actual construction is hereby defined as work
done which is beyond the preparation stage and into that stage where the changes or
additions are made permanent.
0. Single Nonconforming Lots of Record
In any district in which single-family dwellings are permitted, a single-family dwelling and
customary accessory buildings may be erected on any single lot of record after the effective
date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance notwithstanding limitations imposed by other
provisions of this ordinance. Such lots must be in separate ownership or included in a
subdivision of record in the office of the County Recorder at the time of passage of this
ordinance. This provision shall apply even though such lots fail to meet the requirements for
area or width, or both, that are generally applicable in the district, provided that yard
dimensions and requirements other than those applying to area and/or width of the lots shall
conform to the regulations for the district in which such lots are located. (Also see Section
5.2). Variances of requirements listed in Section 5 of this ordinance, other than lot area or
lot width shall be obtained only through action of the Board of Zoning Appeals as provided
in Section 11.4. (Note: This section shall apply only to single-family residences.)
U:ILANTZINAPPANEEISECT.IV (3· 16-98) 44.
AUTHORIZED USES SECTIONN
E. Nonconforming Lots of Record in Combination
If two or more lots or a combination of lots and portions of lots with continuous frontage in
single ownership are of record at the time of passage or amendment of this ordinance and
if all or part of the lots with no buildings do not meet the requirements established for lot width
and area, the lands involved shall be considered to be an undivided parcel for the purposes
of this ordinance and no portion of said parcel shall be used or sold in a manner which
diminishes compliance with the lot width and area requirements established by this
ordinance, nor shall any division of any parcel be made which creates a lot with width or area
below the requirements stated in this ordinance.
F. Nonconforming Uses of Land
Where, at the time of adoption of this ordinance, lawful uses of land exist which would not be
permitted by the regul!itions imposed by this ordinance, the uses may be continued so long
as they remain otherwise lawful, provided:-
1. No such conforming uses shall be enlarged or increased, nor extended to occupy
a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective date of adoption or
amendment of this ordinance.
2. No such nonconfonming uses shall be moved in a whole or in part to any portion of
the lot or parcel other than that occupied by such uses at the effective date of
adoption or amendment of this ordinance.
3. If any such nonconforming uses o(land are discontinued or abandoned for more
than one year (except when government action impedes access to the premises),
any subsequent use of such land shall confonm to the regulations specified by this
ordinance for the district in which such land is located.
4. No additional structure not conforming to the requirements of this ordinance shall be
erected in connection with such nonconforming use of land.
G. Nonconforming Structures
Where a lawful structure exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this
ordinance that could not now be built under the terms of this ordinance by reason of
restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yards, its location on the lot, bulk, or other
requirements concerning the stnucture, such stnucture may be continued so long as it remains
otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:
1. No such nonconfonming structure may be enlarged or altered in a way which
increases its nonconformity, but any structure or portion thereof may be altered to
decrease its nonconformity.
2. Should such nonconforming stnucture or nonconforming portion of structure be
destroyed by any means to the extent of more than 50 percent of the fair market
value of the building immediately prior to the damage, it shall not be reconstnucted
except ·1n conformity with the provisions of this ordinance.
3. Should such structure be moved for any reason for any distan·ce whatever, it shall
thereafter confonm to the regulations for the district in which it is located after it is
moved. · ·
U:\LANTZ\NAPPANEE\SECT.IV (3-16-98) 45.
AUTHORIZED USES SECTION IV
H. Nonconforming Uses of Structures and Land in Combination
If a lawful use involving individual structures, or if a structure and land in combination, exists
at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance that would not now be
allowed in the district under the terms of this ordinance, the lawful use may be continued so
long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:
1. No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this ordinance in the district
in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended, constructed, reconstructed,
moved, or structurally altered except in changing the use of the structure to a use
permitted in the district in which it is located.
2. A nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a building which
were manifestly arranged or designed for such use at the time of adoption or
amendment of this ordinance, but flO such use shall be extended to occupy any land
outside such building.
3. Any structure, or structure and land in combination, in or on which a nonconforming
use is superseded by a permitted use, shall thereafter conform to the regulations for
the district, and the nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed.
4. When a nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and land in combination is
discontinued or abandoned for more than one year (except when government action
impedes access to the premises}, the structure or structure and land in combination,
shall not thereafter be_ used except in conformity with the regulations of the district
in which it is located.
5. Where nonconforming use status applies to a structure and land in combination,
removal or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the nonconforming status of
the land.
I. Repairs and Maintenance
On any nonconforming structure or portion of a structure containing a nonconforming use,
work may be done in any period of twelve consecutive months on ordinary repairs, or on
repair or replacement of non-bearing walls, fixtures, wiring or plumbing, to an extent not
exceeding ten percent of the current replacement cost of the nonconforming structure and
market value of real estate, or nonconforming portion of the structure, whichever the case
may be, provided that the cubic content existing when it became nonconforming shall not be
increased. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to p·revent the strengthening or restoring
to a safe condition of any building or part thereof declared to be unsafe by any official
charged with protecting the public safety, upon order of such official. If a nonconforming use
becomes physically unsafe or unlawful by reason of physical condition, it shall not there<ifter
be restored, repaired, or rebuilt except in conformity with the regulations of the district in
which it is located .
. 4.4 GARAGE OR YARD SALE
A. As. used herein "garage or yard sale" is defined as a sale of household goods, furniture,
equipment, utensil·s, appliances, tools, personal clothing or effects, novelt-j items, glassware,
farm products, or similar personal property, including, but not limited to, any sale commonly
termed "Porch Sale", "Yard Sale", "Lawn Sale", "Group Family Sale", "Rummage Sale",
"White Elephant Sale", "Flea Market Sale", or "Attic Sale."
U:\LANTZ\NAPPANEE\SECT.IV (3-16-98) 46
AUTHORIZED USES SECT/ONN
B. Any garage or yard sale may be conducted two times in any one calendar year on any
premises, but no such sale shall be conducted for more than three (3) consecutive days.
C. All ltems of personal property sold at such garage or yard sale shall be owned by the owner
or occupier of the premises, unless permission for sale of items not owned is given at the
time of issuance of the permit provided for herein by the person issuing the permit.
D. Such garage or yard sale shall only be conducted during the hours between 7:00 a.m. and
7:00 p.m.
E. All personal property exhibited for sale during such garage or yard sale shall be removed
from the outside and placed within a structure immediately following the last day of such sale.
All signs erected for such garage or yard sale shall likewise be removed.
F. No such garage or yard sale shall be held without the owner or occupier of the premises
having first obtained a permit therefor. Sut:h permit shall be obtained by applying therefor
from the City Clerk who shall issue such permit upon payment of a fee as specified in the
official Nappanee Fee Schedule. Such permit shall specify the address and date of such sale.
G. Additionally, all such garage sales shall conform to the provisions of the City of Nappanee
Ordinance No. 700.
4.5 OTHER OUTDOOR SALES
As used herein "outdoor sales" shall include "roadside sales" and "sidewalk sales" as defined in
Section II of the Nappanee Unified Zoning and Subdivision Control Ordinance. The regulation of each
shall be accomplished as follows:
A. General
1. An outdoor sale may be held up to two (2) times per calendar year per applicant, but
no such sale shall be conducted for more than fourteen (14) consecutive days,
except as otherwise authorized by City Resolution.
2. No such outdoor sale shall be held without the owner or occupier of the premises
having first obtained a permit therefor. Such permit shall be obtained through an
application to the Zoning Administrator who may issue such permit upon payment
of a fee as specified in the official Nappanee Fee Schedule. Such permit shall
specify the address and date of such sale and shall expire on December 31 of each
year. Any permit issued by the City does not license the holder to utilize private
property for such purposes.
B. Roadside Sales
1. No sign, stand, structure or other physical component of a roadside sale shall be
placed within ten (1 O) feet of the curb or pavement edge.
2. All items for sale, signs, stands, or temporary structures associated with a roadside
sale shall be·stored in a secure and enclosed condition upon close of the sale each
day or removed.
3. A permitted roadside sale may be conducted only in an R-4, B-1, B-2, or RCOD
District between the hours of sunrise and sunset.
. U:\LANTZ\NAPPANEE\SECT.IV (3-16-98) 47 .
AUTHORIZED USES SECTION IV
C. Sidewalk Sales
1. No sign, stand, structure or other physical component of a sidewalk sale shall be
placed so that it:
a. Obstructs greater than 60% of the width of the public sidewalk,
b. Obstructs the sight triangle of motorists on adjacent rights-of-way, or
c. Otherwise threatens the health and/or safety of City residents.
2. All items for sale, signs, stands or temporary structures associated with a sidewalk
sale shall be placed inside the store upon close of sale each day.
D. Automobiles, Boats, Motorcycles, and_other Vehicles
1. Vehicles owned by owners or tennants of a private residence may be displayed for
sale on the premises of such residence, subject to the following requirements:
a. No more than one (1) vehicle shall be displayed for sale at any one time.
b. Vehicles may be displayed for sale for not more than fourteen (14)
consecutive days, and not more than twice per calendar year.
c. Vehicles displayed for sale must be in running condition.
d. A permit must be obtained from the Zoning Administra_tor.
e. Vehicles in running condition having current license plates which are parked
in a private driveway are exempt from these regulations.
4.6 DISTRICTS IN WHICH USES ARE PERMITIED
A The permitted and non-permitted uses for each District, as well as those uses which may be
considered for special exceptions, are shown in Table A.
Permitted:
Where the District column is marked with a "P", the use corresponding with that row is
permitted in the District.
Non-Permitted:
Where.the District column is not marked (blank), the use corresponding with that row is not
permitted in the District.
Special Exceptions:
Where the District Column is marked with an "S", the use will be permitted ii a special
exception is granted from the Board of Zoning Appeals as specified in Section 11.3 of this
ordinance.
B. The Plan Commission, upon hearing a recommendation from the Zoning Administrator, shall
determine into which category any use shall be placed which is not specifically listed or
defined herein in Table A
U:\LANTZ\NAPPANEE\SECT.IV (3-16-98) 48.
AUTHORIZED USES SECT!ONN
1. The principal use of the land, building(s), structure(s), or operation shall determine
the use. "Principal Use" is defined as being greater than fifty percent (50%), even
in the event that three or more land use categories apply, or
2. When no single use is greater than fifty percent (50%), the land usage category with
the greatest restriction on the land, building(s), structure(s), or operation will apply.
C. Where there are two or more land use categories that apply to one proposed development,
the following should be used to detemiine the applicable land use category:
1. The principal use of the land, building(s), structure(s), or operation shall detemiine
the use. "Principal use" is defined as being greater than fifty percent (50%), even in
the event that three or more land use categories apply, or
2. When no single use is greater than fifty percent (50%), the land usage category with
the greatest restriction on the land, tiuilding(s), structure(s), or operation will apply.
U:ILANTZINAPPANEE\SECT.IV (3-16-98) 49.
AUTHORIZED USES SECTION IV
TABLE A
DISTRICTS IN WHICH USES ARE PERMITTED
P=PERMITTED S=SPECIAL EXCEPTION X=PER PLANNED DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
RESIDENTIAL.USES . 0 •• Rel R-2 . 'R-3 R-4 B-1 B-2 1-l PD Buffer Parking
·- ., ... l. '. . .· Class Class " -~ . . ...
DWELLING, SINGLE- s p p p p s x A I
FAMILY
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY I p p s x A 2
DUPLEX -
DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY p p s s x c 2
/APARTMENT
MANUFACTURED HOME p p p s x A 2
MOBILE HOME s A 2
MOBILE HOME PARK s x D 2
HOME OCCUPATION s s s p p p x A 2
BOARDING OR LODGrNG s p s s x- c 13
HOUSE
GROUP HOME s p s s x c 13
NURSING HOME s s p s s x c 14
CHILDREN'S HOME s p s s x c 14
RETIREMENT COMMUNITY s s p s s x c 2
BED AND BREAKFAST s s s p s s x c 14
. ••
... AGRICULTURAL USES 0 R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 B-1 B-2 l'l PD ·::Buffei" • ;:ii- p.,:J<i~~
.. · . Cla:Ss ._ .... ·. . c1.ss
ARTIFICIAL LAKE OF 3 OR s s s s s p x A NIA
MORE ACRES
COMMERCIAL p p s p x D 12
GREENHOUSE
CROPLAND OR ORCHARD p p x A NIA
PASTURE AND GRAZrNG p p x A NIA
PLANT NURSERY p s p x A 10
LIVESTOCK AND I OR E NIA
FEEDING YARD
5 0 .
P:lsdsk\WORDPROC\BONAR\ 1567\ZONING\USET AB.sec. 4.doc (1-3-00)
AUTHORIZED USES SECTION IV
DISTRICTS IN WHICH USES ARE PERMITIED
P=PER.MITTED S=SPECIAL EXCEPTION X=PER PLANNED DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
IND UST RIAL USES 0 R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4
BOTTLED GAS STORAGE I s
DISTRlBUTION
LIGHT MANAFACTURJNG
GENERAL
MANUFACTUR1NG
MFG. I STORAGE I USE OF -
EXPLOSIVES
FOOD PROCESSING
SLAUGHTER HOUSE
PRODUCT ASSEMBLY
W AREHOUS!NG I
DISTRlBUTION CENTER
FERTILIZER STORAGE I
DISTRlBUTION
JUNKY ARD I SCRAP
METAL YARD
RECYCLING CENTER s
COMPOSTING CENTER s
SANITARY LANDFILL
INCINERATOR
HAZARDOUS WASTE
DISPOSAL
RESEARCH CENTER s
INDUSTRlAL I COMMERCE
PARK
ORA VEL I SAND I MINING
OPERATIONS
GENERAL CONTRACTING s
MACHINE SHOP
WOOD SHOP s
5 1
P:\sdsk\WORDPROCIBONAR\ 1567\ZONING\USETAB.sec. 4.doc (1-3-00)
B-1
s
s
p
s
s
B-2 I-1 PD Buffer Parking
Class Class
p x E 11
p x E 11
p x E 11
s x E II
p x E 11
s x E 11
p x E 11
p x E 11
p x E 11
s x E 10
s s x E 18
s s x E 18
s x E 10
s x E 10
E 10
p p x E 10
s p x E 19
s x E 19
s p x E 10
p x E 10
p x E 10
AUTHORIZED USES SECTION IV
DISTRICTS IN WHICH USES ARE PERMITTED
P=PERMITTED S=SPECIAL EXCEPTION X=PER PLANNED DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
PUBLIC FACILITIES 0 R-l R-2 R-3 R-4 B-l B-2 1-1 PD Buffer Parking
Class Class
AIRPORT s x E 19
CHURCH I TEMPLE I p p p p p p x B 6
MOSQUE
GOVERNMENT OFFICES s p p x D 10
CHILDCARE s s s p p s p x c IO
POLICE I FIRE STATION s s s p p p x D IO
HIGHWAY I MUNICIPAL p p x E IO
GARAGE
MUSEUM s p p p x B 11
PUBLIC PARK p p p p p p p p x B 19
THEME I AMUSEMENT s s x E 19
PARK
GOLF COURSE I DRlVING p s s s s x c 21
RANGE
PUBLIC OR PRIVATE p p p p s s x c 19
SCHOOL
TRADE/VOCATIONAL s s s p x c 19
SCHOOL I COLLEGE
zoo s s x E 19
RECYCLING CENTER s s s s x E 18
COMPOSTING CENTER s s s s x E 18
SANITARY LANDFILL s x E 10
INCINERATOR s x E 10
PUBLIC ORPRlVATE p p p p p p p p x B ..
PARKING AREA
5 2 .
P:\sdsk\WORDPROC\BONAR\ 1567\ZONING\USETAB.sec. 4.doc (1-3-00)
AUTHORIZED USES SECTION IV
DISTRICTS IN WHICH PRIMARY USES ARE PERMITTED
P=PERMITTED S=SPECIAL EXCEPTION X=PER PlANNED DEVELOPMENT REGUlATIONS
C=CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT REQUIRED
COMMUNICATION I 0 R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 B-1 B-2 1-1 PD Buffer
UTILITIES Class
RADIO /TV STATION p s p p x D
UTILITY SUBSTATION s s s p x E
PIPELINE PUMPING p s s s s s s p x E
STATION
ELECTRICAL GENERATOR p s s s s- s s p x E
PUBLIC WELLS p s s s s s s p x E
ABOVE GROUND WATER p p x E
STORAGE TANK
SEWAGE TREATMENT s p x E
FACILITIES
WATER TREATMENT s p x E
FACILITIES
TELECOMMT:INICATIONS c c c E
FACILITY - MINOR
TELECOMMUNICATIONS c c c E
FACILITY - MAJOR '
BUSINESS USES I 0 R-l R-2 R-3 R-4 B-l B-2 1-l PD Buffer
AUTOMOBILE Class
AUTOMOBILE REPAJR s p p x D
AUTO PARTS STORE p p x D
AUTO/TRUCKSALES& s p p x D
SERVICE
BODY SHOP s p p x D
CAR WASH s p x D
ENGINE REPAJR s p p x D
GASOLINE STATION WITH s p p x D
REPAJR
GASOLINE STATION s p p x D
WITHOUT REPAIR
RV I CAMPER SALES & s p p x D
SERVICE
5 3 .
P:lsdsk\WORDPROCIBONAR\1567\ZONING\USETAB.sec. 4.doc (1-3-00)
Parking
Class
JO
19
19
19
19
19
19
19
19
19
Parking
Class
18
12
18
18
18
18
18
10
18
AUTHORIZED USES SECTION IV
DISTRICTS IN WHICH USES ARE PERMITTED
P=PERMITTED S=SPECIAL EXCEPTION X=PER PLANNED DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
BUSINESS USES I 0 R-l R-2 R-3 R-4 B-l B-2 l-l PD Buffer Parking
CLOTHING Class Class
CLOTHING RETAIL s s p x D 12
DRY CLEANINING SHOP p p x D 12
FABRIC SHOP s p x D 12
SELF-SERVICE LAUNDRY p p x D 19
SHOE REPAIR SHOP s p p x D !2
TAILOR I DRESSMAKER s p p x D 12
SHOP
THRIFT I SECOND HAND s s p x D 12
CLOTHING STORE
BUSINESS USES I 0 R-I R-2 R-3 R-4 B-1 B-2 l-1 PD. Buffer-· Parking
ELECTRONICS Class Class
APPLIANCE SALES & s p x D 11
SERVJCE
AUDIO I VIDEO EQUIP. s p x D l l
SALES & SERVJCE
SATELLITE DISH SALES & s p x D ll
SERVJCE
COMPUTER SALES & s p x D 12
SERVlCE
VIDEO ARCADE s p x D 19
BUSINESS EQUIPMENT s p x D 12
SALES & SERVJCE
.
VIDEO I MUSIC STORE s p x D 12
54.
P:\sdsk\WORDPROCIBONAR\1567\ZONING\USETAB.sec. 4.doc (1-3-00)
AUTHORIZED USES SECTION IV
DISTRICTS IN WHICH USES ARE PERMITTED
P=PERMITTED S=SPECIAL EXCEPTION X=PER PLANNED DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
BUSINESS USES I FOOD & 0 R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 B-1 B-2 l-1 PD Buffer Parking
DRINK Class Class
BAKERY, RETAIL s p x D 12
DAIRY, RETAIL s p x D 12
DELICATESSEN s p x D 12
-
MEAT MARKET /BUTCHER s p x D 12
SHOP
FAST FOOD WITH DRJVE- s p x D 12
THROUGH/IN
GROCERY STORE s p x D 12
CONVENIENCE STORE p p x D 12
LIQUOR I WINE I BEER s p x D 12
STORE
RESTAURANT WITH s s p x D 12
ALCOHOLIC BEV.
RESTAURANT WITHOUT s s p x D 12
ALCOHOLIC BEV.
SIDEWALK CAFE s s x D 19
ROADSIDE FOOD ST AND s s s x - 19
ROADSIDE PRODUCE s s s x - 19
STAND
OTHER SIMILAR USES
5 5 .
P:\sdsk\WORDPROC\BONAR\1567\ZONING\USETAB.sec. 4.doc (1-3-00)
AUTHORIZED USES
DISTRICTS IN WHICH USES ARE PERMITTED
P~PERMITTED S=SPECIAL EXCEPTION X=PER PLANNED DEVELOPMENT
BUSINESS USES I OFFICE 0 R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4
ACCOUNTANT OFFICE p
CONTRACTOR omcE p
CORPORATE OFFICE p
DESIGN SERVICES p
HOME OCCUPATION s s s p
INSURANCE OFFICE p
REAL ESTATE OFFICE p
SECRETARIAL SVC. OFFICE p
SERVICE ORG. OFFICE p
TRAVEL AGENCY p
BUSINESS USES I 0 R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4
PERSONAL SERVICES
ACCOUNTING IT AX p
PREPARATION
BARBERSHOP p
BEAUTY SHOP I SALON p
BED AND BREAKFAST p
DENTIST"S OFFICE I p
PRJVATE PRACTICE
DOCTOR'S OFFICE I p
PRJVATE PRACTICE
HEAL TH SPA I FITNESS s
CENTER
HOSPITAL
HOTEL I MOTEL s
LARGE ANIMAL CLINIC I
VETRJNARIAN
MEDICAL CLINIC s
PSYCHIC I PALM READER p
SMALL ANIMAL CLINIC I s
VETRJNARIAN
TANNING SALON p
TATTOO PARLOR
5 6 '
P:\sdsk\WORDPROC\BONAR\1567\ZONING\USETAB.sec. 4.doc (1-3-00)
B-1 B-2 I-1 PD
s p x
s p x
s p x
s p x
p p x
s p x
s p x
s p x
s p x
s p x
B-I B-2 I-I PD
p p x
p p x
p p x
p s x
p p p x
p p p x
s p x
s ·s p x
s p p x
s p x
p p p x
p p x
p p p x
p p x
s s x
SECTION IV
Buffer Parking
Class Class
D JO
D JO
D JO
D IO
A I9
D IO
D IO
D IO
D IO
D IO
Buffer Parking
Class Class
D IO
D 18
D IS
c I3
D 22
D 22
D I9
D I7
D 13
D 10
D 22
D · IO
D IO
D 18
D II
AUTHORIZED USES
DISTRICTS IN WHICH USES ARE PERMITTED
P=PERMITTED S=SPECIAL EXCEPTION X=PER PLANNED DEVELOPMENT
BUSINESS USES I 0 R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4
RECREATION
ARCHERY I FIREARMS s
TARGETRANGE
(INDOOR)
ARCHERY I FIREARMS s
TARGETRANGE
(OUTDOOR)
BAJT & TACKLE SHOP s-
BILLIARD ROOM
BINGO PARLOR
BOWLING ALLEY
CAMPGROUND, TENT &IOR s
RV
DANCE I GYMNASTIC s
STUDIO
GOLF COURSE OR DRJVING p s s s . s
RANGE
LODGE OR PRJV ATE CLUB s s s s
NIGHT CLUB I BAR I s
TAVERN
PAlNTBALL RECREATION s . s
FACILITY
PRJVATE CAMP s s
RJDING ST ABLE AND s s
TRAJLS
SPORTING GOODS STORE,
RETAIL
THEATER, INDOOR
THEATER, OUTDOOR s
THEME I AMUSEMENT s
PARK
VIDEO ARCADE
5 t '
P:\sdsk\WORDPROC\BONAR\ 1567\ZONlNG\USET AB.sec. 4.doc (1-3-00)
.
B-1 B-2 I-1 PD
p p x
s x
s p x
s p x
s p x
s p x
s x
s p x
s x
s s s x
s p x
s s s x
x
x
s p x
s p x
s x
s x
s p x
SECTION IV
Buffer Parking
Class Class
D 18
E 18
D 12
D 19
D 19
D 18
E 18
D 19
c 21
D 19
D .12
D 19
D 19
c 19
D I2
D 5
E 5
E 19
D 19
AUTHORIZED USES SECTION JV
DISTRICTS IN WHICH USES ARE PERMITTED
P=PERMITTED S=SPECIAL EXCEPTION X=PER PLANNED DEVELOPMENT
BUSINESS USES I RETAIL 0 R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 B-I B-2 I-I PD Buffer Parking
SALES Class Class
ANTIQUE SHOP p p p x D I2
APPAREL/CLOTHING s s p x D I2
STORE
DEPARTMENT STORE s p x D I2
DRUGSTORE p x D I2
FLORAL SHOP s p p x D I2
FURNITURE STORE s p x D II
GIFT I CARD SHOP s s p x D I2
HARDWARE STORE p p x D I2
JEWELRY STORE s p p x D I2
LIQUOR I WINE I BEER s p x D I2
STORE
LUMBER/ BUILDING s p x E I9
SUPPLY SALES
MUSIC STORE s p x D I2
NEWS I BOOK I MAGAZINE s p x D I2
STORE
PET STORE s p x D I2
RETAJL SHOWROOM s p p x D I2
..
SHOE STORE s s p x D I2
SPORTING GOODS STORE s p x D I2
TOBACCO I CIGAR STORE S. s p x D I2
V ARJETY STORE s p x D I2
VIDEO STORE s p x D I2
.
5 8 .
P:\sdsk\WORDPROCIBONAR\ 1567\ZON ING\USETAB.sec. 4.doc (1-3-00)
AUTHORIZED USES · SECTIONJV
DISTRICTS IN WHICH USES ARE PERMITIED
P=PERMITIED S=SPECIAL EXCEPTION X=PER PLANNED DEVELOPMENT
ADULT BOOKSTORE I
ENTERTAINMENT
AGRICULTURAL SEED
SALES
·BANK I CREDIT UNION
BANK MACHINE I A.T.M.
BOAT SALES I SERVICE I
STORAGE
BUILDING TRADES
CONTRACTOR
BUS STATION
CEMETERY/
CREMATORIUM
FARM.EQUIPMENT SALES &
SERVICE
HOME OCCUPATION
KENNEL, PET BOARDING
LIVESTOCK AUCTION BARN
MORTUARY I FUNERAL
HOME
PHOTOGRAPHY STUDIO
PRINTING SHOP
SIGN PAINTING
TRUCK STOP
WAREHOUSE I MINI
STORAGE
WELDING SHOP
p p
p
s
s s
U:\LANTZ\NAPPANEE\USETAB.IV (9-1-98)
s
p p
p - p
s
s s
p p p p
s
s s p p
s
s s p p
p p
s s
s s
s
59-A
s s x
s x
p p x
p p x
p p x
s p x
p p x
x
p ·P x
p x
p p x
s p x
p x
p x
p p x
p p x
p p x
p p x
s p x
Buffer
.·Class
D
D
D
D
D
E
D
B
D
A
D
D
B
D
D
D
E
E
E
Parking
CI.SS·"
12
12
19
19
I9
10
19
19
19
19
10
19
19
10
!l
11
19
19
11
AUTHORIZED USES SECTION JV
4.7 TATTOO PARLOR
A tattoo parlor shall be permitted by special exception in a B-2 or an 1-1 district, provided that any
such tattoo parlor shall:
A. Be located a minimum distance of four hundred (400) feet from any church building, licensed
day care center, public park, school building, school playground, school parking lot, public
library, boys and/or girls club, or residential use; and
B. Have any and all rooms where tattooing is performed separated and not visible from each
other or from any other use in the same building and shall have any room where tattooing is
performed separated from and not visible by pedestrian circulation to and from other uses
within the same building or, from outside the building where the tattooing is performed; and
C. Not operate at any time between 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. prevailing time in Nappanee,
Indiana; and
D. Not have any outside display of merchandise related to tattooing, shall have no merchandise
related to tattooing visible from outside the premises where tattooing is performed and shall
have no outside advertising permitted except that a sign may be flush mounted on the
building no more than eight (8) square feet in area and an additional flush mounted sign on
the building SHALL BE REQUIRED at least two (2) square feet, but not larger than four (4)
square feet in area indicating that persons being tattooed must be at least eighteen (18)
years of age unless a parent or legal guardian of the person being tattooed is present at the
time of tattooing and provides written permission for such tattooing prior to the time of such
tattooing; and '
E. Comply with any and all other applicable federal, state, and local laws, siatutes, ordinances,
regulations, and requirements, including but not limited to any regulations adopted by the
Indiana State Department of Health concerning the sanitary operation of tattoo parters.
U:\LANTZ\NAPPANEE\SECT.IV (9-1-98) 59-B
·-·
AUTHORIZED USES SECTION IV
4.8 ADULT BOOKSTORE I ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS
An adult bookstore or adult entertainment business as defined under Section 2 herein, shall be
permitted by special exception in a B-2 or an 1-1 district, provided that any such adult bookstore or
adult entertainment business shall:
A. Be located a minimum distance of four hundred (400) feet from any church building, licensed
day care center, public park, school building, school playground, school parking lot, public
library, boys and/or girls club, or residential use; and
B. Have any room where adult entertainment occurs or where materials of a sexually-explict or
otherwise adult nature exist separated from and not visible by pedestrian circulation to and
from other uses within the same building or, from outside the building where the adult
entertainment occurs or adult materials are located; and
C. Not operate at any time between 12:00 midnight and 8:00 a.m. prevailing time in Nappanee,
Indiana; and
D. Not have any outside advertising permitted except that a sign may be flush mounted on the
building no more than eight (8) square feet in area and an additional ftush mounted sign on
the building SHALL BE REQUIRED at least two (2) square feet, but not larger than tour (4)
square feet in area indicating that persons entering the premises must be at least the
minimum age provided by applicable federal, state, and local laws, statutes, ordinances, and
requirements for attendance at such an establishment and
E. .comply with any and all other applicable federal, state, and local laws, statutes, ordinances,
regulations, and requirements.
U:\LANTZ\NAPPANEEISECT.IV (9-1-98) 59-C

DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS SECTION V
5.1 GENERAL
The purp"ose of this section is to set forth in detail the development standards and restrictions
for permitted uses. Such development standards have been developed to promote the goals,
policies, and objectives set forth in the Comprehensive Plan of Nappanee.
5.2 LOT/YARD REGULATIONS
A. Conflicts
All conflicts concerning lot/yard regulations specified in this section in existence prior
to the time of adoption of this ordinance shall be considered legal nonconforming lots
or structures and are subject to SectiQn 4.3 of this ordinance.
8. Setbacks
No building or structure shall be erected, altered, enlarged, or reconstructed unless
such improvement conforms with the yard regulations of the District in which it is
located as follows:
I. Front Yard Requirements:
Each lot shall have a front yard with a minimum depth measured from and
parallel to the right-of-way as specified in Table B.
TABLE 8
MINIMUM FRONT YARD REQUIREMENTS
TYPE OF FRONTAGE I DISTRICT 0 R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 B-1 B-2 1-1
IN RECORDED SUBDIVISIONS 30 FT 30 FT 30FT 30FT 20 FT 15 FT 10 FT 25 FT
PRIMA.RY ARTERIAL, SO FT SOFT SO FT SOFT SO FT SO FT SO FT 50 FT
(NOT IN RECORDED SUBDIVISION)
SECONDARY ARTERIAL SO FT SO FT SO FT SOFT SO FT SOFT SO FT SOFT
(NOT IN RECORDED SUBDIVISION)
COLLECTOR OR FEEDER 30 fT 30FT 30 FT 30 FT 30 FT 30 FT 30 FT 30 FT
(NOT rN A RECORDED SUBDIVISION)
LOCAl.. STREET 30 FT 30 FT 30 FT 30 FT 30 FT 30 FT 30 FT 30 FT
(NOT IN A RECORDED SUBDIVISION)
• Minimum front yard requirements are as indicated above unless an existing setback is clearly
established by adjacent properties with similar uses on the block or street. In the latter case,
the minimum front yard shall be equal to the average set back of the existing buildings on the
block or street, and shall be established by the Zoning Administrator.
60.
P:\sdsk\WORDPROC\BONAR\1567\ZONING\Section 5.doc (1-6-00)
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS SECTION V
II. Side Ya.r.d Requirements:
Two side yards shall exist for each lot with minimum width as specified in
Table C. Side yard requirements vary, as shown, depending upon the adjacent
district. Applicants should find the appropriate district at the top of the table ·
and follow the column down to the adjacent district to find the minimum side
yard requirement.
*Side yard set backs in R-1 districts may be reduced to five (5) feet for an accessory structure of not
more than Two Hundred (200) square feet in size provided that no such building will encroach on any
drainage or utility easement.
TABLE C
MINIMUM SIDE YARD REQUIREMENTS
DISTRICT I ADJACENT DISTRICT 0 R-1 R-2 - R-3 R-4 B-1 B-2 1-1
OPEN SPACE (0) 15FT 15FT 5FT 5 FT 5 FT 5 FT 5 FT IOFT
SINGLE-FAMlL Y RESIDENTIAL (R-1) 15 FT• !5 FT• 15 FT• 15 FT .. !5 FT• 15 FT• 15 FT• 1s rr•
TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTlAL (R-2) 15 FT 15 FT 5 FT 5FT 5 FT IO FT !OFT 10 FT
MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTlAL (R-3) 15 FT 15 FT 5 FT 5 FT 5 FT 10 FT 10 FT 10 FT
RESIDENTIAL OFFICE (R-4) 15 FT 15 FT 5 FT 5 FT 5 FT 5 FT 5 FT JO FT
LIMITED BUSINESS (B-1) 15 FT 15 FT 5 FT 5 FT 5 FT 5 FT 5 FT 10 FT
GENER.AL BUSIN'ESS (CB} 15 FT 15FT 5 FT - 5 FT 5 FT 5 FT 5 FT 10 FT
INDUSTRIAL (1-1) 15 FT 15 FT 5 FT 5 FT 5 FT 5 FT 5 FT 10 FT
Ill. Rear Yard Requirements:
A rear yard shall exist for each lot (with the exception of corner lots which
have two front yards and two side yards by definition) having a minimum depth
as specified in Table 0. Applicants should find the appropriate district at the
top of the table and follow the column down to the adjacent district to find the
minimum required rear yard. One-half of an alley abutting the rear lot line may
be included in the required rear yard.
*Rear yard set backs in R-1 and R-2 districts may be reduced to five (5) feet for an accessory structure
of not more than Two Hundred (200) square feet in size provided that no such building will encroach
on any drainage or utility easement.
61.
P:lsdsk\WORDPROCIBONAR\1567\ZONING\Section 5.doc (1-6-00)
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS SECTION V
TABLED
MINIMUM REAR YARD REQUIREMENTS
DISTRICT I ADJACENT DISTRICT 0 R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 B-1 B-2 1-1
OPEN SPACE (0) 20 FT 20 FT 20 FT 20 FT 20 FT 15 FT J5 FT 15 FT
SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL (R-1) 20 FT • )0 FT• 20 FT• 20 FT• 20 FT• 15 FT* 15 FT* 15 FT*
TWO-FAMlLY RESIDENTIAL (R-2) 20 ·FT* 20 FT* 20 FT* 20FT" 20 FT • !5 FT * 15 FT* 15 FT *
MUL TI-F Al'vflL Y RESIDENTIAL (R-3) 20 FT 20 FT 20 FT 20 FT 20 FT !S FT ISFT ISFT
RESIDEMTIAL OFFICE (R-4) 20FT 20 FT 20 FT 20 FT 20 FT J5FT J5 FT J5 FT
LIMITED BUSrnESS (B-1) 20 FT 20 FT 20 FT 20 FT 20 FT JO FT JO FT 15 FT
GENERAL BUSINESS (B-2) 20 FT. 20 FT 20 FT 20 FT 20 IT JO FT 10 FT J5 FT
-
INDUSTRU\L (I-1) 20 FT 20 FT 20FT 20 FT 20 FT JO FT JO FT JO FT
C. Lot Width
No building or structure shall be erected on a lot not meeting minimum lot width
standards per Table E.
D. Lot Coverage
All lots must conform to the maximum lot coverage standards per Table E.
E. Lot Area
No building or structure shall be erected on a lot not conforming with the minimum lot
area standards per Table E.-
F. Minimum Size of Single Family Dwelling
No single-family residence shall be constructed which is less than Nine Hundred Fifty
1950) square feet in size.
62.
P:\sdsk\WORDPROC\BONAR\1567'ZONING\Section 5.doc (1-6-00)
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS SECTION V
TABLE E
Zone Standards
REGULATION O R-1 R-2 R-3 R-1 B-1 B-2 I-1
MINIMUM LOT SIZE NA 7.920 S.F. 7.920 S.F. 7,920 S.F. 7,920 S.F. 10.890 S.F. 10,890 S.F. 43,560 S.F.
MfNIMUM LOT WIDTH NA 66 FT 66 FT 66 FT NA NA NA NA
MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE 5% 25% 25% 25% 25% 50% 75% 75%
MINIMUM FRONT YARD* SEE SEE SEE SEE SEE SEE SEE SEE
TABLE TABLE TABLE TABLE TABLE TABLE TABLE TABLE
B B B 8 8 B 8 B
MINIMUM SIDE YARD* SEE SEE SEE SEE SEE SEE SEE SEE
TABLE TABLE TABLE TABLE TABLE TABLE TABLE TABLE
c c c c c c c c
MINilv1UM REARY ARD* SEE SEE SEE SEE SEE SEE SEE SEE
TABLED TABLED TABLED TA.BLEE TABLED TABLED TABLED TABLED
MAXIMUM WIDTH:DEPTH~ NA 1:3 !:J I:J 1:3 NA NA NA
* Only applicable to lots platted subsequent to the adoption of this ordinance.
5.3 HEIGHT REGULATIONS
A. General
Structures may be erected or modified to heights no greater·than the rnaximum heights
specified in Table F.
TABLE F
GENERAL HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS
TYPE OF STRUCTURE 0 R-1 R-2 R~3 R-1 B-1 8-2 1-1
PRIMA.RY STRUCTURES 35 FT 35 FT 35 FT 35 FT 55 FT 40 FT 60 FT 60 FT
(WITH ONLY MIN!MillYI SIDE YARDS)
PRIMARY STRUCTURES 45 FT 45 FT 45 FT 45 FT NA NA NA NA
(IF 15 FOOT OR GREATER SIDE YARDS ARE
PROVIDED)
ACCESSORY STRUCTIJRES 18 FT 18 FT 18 FT 18 FT . • • .
• 18 feet or half of the height of the primary structure
B. Special
1. The height of primary structures in a B-1, B-2, or 1-1 district may be increased
an additional two (2) feet for every one (1 I foot that front, side, or rear yards·
are increased.
2. Spires, church steeples, chimneys, cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, fire
towers, scenery lofts, penthouses for mechanical equipment, stacks, tanks,
water towers, transmission towers for electric lines, telecommunications
63.
P:lsdsk\WORDPROC\BONARI 1567\ZONING\Section 5.doc (1-6-00)
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS SECTION V
towers, and agricultural structures may be erected or changed to any height,
subject to the approval of the Zoning Administrator.
5.4 LOADING
A. General
There shall be provided off-street loading berths not less than the minimum
requirements specified in this chapter in connection with any building or structure
which is to be erected or substantially altered, and which requires the receipt or
distribution of materials or merchandise by trucks or similar vehicles.
B. Location
c.
D.
All required off-street loading berths shall be located on the same lot as the use to be
served, and no portion of the vehicle shall project into a street or alley. No permitted
or required loading berth shall be located within twenty-five (25) feet of the nearest
point of intersection of any two streets, nor shall it be located in a required front yard,
or side yard adjoining a street.
Size
Off-street loading berths for over-the-road tractor-trailers shall be at least fourteen (14)
feet in width by at least sixty (60) feet in length with a sixty (60) foot maneuvering
apron, and shall have a vertical clearance of at least fifteen (15) feet. For local pick-up
and delivery trucks, off-street loading berths shall be at least twelve (12) feet in width
by at least thirty (30) feet in length with a thirty (30) foot maneuvering apron, and shall
have a vertical clearance of at least fourteen (14) feet.
Access
Each required off-street loading berth shall be designed with appropriate means of
vehicular access to a street or alley in a manner which will least interfere with traffic
movements.
E. Surf'.'cing
All open off-street loading berths shall be improved with a compacted base not less
than six (6) inches thick, or equal, surfaced with not less than two (2) inches of
asphaltic concrete or some comparable all-weather, dustless material.
F. Space Allowed
Space allowed to any off-street loading berth shall not, while so allocated, be used to
satisfy the space requirements of any off-street parking areas or portions thereof.
G. Off-Street Loading Berth Requirements
Minimum off-street loading berth requirements are as specified in Table G.
64.
P:\sdsk\WORDPROC\BONAR\1567\ZONING\Section 5.doc (1-6-00)
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS SECTION V
TABLE G
MINIMUM OFF-STREET LOADING BERTH REQUIREMENTS
.
Minimum Number Required Gross Floor Area
1 up to 40,000 sq. ft. .
2 40,000 to 80,000 sq. ft.
3 80,000 to 120,000 sq. ft.
4 120,000 ta 160,000 sq. ft.
5 160,000 to 240,000 sq. ft.
s· 240,000 to 320,000 sq. ft.•
One additional off-street loading space shall be required for each additional 80,000
square feet after 320,000 square feet.
5.5 PARKING
A. General
To reduce traffic problems and hazards by eliminating unnecessary on-street parking,
every use of land must include on-premises parking sufficient for the needs normally
generated by the use, as provided by Table H. Parking spaces or bays contiguous to
the street are in addition to and not in place of the spaces so required. Public parking
spaces available within three (31 blocks of a given premises shall be considered in
meeting the off-street parking requirements specified by Table H.
B. Parking Spaces
As used in this Chapter, the term "parking space" means an area, not including any
part of a street or alley, designed or used for the temporary parking of a motor vehicle.
Parking spaces of the following type have the following minimum dimensions:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
Handicapped
Parallel
Right Angle (90°1
Sixty degree (60°1
Forty-five degree (45°1
12 feet wide by 20 feet long
1 0 feet wide by 20 feet long
10 feet wide by 20 feet long
1 0 feet wide by 1 8 feet long
10 feet wide by 17 feet long
The length for the right angle, sixty degree, and forty-five degree parking space shall
be measured at right angles to the edge of usable parking area forming the angles,
exclusive of passageway.
All uses which are required to provide handicapped parking areas shall be required to
(al provide the minimum number of handicapped parking spaces required for said use,
with each parking space conforming to the dimensions shown above; (bl show the
proposed dimensions an_d location of all such handicapped parking spaces on all site
plans, plats, and other plans which will be reviewed by the Commission or BZA; and
(cl comply with all appropriate parking, traffic, safety, and handicapped accessibility
65.
P:lsdsk\WORDPROC\BONAR\1567\ZONING\Section 5.doc (1-6-00)
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS SECTION V
codes.
Except for providing for the minimum number of off-street parking spaces required in
this Chapter for .residential uses {exclusive of any commercial or lodging operations
associated with residential uses), parking spaces shall not be located in required front
yards except in business IB-1 and B-2) and industrial {1-1) districts.
Parking spaces for any commercial or lodging operations associated with a residential
use shall be provided either in one of the side yards or the rear yard of such dwelling,
substantially out of public view from {a) the street fronting the front yard or an interior
lot {or both street frontages on a through-lot), and {b) both streets which front the side
and front yards on a corner lot {or all street frontages on corner lots which run the
entire length of a block).
Off-street parking shall be provided as shown in Table G. Refer to Table A in Section
4 to determine which parking classification shall be met. {Example: if parking class is
"3" for a use listed on Table A, the parking requirement found on Table H for the use
"3" shall apply).
C. Parking Areas
As used in this Chapter, "parking area" means a group of parking spaces or an open
area not including any part of a street or alley, designed or used for the temporary
parking of motor vehicles.
Parking areas prescribed in this section for commercial and industrial uses .must be
located either on the pre.mises of such commercial or industrial use or on a site
approved by the Commission. Said off-street parking, however, must be located within
three hundred {300) feet of the respective commercial or industrial site.
All parking lots for commercial, industrial, business, public and private employee
parking, offices, and places of assembly, and all interior drives for commercial and light
industrial developments must be paved with an impervious hard surface. In addition,
all parking lots must also conform to all the following requirements:
1. Be striped so as to show each parking space;
2. Meet all of the parking space requirements in Table H;
3. Be constructed to allow proper drainage;
4. Be designed to prevent vehicles from having to back into public streets; and
5. No point of ingress or egress shall be allowed closer than twenty-five 125) feet
of any right-of-way line of any intersecting street or alley.
A group of business and/or industrial uses may provide a joint parking area if the
number of spaces required for all uses is adequate, and at least eighty percent {80%)
of the total sum required for each use. The Zoning Administrator shall approve such
aggregate parking lots.
A church or temple or like uses may request to the Commission a down-sizing of
parking requirements if adequate parking is located near the use and which is available
during the times of use by the church or temple.
All parking areas are encouraged to be located in the rear and side yards for all uses of
property. The Commission shall hear requests for variations from this Chapter's
66.
P:\sdsk\WORDPROC\B.ONAR\1567\ZONING\Section 5.doc {1-6-00)
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS SECTION V
requirements only if the parking areas are located in the side or rear lots; front lot
parking shall have no flexibility.
D. Recreational Vehicle Parking
1. One (1) recreational vehicle, as defined in this Chapter, may be temporarily
parked on a residential lot and occupied by its owner and the owners family for
the purpose of using the same as temporary living quarters for a period not to
exceed seven (7) days for any calendar year.
2. One (11 recreational vehicle may be stored on a residential lot for an indefinite
period of time, provided that such recreational vehicle will not be occupied for
the purpose of using the same as temporary or permanent living quarters
except as use for temporary living quarters is allowed under section 5.5 0.1
Such recreational vehicle shall be stored either behind the principal residential
structure or, beside such principal structure it the recreational vehicle is placed
on a concrete, asphalt or crushed stone surface completely covering the area
of the recreational vehicle. Any recreational vehicle so stored must comply
with all setback requirements applicable to such residential lot except that any
recreational vehicle placed behind a principal residential structure may be
placed up to 5 feet from all property lines.
67.
P:\sdsk\WORDPRDC\BONAR\1567\ZONING\Section 5.doc (1-6-00)
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
TABLE H
MINIMUM PARKING REQUIREMENTS
PARKING CLASS~ REQUIRED MINI!\.IUi\1 NUl\ifBER OF SPACES
I
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
IQ
II
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
4 PER HOUSEHOLD I DWELLING UNIT
2 PER HOUSEHOLD I DWELLING UNIT
I PER HOUSEHOLD I DWELLING UNIT
I PER 6 SPECTATOR SEATS
I PER 3 SPECTATOR SEATS
l PER 2 SPECTATOR SEA TS
! PER 4 EMPLOYEES
I PER 3 EMPLOYEES
I PER 2 EMPLOYEES
2 PER I EMPLOYEE
1 PER 300 SQ. FT. (UP TO 9.000 SQ. FT.)
1PER500 SQ. FT. (9.001 TO 50.000 SQ. FT.)
! PER l.000 SQ. FT. (OVERS0,000 SQ. FT.)
1 PER200 SO. FT. flJPTO 1.000 SQ. FT.)
I PER 400 SO. IT. (OVER 1.000 SO. FT.)
1 PER SLEEPING ROOM
I PER 2 SLEEPING ROOMS
I PERS BEDS PLUS I FOR EACH EMPLOYEE
I PER SLEEPING ROOM PLUS I PER 2 EMPLOYEES
1 PER 4 HOSPITAL BEDS PLUS l PER 2 EMPLOYEES
2 PER BAY I BOOTH I ALLEY
PER PLAN COMMISSION RECOMMENDATION
ADD ONE ADDITIONAL SPACE
3 PER GOLF HOLE
2 PER TREATMENT ROOM
•As established in Table A, ·section IV
FIGURE 5.1
CURB
5TREET RIGHT-OF-WAY
r·=====
M!NIMJM 0!.5TANCC BETWCSV I ,..
INTER.5ECT!ON AN a?!VEWA Y / [.../'
ENTRANCE. MEASURE FROM
OUTS/OE CORNER TO CXJT.5/0t .l._
CORNER. (.5EE TABLE G) .LL---
W!VEWA Y /ENTRANCE
68.
P: \sdsk\WORDP ROC\B.ONAR\ 1567\ZONl NG\Section 5.doc (1-6-00)
SECTION V
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS SECTION V
5.6 ENTRANCES I DRIVEWAYS
A. Spacing
Entrances and driveways must be spaced away from intersections for vehicular and
pedestrian safety and to reduce traffic congestion. Spacing should be as follows in
Table I (see Figure 5.1 for reference).
TABLE I
DRIVEWAY I ENTRANCE TO INTERSECTION REQUIREMENTS
ROAD CLASS./ DISTRICT 0 R-1 R-2 R-3 R-1 B-1 B-2 1-1
PRIMARY ARTER.IAL 60 FT 60 FT 60 FT 60 FT 70 FT 70 FT 70 FT 80 FT
.
SECONDARY ARTERIAL 50 FT 50 FT 50 FT 50 FT 60 FT 60 FT 60 FT 70 FT
COLLECTOR (FEEDER) 40 FT 40 FT 40 FT 40FT 50 FT 50FT 50 FT 60 FT
LOCAL STREET
8. Width
30 FT 30 FT 30 FT JO FT 40FT 40FT 40 FT 50 FT
Driveway width shall be a minimum of twenty-four (24) feet for commercial and multifamily
housing uses and thirty-four (34) feet for industrial uses. There are no minimum
driveway widths for single-family residential uses.
5.7 MISCELLANEOUS RESTRICTIONS
A. Through-Lots
In the case of a through-lot, the area at each end of the lot between the setback line
and the right-of-way line shall be considered as if it were a part of the front yard.
8. Access to Public Streets
Every principal building hereafter erected shall be on a zoning lot or parcel of land
which adjoins a public street or a permanent easement of access to a public street;
such easement to be at least twenty (201 feet wide unless a lesser width was duly
established and received prior to the effective date of this ordinance.
C. Satellite and Digital Dish Systems
1. All satellite receiving systems having a diameter greater than four 14) feet shall
be located within the rear or side yard of any residential zoned lot.
2. In the case of a corner lot, the satellite receiving system shall not be placed in
either yard adjacent to a street.
3. All satellite receiving systems shall be placed a minimum of five (5) feet inside
the property line of the owner's lot.
69.
P:\sdsk\WORDPROC\BONAR\ 1567\ZONI NG\Section 5.doc (1-6-00)
· ..
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS SECTION V
4. No satellite system, if elevated, shall exceed a height of 20 feet.
5. If affixed to a structure, digital dish systems shall be attached to a side or rear
of the structure when possible.
6. A permit shall be obtained prior to the placement of any satellite dish system
(excluding digital dish systems of less than 24 inches in diameter) and a fee
paid as specified in the official fee schedule maintained in the Office of the
Clerk-Treasurer.
C. Fences
1. No fence on a residential property shall be constructed of barbed wire, nor shall
it be electrified.
5.8 ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS
A. General
No land shall be used or structure erected if the City or its designated agent determines
it to be unsuitable for such use or structure due to slopes greater than ten percent
(10%), adverse soil or rock formation, erosion susceptibility, low percolation rate or
bearing strength, or any other feature likely to be harmful to the health, safety,
prosperity, aesthetics, and general welfare of the community. Failure of the City or 'its
designated agent to make such a determination shall not give rise to any liability or
cause of any action against the City or its agent.
B. Surface Water
It shall be the responsibility of the owner of any lot or parcel of land developed for any
use other than for agriculture to provide for adequate surface water drainage. When
possible, existing natural surface drainage may be utilized. Whenever the evidence
available indicates that the natural surface drainage is inadequate, the owner shall
provide the parcel with an adequate surface water system which shall be integrated
into the drainage pattern of surrounding properties. When the surface drainage is
adequate, easement for such surface drainage shall be provided. On-site detention
shall be required where necessary to prevent harm to adjoining properties.
C. Drainage
Drainage swales (ditches) along dedicated roadways and within the right-of-way or on
dedicated drainage easements are not to be altered, except for maintenance as
originally constructed and as approved by the County Highway Department, the County
Drainage Board, City Street Department, or Indiana Department of Transportation, as
may be applicable. Driveways may be constructed over these or other approved
structures as permitted by the appropriate agency.
D. Permanent Structures
No permanent structures other than a fence may be erected, and if erected in violation
of this section, no such structure may be used if the location is within seventy-five feet
of the centerline of any legal tile ditch, or within seventy-five feet of .the existing top
70.
P:lsdsk\WORDPROCIBONAR\1567\ZONING\Section 5.doc (1-6-00)
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS SECTION V
edge of any legal open ditch or tile unless approved by the County Drainage Board and
the Nappanee Plan Commission.
E. Preservation of Natural/Historic Features
Existing natural and historic features which would add value to development of natural
or manmade assets of the county such as trees, streams, vistas, lakes, historical
landmarks, and similar irreplaceable assets, shall be preserved through harmonious and
careful design. Land to be developed shall be designed and improved as far as practical
in conformity to existing topography in order to minimize stormwater runoff, and
conserve the natural cover and soil.
F. Landscaping
Any part or portion of non-farm parcel which is not used for structures, loading or
parking spaces, sidewalks and accessory uses shall be landscaped or left in a natural
state. If landscaped, they shall be planted with an all-season ground cover and shall
be landscaped with trees and shrubs in accordance with the Development Plan and/or
site plan and shall be in keeping with natural surroundings.
G. Cut/Fill Grade
No cut or fill grade shall exceed a slope of 3:1 or 33 1 /3 percent. This provision shall
apply to all cuts and fills exceeding 1 00 square feet in exposed surface area, including
cuts or fills on land naturally exceeding 3: 1 in slope.
H. Erosion Preve-ntion
All land, regardless of slope, from which structures or natural cover has been removed
or otherwise destroyed, shall be appropriately graded and seeded within a reasonable
time of such activity to prevent erosion.
I. Alterations to Shoreline
No alteration of the shoreline or bed of a river or public lake shall be made until written
approval is obtained from the Indiana Department of Natural Resources, and the
provisions of this ordinance are complied with. Alterations include, among other
things, filling of a river or wetlands, dredging of a riverbed, and ditch excavation within
one-half mile of a water body.
J. Code Compliance/Hazardous Waste
All development must be in compliance with Title 7 of the Indiana Code, as amended,
as it relates to h8.zardous waste, low Jeve! nuclear waste, underground storage tanks,
waste tires, and other applicable chapters of said Title.
K. Code Compliance/Environmental Quality
All development must be in compliance with Title 13 of the Indiana Code, as amended,
as it relates to air pollution control, water pollution control, solid waste management,
and other applicable chapters of said Titl.e.
71.
P:\sdsk\WORDPROC\BONAR\1567\ZONING\Section 5.doc (1-6-00)
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS SECTION V
L. Waste Disposal
No waste materials such as garbage, rubbish, gasoline, oil, flammables, soils, tars,
chemicals, greases, industrial or agricultural waste, or any other material of such
nature, quantity, obnoxiousness, toxicity, or temperature so as to contaminate, pollute,
or harm the waters shall be deposited, located, stored, or discharged on any lot in a
way that would be likely to run off, seep, or wash into surface or groundwaters.
M. Fuel Storage
No highly flammable or explosive liquids, solids, or gases specified by the State Fire
Marshal shall be stored in bulk above ground, except tanks or drums of fuel connected
directly with energy devices or heating appliances located and operated on the same
lot as the tanks or drums of fuel and except for permitted agricultural uses and
permitted uses in an 1-1 District, unless in conformance with applicable state statutes
or regulations
N. Debris/Refuse
Debris and refuse shall not accumulate on any property, in any zoning district.
0. Treatment of Fill
Bricks, concrete, lumber, and other material used for fill where permitted by this
ordinance and/or by the Indiana Department of Environmental Management (IDEM),
Indiana Department of Natural Resources -(IDNRI, or other governmental agency, shall
be promptly covered and seeded.
P. Improvement Location Permit Requirements
Requirements for Improvement Location Permits can be found in Section 11. 1 of this
Ordinance. The following activities are permitted, however, with no Improvement
Location Permit required, provided all other applicable standards are met:
1. Normal excavation for structural foundations, driveways, utility installations,
and similar preparation activities.
2. Normal plowing and preparing of the land for gardens and yards.
3. Normal trimming and/or removal of trees and shrubs for maintenance and/or site
preparation.
4. Earth movements related to farming and other agricultural activity, including sod
farming.
5. Public and private road construction.
6. Drain tile laying and ditch cleaning.
7. Top soil removal, other than mineral extraction.
72.
P:\sdsk\WORDPROC\BONAR\ 1567\ZONING\Section 5.doc (1-6-00)
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS SECTION V
5.9 BUFFERING
A.. General
In addition to regular setback (yard) requirements for structures, a bufferyard shall be
provided and maintained by the owner or lessee of a property in accordance with this
section. Bufferyards are required between most land uses on adjacent properties in
order to reduce the impact of one use or another. Generally, more intensive uses
require greater amounts of buffering than less intensive uses. This section applies only
to changes of use, the construction of a principal structure on a lot or the expansion
of any existing principal structure by thirty percent (30%) or more.
In the everit that residential uses are developed adjacent to legally existing industrial
or commercial uses, said industrial or commercial uses shall not be required to
retroactively provide required bufferyards, except in the event of a change or expansion
of use, as stated above.
B. Application
Bufferyard, where required, shall be located along side and rear property lines. In the
1-1 District, bufferyards shall also be required along the front property line when
adjacent to or facing R-1, R-2, R-3 or R-4 residential districts. On lots which abut a
street along more than one property line, the site plan shall designate which property
line shall be considered the front and bufferyards shall be provided along all other lines.
Bufferyards shall have the necessary widths and planting and fencing material as
required below.
C. Determining Requirements
To determine the minimum requirements for bufferyards, the following procedure shall
be used:
1. Identify the Bufferyard Classification (Buffer Class A, B, C, D, or E) of the
proposed use and/or structure by referring to Table A (Column, Buffer Class)
in Section 4 of this ordinance.
2. Identify the Bufferyard Classification (Buffer Class A, B, C, 0, or E) of the
existing adjacent use by referring to Table A of this ordinance. For vacant land
and for existing, adjacent uses, refer to the Zoning Map for the district
classification of the land and/or use.
3. Determine the bufferyard requirements for the proposed use and/or structure
by referring to Table J. Go. down the left column to the Bufferyard
Classification of the proposed use and then go across the matrix either to the
land use class or the adjacent vacant land zoning district and refer to the
numbers (1 through 5) in the corresponding box which indicates the bufferyard
type illustrated in Figure 5.2.
4. Refer to the bufferyard type in Figure 5.2 illustrations 1 through 5. Any of the
alternative bufferyards may be selected for the determined bufferyard.
73.
P:\sdsk\WORDPRDC\BONAR\1567\ZONING\Section 5.doc (1-6-00)
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS SECTION V
D. Additional Standards
The following additional standards apply to bufferyards:
1 . All bufferyards shall be maintained and kept free of debris, rubbish, weeds, and
tall grass.
2. There shall be no structures, outdoor storage, parking, or loading facilities in
bufferyards, except for agricultural or residential uses. However, bufferyards
may be coterminous with the required front, side, or rear setback areas but in
case of conflict, the larger yard area regulation shall apply.
3. All plants shall be planted within one year of the Improvement Location Permit
issuance or within six months of project completion, whichever is shorter, and
all plants shall be properly maintained. Any plants which do not live or are
destroyed shall be promptly replaced.
4. Deciduous trees shall be a minimum of eight feet in height when planted.
Deciduous shrubs shall be a minimum of six feet in height when planted.
5. Evergreens shall be a minimum of four feet in height when planted.
6. Berms shall be a minimum of four feet in height.
7. Flowering trees and shrubs shall be encouraged in bufferyards.
E. Exceptions
1 . On any parcel of land where there is an existing use or structure, the Zoning
Administrator may waive up to fifty percent of the required bufferyard if it is
physically impossible to locate the required bufferyard due to non-conforming
lot size, existing structure or parking lot location, or other similar reasons.
2. No bufferyard is required when a less-intense use is newly located adjacent to
a more intense and established land use.
3. Two or more undeveloped lots abutting one another are not required to provide
bufferyards. However, upon development, the appropriate bufferyard will be
required.
F. Responsibility
The owner of the most intense land use must be responsible for providing the
necessary bufferyard, and all costs associated therewith, and contain the bufferyard
completely within their property limits.
74.
P:\sdsk\WORDPROCIB.ONARI 1567\ZONING\Section 5.doc (1-6-00)
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS SECTION V
TABLE J
MINIMUM BUFFERYARD REQUIREMENTS
ADJACENT EXISTING
BUFFERYARD
CLASSIFICATION
BUFFERYARD A
CLASSIFICATION
(FROM TABLE A)
A NA
B 2
c J
D 4
E 5
!00'
0
~+-r~~~-@~-0~-~~
~T· -'-~~~-=---=-~--'
I 1£2f2'
B
1
1
2
J
4
~
~
(:,
I.
I
c D
2 J
2 2
1 2
2 1
J 2
FIGURE 5.2
rm:
0
@ 0
(9 * (.) I
(:, I G @
" 0 ~ I G &
0
01
I ~2 *@ 0 ~ ~ -9-* Q0Q I - 1$@$ oo I 8 "' t~$@ 0800 I
(:, I &titt: oo <:; I@® 00020 I
4.
75.
P:\sdsk\WORDPROC\BONAR\1567\ZONING\Section 5.doc (1-6-00)
E
4
3
2
2
I
2.
8
.5.
ADJACENT
ZONING DfSTRICT
(IF LAND IS VACANT)
R·l B-1
0 R-2 B-2
R-J
R-4
NA NA J
I 2 2
2 J J
J 4 3
4 5 4
'
I 1
@01
<:; I
OEC!CUCUS rREES • (9
OEC!CUCUS SHRUBS• 0
EVERGREENS • @
BERM· 8
FENCEREOO
PLANrs -
N.r..s. PER 100'
1-1
5
4
J
2
2
3.
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS SECTION V
5.10 INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
A. General
No Industrial use shall be located within the jurisdiction of the Nappanee Advisory Plan
Commission which is injurious to the health or safety of humans or animals, injurious
to vegetation, or which is noxious or offensive, by reason of the omission of smoke,
particulate matter, dust, odor, gas and fumes, glare, vibration or noise and sound
beyond the confines of the building in which such industry is conducted.
B. Exceptions
The restrictions of this section shall not apply to:
1. The activities of site preparation or construction, maintenance, repair,
alteration, modification or improvement of buildings.
2. The operation of motor vehicles or other facilities for the transportation of
personnel, materials or products.
3. Conditions beyond the control of the user such as fire, explosion, accidents,
failure or breakdown or equipment or facilities of emergencies.
4. Safety or emergency warning signals or alarms necessary for the protection of
life, limb or property, or
-
5. Processes for which there are no known means of control. Research shall be
promptly conducted to discover methods of control leading to installation of
corrective equipment.
C. Interpretation
For the purpose of this section, certain terms and words shall be interpreted and
defined as follows:
DECIBEL - A unit of measurement of the intensity or loudness of sound. Sound level
meters are used to measure such intensities and are calibrated in decibels.
FLASH POINT - The lowest temperature at which a combustible liquid under prescribed
condhions will give off a flammable vapor which will burn momentarily using the closed
cup method.
FREE BURNING - A rate of combustion described by a material which burns actively and
easily supports combustion.
INTENSE BURNING - A rate of combustion described by a material that burns with a
high degree of activity and is consumed rapidly.
MODERATE BURNING - A rate of combustion described by a material which supports
combustion and is consumed slowly as it burns.
PARTICULATE MATTER - Fi~ely divided liquid or solid material which is discharged and
carried along in the air.
76.
P:\sdsk\WORDPROC\BONAR\1567\ZONING\Section 5.doc (1.Q-00)
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS SECTION V
RINGELMANN NUMBER - The number of the area on the Ringelmann chart that most
nearly matches the light-obscuring capacity of smoke. The Ringelmann chart is
described in the U.S. "Bureau of Mines Information Circular 6888, on which are
illustrated graduated shades of gray for use in estimating smoke density. Smoke below
the density of Ringelmann No. 1 shall be considered no smoke or Ringelmann No. 0.
SLOW BURNING OR INCOMBUSTIBLE - Materials which do not in themselves
constitute an active fuel for the spread of combustion. A material which will not ignite,
nor actively support combustion during an exposure for five (5) minutes to a
temperature of 1,200 degrees F.
SMOKE - Small gas-borne particles resulting from incomplete combustion, consisting
predominantly of carbon and other incombustible material, excluding metallurgical fume
and dust, and present in sufficient quantity to be observable independently or the
presence of other solids.
VIBRATION - Oscillatory motion transmitted through the ground.
D. Application
The following general performance standards shall apply to all Industrial uses:
1. SMOKE - In any 24-hour period, visible emissions and malfunctions shall not
exceed forty percent 140%) of No. 2 of the Ringelmann's Scale for more than
an accumulated fifteen 115) minutes.
2. DUST - No dust of any kind produced by the industrial operations shall be
permitted to escape beyond the confines of the building in· which it is produced.
3. ODOR - No noxious odor of any kind shall be permitted to extent beyond the
lot lines. ·
4. GASES AND FUMES - No gases or fumes, toxic to persons or injurious to
property shall be permitted to escape beyond the building in which they occur.
5. GLARE - No bright dazzling light produced by the industry shall be seen from
any street or any residential area.
6. WATER POLLUTION - No industrial operation or activity shall discharge, or
cause to be discharged, liquid or solid wastes into public waters unless in
conformance with the provisions of the Stream Pollution Control Law of the
State of Indiana (Chapter 214, Acts of 1943, as amended)· and the regulations
promulgated thereunder. Plans and specifications for proposed sewage and
industrial waste treatment and disposal facilities shall be submitted to and
approval obtained from the Stream Pollution Control Board of the State of
Indiana.
7. FIRE HAZARDS - The storage, utilization or manufacture of solid materials or
products ranging from incombustible to moderate burning is permitted. The
storage, utilization or manufacture of flammable liquids or gases which produce
flammable or explosive vapors, shall be permitted in accordance with State and
Federal statutes and regulations.
77.
P:lsdsk\WORDPROCIBONAR\1567\ZONING\Section 5.doc (1-6-00)
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS SECTION V
8. PARTICULATE MATTER -
Boiler-Generated - No particulate matter from a flue or stack leading from a
boiler shall exceed .8 pounds per million BTU's.
Foundry-Generated - No particulate matter resulting from a foundry process
shall exceed the following:
Rate of Process
(Pounds Per Houri
Pounds of Particulate Matter Per Hour
1,000
2,000
3,000
4,000
5,000
6,000
7,000
8,000
9,000
10,000
12,000
16,000
18,000
20,000
30,000
40,000
50,000
60,000
70,000
80,000
90,000
100,000
3.00
4.70
6.35
8.00
9.65
11.30
12.90
14.00
15.50
16.65
18.70
21.60
22.80
24.00
30.00
36.00
42.00
48.00
49.00
50.50
51.60
52.60
Incinerator-Generated - No particulate matter resulting from an incinerator with
a capacity to process 200 or less pounds per hour shall exceed .3 pounds per
thousand pounds of dry gas at standard conditions. All other incinerators shall
not exceed five (5) pounds per thousand pounds of dry gas at standard
conditions. Further, all incinerators shall have a primary and secondary
combustion chamber.
All other processes - For all other processes, no particulate matter from any
stack or flue shall exceed a level determined by the following formulae:
Process under 60,000 pounds per hour
.67
E = 4.1 P
78A
l\BGVALPO\SDSK\sdsk\WORDPROC\BONAR\1567\ZONING\Section 5.doc (1-6-00)
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Process over 60,000 pounds per hour
. 11
E = 55P - 4P
Where:
E = Rate of emissions in pounds per hour
P = Rate of process in pounds per hour
SECTION V
9. EXPLOSIVE MATERIALS - No act1v1ty involving the storage, utilization or
manufacture of materials or products which decompose by detonation shall be
permitted unless specifically licensed by the Council. Such activity shall be
conducted in accordance with the rules promulgated by the State Fire Marshal
and the State Administrative Building Council. Such materials shall include, but
are not limited to, all primary explosives such as lead azide, lead styphnate,
fulminated, and tetracene; all high explosives such as TNT, ROX, HMX, PETN,
and picric acid; propellants and components thereof; such as nitrocellulose,
black powder, boron hydrides, hydrazine and its derivatives; pyrotechnics and
fireworks such as magnesium powder, potassium chlorate, and potassium
nitrate; blasting explosives such as dynamite and nitrogylcerine; unstable
organic compounds such as acetylides, tetrazoles, and ozonides; strong
oxidizing agents such as liquid oxygen, perchloric acid, perchlorates, chlorates,
and hydrogen peroxide in concentrations greater than thirty-five percent (35%);
and nuclear fuels, fissionable materials and products, and reactor elements
such as Uranium 235 and Plutonium 239.
10. If the State or Federal government shall adopt more restrictive environmental
controls, those requirements shall apply to the provisions of this ordinance.
788
\\BGVALPO\SDSK\sds.k\WORDPROCIBONAR\1567\ZONING\Section 5.doc (1-6-00)
PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS SECTION VI
6.1 INTENT OF PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICTS
The purposes of these regulations are to provide greater design flexibility in the development of land
when consistent with the Comprehensive Plan and intent of the Unified Zoning Ordinance. The use
of Planned Development zoning classifications shall be encouraged when the use of such regulations
promotes a harmonious variety of uses, and/or provides for an economy of shared services and
facilities, and/or are compatible with surrounding areas and/or foster the creation of attractive,
healthful, efficient and stable environments for living, shopping or working.
The Planned Development regulations and procedures may apply to the development of existing
developed lands, or vacant lands, and may apply to small and large scale parcels and their
relationship with other surrounding uses and the overall characteristic of the area in which it is
located.
Planned Development regulations are intended _to encourage innovations in land development
techniques so that the growing demands of the community may be met with greater flexibility and
variety in type, design and layout of sites and buildings and by the conservation and more efficient
use of open spaces and other amenities generally enhancing the quality of life of Nappanee residents.
Planned Development projects should also encourage a more efficient use of land, which reflects the
changes in the technology of land development, so that resulting economies may accrue to the benefit
of the community at large. Examples of this concept would include the preservation of existing trees
and the inclusion of recreation areas within new subdivisions.
6.2 CLASSIFICATIONS OF PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS
A PD-R Residential Planned Development
Any development consisting of not less than five (5) acres in which more than eighty percent
of the interior floor area of all buildings to be included in the development is used for
residential purposes or those accessory purposes customarily related to residential use.
B. PD-B Business Planned Development
Any development consisting of not less than four (4) acres in which eighty percent of the
interior floor area of all buildings to be included in the development is to be used for
commercial purposes.
C. PD-I Industrial Planned Development
Any development consisting of not less than ten (10) acres in which eighty percent of the total
interior and exterior area of all sites and structures be used for. manufacturing, warehousing,
or other light to medium.intensity industrial use.
D. PD-E Planned Development - Extraordinary
A development not otherwise distinguishable under any previous classification, containing
less than the minimum land area and/or less than the stated minimum proportions of any
single dominant use or function, and in which the proposed uses of interior and exterior
spaces require unusual design flexibility to achieve a completely logical and complementary
conjunction of uses and functions.
U:ILANTZ\NAPPANEEISECT.VI (3-21-98) 79.
PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS SECTION VI
6.3 ORIGINATION OF PROPOSALS
Any person or group of persons united in interest, acting jointly, and in pursuance to an agreement
to carry out a proposal may propose a Planned Development District in accordance with the
procedures hereinafter established. Such person or group of persons making such proposal,
however, must demonstrate the requisite capabilities to carry out such a proposal.
A parcel or site proposed for Planned Development need not be under single ownership where the
proposed development consists of a group of structures or improvements capable of being developed
separately but in accordance with a single, unitary plan, and in which the separate owners have given
their expressed intentions to enter into such private agreements between or among themselves as
will facilitate their mutual enterprise, and assure its completion as planned to the satisfaction of the
Commission.
6.4 FILING PROCEDURE
The authorization of a Planned Development (PO) shall be subject to the following procedures:
A petition for rezoning to an appropriate PD classification shall be submitted, which shall be signed
by the owner or owners of all real estate involved in the petition for the Planned Development, which
petition shall have attached thereto letters of consent of all such owners prior to the filing of such
petition, concerning the change to a PD classification of the real estate included.
The petition, which shall include a Preliminary Development Plan and plat for any area proposed for
development as a Planned Development shall be filed with the Plan Commission.
6.5 PRELIMINARY DEVELOPMENT PLAN
The following shall be included in the Preliminary Development Plan.
A Proposed layout of streets, open space and other basic elements of the plan;
B. General description of, location of, and types of structures on the site;
C. Proposals for handling traffic, parking, sewage disposal, drainage, tree preservation and
removal, lighting, signage, landscaping, and other pertinent development features;
D. A separate location map, to scale, shall show the boundary lines of adjacent land and the
existing zoning of the area proposed to be developed as well as the adjacent land;
E. A general statement of the covenants to be made a part of the Planned Development;
F. A statement of the proposed order of development of the major elements of the project,
including whether the development will be in phases, and, if so, the order and content of each
phase;
G. The use categories within the area, including proposed densities of said uses.
H. The preliminary plan shall be presented in triplicate and to a scale ratio not to exceed
1"=100'. The preliminary plan may include any additional graphics which will explain the
features of the development. It shall also be provided to the following checkpoint agencies
for their review and comment
U:ILANTZINAPPANEEISECT.Vl (3-21-98) 80.
PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS SECTION VJ
• Design Review Board
• Director of Public Works and Safety
• Nappanee Police Department
• Nappanee Fire Department.
• County Soil and Water Conservation District
• County Drainage Board
Within twenty-five (25) days after filing, the Administrator shall meet with the petitioner
regarding the preliminary plan and checkpoint agency comments. Checkpoint agency
personnel may attend this meeting to provide comments. After such consultation, the
petitioner may make modifications to the petition.
After the meeting described above and after making any modifications to the proposed
preliminary plans, the petitioner shall file in triplicate a "Final Proposed Preliminary Plan"
which shall:
-
1. Include all documents included in the preliminary plan.
2. Include an index identifying all documents included in the preliminary plan.
3. Include a cover sheet indicating that it is the Final Proposed Preliminary Plan and
indicating the date and zoning case number.
4. Be bound or stapled together and all documents therein reduced to a size no larger
than 8 Y:. x 14 inches except for the maps, sketches and plat (if any).
Such final proposed preliminary plan shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator at least ten
(10) days prior to the preliminary plan hearing.
6.6 PRELIMINARY PLAN HEARING
A. The petition, if and as modified, shall then be heard by the Plan Commission as a petition for
zoning map amendment and subject to the procedures applicable thereto. The Plan
Commission may recommend approval or disapproval of the plan and may impose any
reasonable condition(s) with its affirmative recommendation. If disapproval is recommended,
the application shall not be certified to the Common Council of the City of Nappanee. If
approval is recommended, the preliminary plan shall be stamped "Approved Preliminary
Planned Development" and be signed by the President and Secretary of the Plan
Commission. One copy shall be permanently retained in the office of the Plan Commission,
one copy shall be returned to the petitioner, and one copy and all conditions shall be certified
as described in (B) below.
B. The approved preliminary Planned Development shall then be certified to the Common
Council of the City of Nappanee for adoption as a Planned Development District pursuant to
the laws governing proposals to change zoning maps. Upon adoption by the legislative body,
the petitioner shall prepare the final detailed plan.
6.7 APPROVAL OF FINAL DETAILED PLAN
A Before any development takes place, the petitioner shall file with the Plan Commission a
minimum of seven sets of the final detailed plan specifying the location, composition, and
engineering features of all lots, storm drainage, sanitary sewage, water supply facilities,
public or private streets, recreation facilities, site perimeter treatment and buffering,
landscaping, plat and other site development features including locations of buildings. The
petitioner shall also file the original of all signed and notarized documents pertaining to
restrictive covenants, condominium declaration and/or the creation of a homeowners'··
U:ILANTZINAPPANEEISECT.VI (3-21-98) 81.
PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS SECTION VI
association, along with financial assurance for the satisfactory installation of all public
improvements in the form of bonds or such other assurances as are required in the normal -1-
procedures of platting pursuant to the provisions of Section VIII of this Ordinance. The Plan
Commission shall then approve said final detailed plans by resolution duly adopted, upon an
affirmative finding that the final detailed plan is consistent with the approved Preliminary
Planned Development as adopted and passed by the Common Council of the City of
Nappanee upon rezoning. Having so once approved the final detailed plan, the Plan
Commission shall have no further authority to review or act thereon, except as to
enforcemen~ except as to an amendatory ordinance, and except as hereafter provided for.
B. The approved Preliminary Plan may provide for development of the property involved in
phases. If such phasing is included as a part of the approval of the preliminary plan, the
petitioner may submit partial final detailed plans which correspond to the phases involved.
Such partial final detailed plans, when approved, shall be treated in the same manner as
approved final detailed plans for an entire Planned Development.
C. The approved final detailed plan or phase thereof shall be stamped "Approved Final Detailed
Planned Development" and be signed by the President and Secretary with one copy
permanently retained in the office of the Plan Commission following recordation as specified
in Section 6.9.
D. Unless extended by the Plan Commission pursuant to Section 6.12, approval of the first
phase of the final detailed plan shall be obtained within two (2) years and approval of the
balance of the final detailed plan shall be obtained within five (5) years after adoption of the
Planned Development District by the Common Council of the City of Nappanee.
E. In the event that approval of a final detailed plan is not timely obtained, the Plan Commission
may initiate an amendment to the zoning map relating to said land.
F. In the exercise of continuing jurisdiction, the Administrator may from time to time approve
only minormodificafions of the approved Final Detailed Planned Development in a manner
consistent with the approved Preliminary Planned Development. Such modifications shall
not include any increase in density, any lessening of aesthetic treatments, ·any alteration of
frontage or building location, any change in type of use, or any change in access points.
G. Approval of a final detailed plan shall expire after a period of five (5) years from the approved
phasing of the preliminary plan unless the development is fifty percent (50%) completed in
terms of public improvements including streets, parks, walkways, utility installations and
sanitary sewers. Determination of the amount of completion shall be made by the Plan
Commission upon a recommendation of the Administrator. Following expiration of the final
detailed plan, the City of Nappanee shall declare the bond to be in default and cause all
public improvements to be installed according to the final detailed plans.
6.8 COVENANTS AND MAINTENANCE
A. All covenants, when required by the Plan Commission, shall be set forth in detail and shall
provide for a provision for the release of such restriction by execution of a document so
stating and suitable for recording, signed by the Plan Commission President and Secretary
upon authorization by the Plan Commission and all of the owners of property in the area
involved in the petition for whose benefit the covenant was created. Such covenants shall
provide that their benefits run to the Plan Commission and shall be specifically enforceable
by the Plan Commission in addition to the property owners.
B. The Plan Commission may require the recording of covenants for any reasonable public or
U:\LANTZ\NAPPANEE\SECT.VI (3-21-98) 82.
PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS SECTION VI
semi-public purpose, including, but not limited to, the allocation of land by the petitioner for
public thoroughfares, parks, schools, recreational facilities, and other public and semi-public
purposes. Such covenants shall provide that if a governmental unit or agency thereof does
not proceed with acquisition of the allocated land within a specified period of time, the
covenants shall automatically terminate. If such termination occurs, the petitioners shall then
submit for approval by the Plan Commission a modified final detailed plan for such land,
otherwise consistent with the approved Preliminary Planned Development.
C. The Commission may require the recording of covenants for any other reasonable purpose,
including, but not limited to, imposing standards for development of property in a Planned
Development Such development standards may include, but are not limited to, requirements
concerning the following:
1. Lot area.
2. Floor area.
3. Ratios of floor space to land space.
4. Area in which structures may be built ("buildable area").
5. Open space.
6. Setback lines and minimum yards.
7. Building separations.
8. Height of structures.
9. Signs.
10. Off-street parking and loading space.
11. Design standards (including landscaping requirements).
12. Phasing of development.
D. Adequate provision shall be made for a private organization with direct responsibility to, and
control by, the property owners involved to provide for the operation and maintenance of all
common facilities including private streets join~y shared by such property owners if such
facilities are a part of the Planned Development, arid, in such instance legal assurances shall
be provided and recorded which show that the private organization is self-perpetuating.
E. Common facilities which are not dedicated to the public shall be maintained to standards
assuring continuous and adequate maintenance. Common facilities not dedicated to the
public shall be operated and maintained at no expense to any governmental unit.
F. All private streets shall be maintained by the aforementioned private organization in such a
manner that adequate access is provided at all times to vehicular traffic so that fire, police,
health, sanitation, and public utility vehicles can serve the properties contiguous or adjacent
thereto, and so that said vehicles will have adequate turning area. All streets and roadways
not dedicated to the public shall be operated and maintained at no expense to any
governmental unit.
6.9 RECORDING
All approved Final Detailed Planned Development Plans and Plats and modifications thereof shall be
recorded in the Office of the County Recorder within two (2) years after approval, but before any
development takes place.
Failure to so record shall automatically void the approval of the Final Detailed Planned Development.
Where upon completion of all development, the exact measurements, as to the location of buildings
or structures erected during the development, are deemed desirable for public record by recording
thereof, the developer may submit a copy of the approved Final Detailed Planned Development to the
U:\LANTZ\NAPPANEE\SECT.VI (3-21-98) 83.
PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS SECTION VI
Administrator as an amended approved Final Detailed Planned Development with the exact
measurements thereon shown, and upon being satisfied that the measurements are substantially the · 1-
same as indicated on the original approved Final Detailed Planned Development, shall reapprove, /
date and sign said amended approved Final Detailed Planned Development, which the developer
shall then record. ·
6.10 PERMIT
An Improvement Location Permit shall be issued for a Planned Development District upon full
compliance with the approved Final Detailed Planned Development.
6.11 CONSTRUCTION
A. No construction or installation work shalr be done on any public improvements until the
petitioner has, at least twenty-four (24) hours in advance, notified the appropriate
Governmental lnspector(s) of his intention to begin such work, in order that inspections may
be made as the work progresses.
B. All development shall be in conformity with the approved and recorded Final Detailed
Planned Development and any material deviations from the approved and recorded Final
Detailed Planned Development shall be subject to appropriate enforcement action as
provided for in this Ordinance. ·
6.12 EXTENSIONS, ABANDONMENT, AND EXPIRATION
A. Extensions of the time for accomplishing any matters set forth herein may be granted by the
Plan Commission at a public hearing for good cause shown. ·
B. Upon the abandonment of a development authorized under this section (abandonment shall
be deemed to have occurred when no improvements have been made pursuant to the
approved Final Detailed Planned Development for twenty-four [24] consecutive months), or
upon the expiration of five (5) years from the approval of a Final Detailed Planned
Development for a development which has not been completed, an amendment may be
initiated as provided by law to the zoning map so that the land will be zoned into a category
or categories which most nearly approximate its then existing use or such other zoning
category or categories which the legislative body deems appropriate.
6.13 RULES OF PROCEDURE
All proceedings brought under this section shall be subject to the Rules of Procedure of the Plan
Commission, where not inconsistent with the procedure otherwise stated herein.
6.14 LIMITATION OF REZONING
The Plan Commission shall not initiate any amendments to the zoning map concerning the property
involved in a Planned Development before completion of the development as long as the
development is in conformity with the approved Final Detailed Planned Development and is
proceeding in accordance with the time requirements imposed herein.
U:\LANTZINAPPANEE\SECT.Vl (3-21-98) 84.
SIGN REGULATIONS SECTION VII
7.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
This Section of the Nappanee Unified Zoning & Subdivision Control Ordinance shall be known as the
"Sign Regulations" of the City of Nappanee.
7.2 DEFINITIONS
All terms used in this Section, not otherwise defined herein, shall have the definitions provided in
Section II of this Ordinance.
7.3 PERMITS REQUIRED, FEES
A. Permits Required
Except as otherwise provided herein, it shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct,
enlarge, move or convert any sign, or change the penmanent copy on an existing sign
structure within the jurisdiction of the Nappanee Advisory Plan Commission, or cause the
same to be done without first obtaining a sign penmit for each sign from the Zoning
Administrator.
B. Application
Application for a penmit shall be made to the Zoning Administrator upon a form provided and
shall be accompanied by such information as may be required to assure compliance with the
laws and regulations of the City, including:
1. Name and address of the property owner of the premises on which the sign is
located or is to be located.
2. Name and address of the owner of the sign.
3. Clear and legible drawings with description showing the location of the sign which
is the subject of the permit, and all other signs whose construction requires permits
when such signs are on the same premises.
4. Any individual or company seeking to erect, construct, alter, repair, improve,
maintain, convert or manufacture any sign adjacent to or visible from any state or
federal roadway shall register in writing, a statement that they have all necessary
licenses and/or approvals from the other affected governmental agencies.
5. Permission in writing from the person in possession or ownership of shopping
centers and/or industrial premises shall be supplied as part of the application
documentation.
C. Permit Fees
The application, including all required documentation shall be filed with the Zoning
Administrator together with a permit fee as specified by the Official Fee Schedule If any sign
is hereafter erected, placed, installed or otherwise established on any property before
obtaining a permit as required herein, the fees specified shall be doubled. Payment of such
double fee shall not relieve any person from compliance with other provisions of this
Ordinance and penalties prescribed herein.
85.
P:\sdsk\WORDPROC\BONAR\ 1567\ZONING\Section 7.doc 11-3-00)
SIGN REGULA TJONS SECTION VII
D. Effect of Sign Permit Issuance
No permit for a sign issued hereunder shall be deemed to constitute permission or
authorization to maintain an unlawful sign nor shall.a permit issued hereunder constitute a
defense in an action to abate an unlawful sign.
E. Nullification
A sign permit shall become null and void if the work authorized thereunder has not been
started within a period one (1) year following the date of the permit and completed within six
(6) months thereafter.
F. Permit Exceptions
The following shall not be considered as creating a sign and therefore shall not be required
to have sign permit unless otherwise sp,.cified.
1. Changeable Copy - The changing of advertising copy or message on an approved
sign such as a theater marquee and similar approved signs which are specifically
designed for use of replaceable copy.
2. Maintenance - Painting, repainting, cleaning, or other normal maintenance and repair
of a sign or sign structure unless a structural change is involved, or a change in copy
is involved. The changing of logo or verbiage on a sign to update or modernize an
existing business's sign without changing ownership or company name is permitted.
3. Temporary or Exempt Sign - Temporary sign as listed per Section 7.8 and exempt
signs per Section 7.7 of this Ordinance are exempt from permit requirements unless
specified elsewhere.
G. Variances
A variance from the sign regulations of this Ordinance may be granted through the
procedures established in Section 11.4 of this Ordinance.
7.4 INSPECTION, REMOVAL, SAFETY
A. Inspection
Signs for which a permit is required may be inspected periodically by the Zoning
Administrator for compliance with this Ordinance and other codes of the City.
8. Removal of Sign
The Zoning Administrator may order the removal of any sign erected or maintained in
violation of this Article. He shall give thirty (30) days' written notice to the owner of a
permanent sign or place a notice of such violation on the building, structure, premises, or
sign in violation to remove the sign or to bring it into compliance. He shall give a three (3)day
notice for temporary or portable signs. The Zoning Administrator may remove a sign
immediately and without notice if, in his opinion, the condition of the sign is such as to
presenfan immediate threat to the safety of the public.
Any sign removed by the Zoning Administrator and/or his agent, pursuant to the provisions
of this Section shall be held by the City for redemption by the owner. To redeem, the owner
86.
P:\sdsk\WORDPROC\BONAR\ 1567\ZONING\Section 7.doc 11-3-00)
SIGN REGULATIONS SECTION VII
shall pay all costs incurred by the City for removal. Should said sign not be redeemed within
thirty (30) days of its removal, it may be disposed of in any manner deemed appropriate by
the City. The cost of removal shall include any and all incidental expenses incurred by the
. City in connection with the sign's removal.
C. Maintenance
All signs and components thereof shall be kept in good repair and in safe, neat, clean and
attractive condition. Failure to comply will automatically revoke the permit after such
noncompliance has been determined by the Zoning Administrator and notice has been given
to the owner of the sign as reflected by the records of the Zoning Administrator.
D. Abandoned Signs
A sign shall be removed by the owner or lessee of the premises upon which the sigh is
located when the business which it advertjses is no longer conducted on the premises. If the
owner or lessee fails to remove it, the Zoning Administrator shall give the owner ten (10)
days' written notice to remove it. Upon failure to comply with this notice, the Zoning
Administrator or his duly authorized representative may remove the sign at cost to the owner.
Where a successor to a defunct business agrees to maintain the sign(s) as provided in this
Article, this removal requirement shall not apply. The new sign user shall forthwith notify the
Zoning Administrator's office, in writing, of this change. No new sign permit is required unless
the sign is altered or relocated. The Zoning Administrator shall be notified in any matters
relating to sign relocations.
At the discretion of the Zoning Administrator, in cooperation with the Historic Preservation
Commission or the Redevelopment Commission, a sign having historic or other significant
value may be exempt from the requirements of this provision.
E. Street Improvement Projects
Any sign projecting over a roadway right-of-way at the time of the effective date of this
Ordinance which was subject to removal or relocation at the owner's expense, pursuant to
a permit or other ordinance of the City, shall be removed by the owner, or altered at the
owner's expense to comply with the regulations of this Section if, as the result of or after
completion of a roadway improvement project, said sign does not or would not comply with
the provisions of this Ordinance.
F. Assurance of Discontinuance
As an additional means of enforcement, the Zoning Administrator may accept an assurance
of discontinuance of any act or practice deemed in violation of any rule or regulation adopted
pursuant thereto, from any owner or person engaging in such act or practice. Such
assurance shall be in writing and shall specify a time limit during which said discontinuance
is to be accomplished. Failure to perform the assurance shall constitute prima facia proof
of a violation of this Ordinance or any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, which
makes the alleged act or practice unlawful for the purpose of securing any injunctive relief
from a court of competent jurisdiction.
7.5 NONCONFORMING USES AND SIGNS
Signs which existed prior (nonconforming) to the time this Ordinance was passed .and were in
conformance with previous ordinances will be legally nonconforming (grandfathered) until such time
a major change is made to the sign. Major changes include changing the name, changing the size,
87.
P:\sdsk\WORDPROC\BONAR\ 1567\ZONING\Section 7.doc 11-3-00)
SIGN REGULATIONS SECTION VII
adding lights, refurbishing, and/or relocation.
All signs shall be kept in good repair and safe, neat, clean and attractive ccndition. In the event signs
are not kept in said condition or are demolished by any force whatsoever to the extent of fifty percent
(50%) or more of the fair market value of the sign structure, said signs shall then conform to this
Ordinance.
Nonconfonming signs which are structurally altered, relocated, or replaced shall comply immediately
with all provisions of this Ordinance. Nothing in this Ordinance shall be construed to give a legal
status to any sign without a sign permit.
7.6 PROHIBITED SIGNS
The following type signs are expressly prohibited in all Zone Districts:
"A" Frame Signs - "A" frame signs or sandwich board, sidewalk or curb signs are prohibited if it is
deemed hazardous to pedestrian traffic by the Zoning Administrator.
Abandoned Signs - Such business signs that advertise an activity, business, product or service no
longer conducted or available.
Animated and Intensely Lighted Signs - No sign shall be permitted which is animated by means of
flashing, scintillating, blinking or traveling lights or any other device or means not providing constant
illumination. Public service information signs and other electronic message centers classified as
"changing signs" are penmitted under special provision of this Section and by special sign permit
approval of the Advisory Plan Commission. ·
Lights and Balloons - Search lights, "twirling signs", balloons or other gas-filled figures shall be
prohibited except as set forth below. Such items shall be penmitted in a commercial or industrial
district for a period not to exceed fourteen ( 14) days per event, and may not be used for more than
two (2) events per calendar year and will be penmitted in resid!"ntial districts in conjunction with an
open house or model home demonstration conducted by a real estate agent for two (2) days after and
not to exceed a total period of ten (10) days.
Miscellaneous Signs and Posters - The tacking, pasting or otherwise affixing of signs of a
miscellaneous character, visible from a roadway, located on the walls of buildings, barns, sheds, on
trees, poles, posts, fences or other structures are prohibited unless otherwise permitted by this
Ordinance.
Moving Signs - No sign or any portion thereof shall be penmitted which moves or assumes any motion
or gives the illusion of moving.
Off-Premise Signs - Off-premise signs shall be prohibited except as expressly permitted in this
Ordinance.
Projecting Signs - No privately owned sign shall project over or into the street cartway.
Public Areas - No sign shall be permitted which is placed on any post, pole, electrolier, hydrant,
bridge, tree or other surface located on public property or over or across any street or roadway except
as otherwise expressly authorized by this Ordinance.
Towers (Water, Radio, Etc.) - No sign shall be placed on any tower or tank withoutthe approval of
the Advisory Plan Commission.
88.
P:\sdsk\WORDPROC\BONAR\ 1567\ZONJNG\Section 7.doc (1·3·00)
SIGN REGULATIONS SECTION VII
Unclassified Signs - The following signs are prohibited which:
a. Bear or contain statements, words or pictures of an obscene or pornographic
character, or which contain advertising matter which is untruthful or will offend public
morals or decency; or
b. Are painted on or attached to any fence or any wall which is not structurally a part
of a building except to identify a residence or residence structure by means of
posting the name of the occupant or structure and the street address; or
c. Operate or employ any motion picture projection or media in conjunction with any
advertisements, or have visible moving parts of any porton of which moves or gives
the illusion of movements except as permitted in this Ordinance; or
ct. Emit audible sound, odor or visible matter; or
e. Signs which, by reason of their size, shape, location, movement, content, coloring,
or manner of illumination, may be confused with a traffic control sign, signal or
device, or the light of an emergency or road equipment vehicle or which hide from
view any traffic or roadway sign, signal or device; or
f. Obstruct any door, fire escape, stairway, or any opening intended to provide air,
egress or ingress for any building or structure; or
g. Are not included under the types of signs permitted in this Ordinance.
h. Small, free-standing signs shall be prohibited unless otherwise permitted in this
Ordinance.
7.7 EXEMPTIONS
The following types of signs are exempted from all prov1s1ons of this Ordinance except for
construction and safety regulations and the following requirements.
Business Identification Sign -An identification sign on or near (above or beside) a public entrance
or service entrance to a business in a B-1, B-2, R-4, or 1-1 zone is permitted provided such signs are
mounted fiush against the wall, and that such signs shall not exceed ten percent (10%) of the front
of the building.
Damaged Signs - A sign erected under a legally obtained permit which is damaged or destroyed fifty
percent (50%) or more of the fair market value of the sign structure by wind, weather, or other
accidental means beyond the control of the applicant may be replaced or restored to its original size,
shape, and location (as prior to the accident) without obtaining an additional permit. Replacement of
a damaged or destroyed sign with a new sign or different size or location from the original sign shall
require a permit. ·
Integral Signs - Names of building, date of erection, monumental citations, commemorative tablets
and the like when carved into stone, concrete or similar material or made of bronze, aluminum, or
other permanent type construction and made an integral part of the structure.
Parking Signs - Signs for public and private parking shall be permitted.· Such signs shall be subject
to a three- (3) foot setback from right-of-way and shall not be used for advertising purposes. Signs
shall be no higher than six (6) feet and no greater than six (6) square feet in area. Such signs shall
be installed so as to not present a hazard to traffic entering or leaving the premises.
89.
P:\sdsk\WORDPROC\BONAR\ 1567\ZONING\Section 7.doc 11 ·3·00)
SIGN REGULA T/ONS SECTION VII
Private Traffic Direction Signs - Signs directing traffic movement onto or within a premise. Illumination
of these signs shall be permitted in accordance with Section 7.9. The leading edge of such signs
shall be a minimum of three (3) feet from any curb or traffic movement aisle, the sign shall be no
higher than three (3) feet and no greater tha.n six (6) square feet in area.
Public Signs - Signs of a noncommercial nature and in the public interest erected by or on the order
of public officer(s) in the performance of his public duty, such as safety signs, danger signs,
trespassing signs, traffic signs, memorial plaques, signs of historical interest, signs directing the
traveling public and quasi-public facilities, or signs on public buildings or structures and the like.
Banners and Pennants - Banners and pennants shall be permitted only as a temporary sign as
specified in Section 7.8 of this Ordinance.
Small Signs -A nameplate which shall not exceed two (2) square feet in area is permitted for each
dwelling unit of a single-family or multi-family dwelling; such nameplate shall state nothing other than
the name and/or address of the occupant and/or legal customary home occupation. No other sign
shall be allowed. This paragraph shall not be construed to prohibit each dwelling unit from also
displaying a house number plate for identification. Signs on the premises announcing rooms,
apartments, or house for sale or rent shall not exceed six (6) square feet in area. Also provided that
the signs are located three (3) feet from the street right-of-way.
Social or Charitable Organizations - Signs indicating the names and locations of churches·, charitable
organizations, and community service organizations are permitted provided that the sign area shall
not exceed six (6) square feet, shall be located at least three (3) feet off the street right-of-way, and
shall in no way obstruct the view of pedestrians or vehicular traffic. Such signs shall be permitted as
"off-premises" signs; providing, however, such signs have a minimum spacing of five hundred (500)
feet between any two (2) signs in this category, except where there is a community service central
display.
Vehicle Signs - Signs on vehicles are permitted provided the sign is painted or attached directly to
the body of the. original motor-powered vehicle and does not project or extend beyond the original
manufactured body proper of the motor-driven vehicle. Such vehicles and/or semi-trailers shall be
parked a minimum distance often (10) feet from any street right-of-way and shall be located so as
to not create an obstruction or hazard to the traveling public. Trucks and/or trailers may be used as
signs for special events or sales for a maximum period of thirty (30) days.
Window Signs - Window signs are permitted provided such signs conform to the construction,
illumination, and safety regulations of this Ordinance.
7.8 TEMPORARY SIGNS
The following signs shall be permitted at any location within the City of Nappanee and shall be
required to have a permit unless otherwise specified:
Construction Signs - Construction signs which identify the architects, engineers, contractors and
other individuals or firms involved with the construction but not including any advertisement of any
product, and signs announcing the character of the building enterprise or the purpose for which the
building is intended during the construction period to a maximum of thirty-two (32) square feet for
each firm. The minimum setback shall be ten (10) feet from any street right-of-way. The sign shall
be confined to the site of construction and shall be removed within thirty (30) days after the end of
construction. No permit shall be required, and the maximum time limit shall be two (2) years, or the
duration of construction, whichever is shorter.
Garage Sale Signs - Signs advertising the sale of miscellaneous household items for the purpose of
90.
P:\sdsk\WORDPROC\BONAR\ 1567\ZONING\Section 7.doc (1-3-00)
SIGN REGULATIONS SECTION VII
a residential "garage" or "yard" sale shall not exceed four (4) square feet in area. Such signs may
be erected on the premises one week in advance of the sale and shall be removed within forty-eight
(48) hours after the sale. No permit shall be required. Per l.C. 35-43-1-2, garage sale signs are
prohibited from being posted on utility poles ..
Political Campaign Signs - Political campaign signs announcing the candidates seeking public
political office shall be confined within private property and not within the street right-of-way. They
shall be permitted no more than sixty (60) days prior to the scheduled election and shall be removed
within fourteen (14) days after the election for which they were made. Such signs shall be placed at
least three (3) feet from any public right-of-way and shall not require a permit
Portable Signs - Signs placed upon wheels or lightweight frames for convenient moving and with
changeable letter boards for convenient changing of copy, shall be utilized only as noted below:
Portable signs shall be permitted in a commercial or industrial district, provided that such sign shall:
a. Be located not less than five (5) feet from any public right-of-way; and
b. . Not extend more than seven (7) feet from ground level; and
c. Not obstruct the fiow or sight pattern of vehicular traffic on any established right-ofway;
and
d. Not be less than ten (10) feet from adjoining residential lots; and
e. Have a face not exceeding thirty-two (32) square feet; and
f. Not have blinking lights; and
g. Be used for no more than sixty (60) days per calendar year; and
h. Be used for no more than thirty (30) consecutive days; and
i. Not be used for a period of at least fiftenn (15) days between uses; and
j. Be used no more than two (2) times in each of the six month periods listed below:
• January 1 through June 30
• July 1 through December 31; and
k. First obtain a permit from the Zoning Administrator.
I. Service and charitable organizations shall be permitted the use of these portable
signs six (6) times per calendar year for a maximum of fourteen (14) days each time.
m. Businesses located in a residential district shall NOT be permitted the use of these
portable signs.
Real Estate Signs - One (1) real estate sign advertising the sale, rental, or lease of the premises or
part of the premises on which the sign is displayed shall not exceed six (6) square feet in R-1 and R-2
Districts; and thirty-two (32) square feet in R-3, R-4, business, or industrial districts. Such signs shall
be removed within fourteen (14) days of the sale, rental, or lease. The minimum setback from street
right-of-way shall be ten (10) feet. Signs shall refiect no advertising or promotional material other
than to indicate the party listing the property for sale, rental, or lease. ·Such sign shall not be required
to obtain a permit. "A" frame real estate directional signs shall be pemnitted for a period of forty-eight
91.
P:\sdsk\WORDPROC\BONAR\ 1567\ZONING\Section 7.doc 11-3-00)
SIGN REGULATIONS SECTION VII
(48) hours in a seven- (7) day period.
Banners - Banners shall be permitted in a commercial or industrial district only under the following
conditions:
a. It shall be placed as a building wall sign and shall adhere to the stipulations as noted
elsewhere in this Ordinance; and
b. Be used for no more than ninety (90) days per calendar year; and
c. Be used for no more than thirty (30) consecutive days; and
d. Not be used for a period of at least fifteen (15) days between uses; and
e. Be used no more than three (3) times in each of the six month periods listed below:
• January 1 through June 30
• July 1 through December 31.
f. Street banners shall be permitted in designated areas and shall be permitted for a
period of thirty (30) days. The requesting organization shall provide proof of
insurance and be responsible for installation and removal of banner.
g. Banners shall be permitted in a residential district two (2) times per calendar year
for a maximum of seven (7) days each time.
Subdivision or Multi-Family Sign - One (1) temporary subdivision or multiple-family project identity
sign indicating only the name and/or address of the premises and/or the name of the management.
Such a sign shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet ·at area and shall be located a minimum
distance often (10) feet from any street right-of-way. Excepting, however, for each additional foot
beyond ten (10) feet that the setback distance is increased, the face area of the sign may be
increased by one (1) square foot up to a maximum allowable size of one hundred (100) square feet.
The maximum time period will be twelve (12) months from the date the sign permit is issued. Such
sign may be extended for another twelve (12) months by the Advisory Plan Commission or until the
project is eight-five percent (85%) completed or is occupied. Temporary project signs shall be
removed within ten (10) days of the erection of any permanent or temporary project identity sign.
Temporary Off-Premises Signs - Off premises signs of not larger than 7 square feet may be placed
off premises with the property owners' permission for a period of not more than three (3) days.
7.9 ILLUMINATION
All signs must meet the illumination criteria listed below:
A. All illuminated signs must meet the standards as specified in the National Electric Code, as
adopted and amended by the State of Indiana.
B. No sign shall have blinking, fiashing, or ftuttering lights, nor shall any device be utilized which
has a changing light intensity, brightness or color, or give such illusion.
C. The full number of illuminating elements thereof shall be kept in satisfactory working condition
or be immediately repaired or replaced. Signs that are only partially illuminated shall meet
all electrical requirements for that portion directly illuminated. All electrical wiring shall be
in conduit and not exposed to the elements of external streets in any way. All electrical signs
92.
P:\sdsk\WORDPROC\BONAR\ 1567\ZONING\Section 7.doc 11-3-00)
SIGN REGULA T!ONS SECTION VII
shall have a disconnecting switch located in a readily accessible place.
D. The direct non-reflected light from a primary light source shall not create a traffic hazard to
operators of motor vehicles on public and/or private roadways.
E. The light from any illuminated sign shall be so shaded, shielded, or directed that the light
intensity or brightness will not be objectionable to the surrounding areas. No light shall shine
directly onto adjacent property.
7.10 SIGN STANDARDS BY ZONING DISTRICTS
A The following sign standards by districts are intended to apply to every zoning district within
the jurisdiction of the City of Nappanee. The districts are as defined in Section 3.1 of this
Ordinance and are shown on the Official !IJlap. Only signs as described herein and as may
be described under Sections 7.7 and 7.8 shall be permitted in each particular zone.
B. If any zone is omitted from this Ordinance, or if a new district is created after enactment of
this Ordinance, no sign shall be permitted therein until this Ordinance is amended to include
the new district.
7.11 RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
These regulations shall apply to all districts designated as R-1, R-2, R-3, or R-4, Single-Family,
Multiple-Family, Cluster Housing, Condominiums, High-Rise Apartments, Residential Office, or any
combination of residential uses.
A Single-Family Residential (R-1)
The following signs shall be permitted in an R-1 District:
1. One (1) nameplate not exceeding a combined area of two (2) square feet in area is
permitted for single family homes. Said nameplate shall not be subject to the permit
requirements of this Ordinance, but shall be in conformance with the provisions of
this ordinance and other City standards.
2. Signs in conjunction with home occupations, not exceeding two (2) square feet shall
not be illuminated.
3. A church, school, golf course, lodge, or public building bulletin board or sign, not
exceeding thirty-two (32) square feet in area, may be illuminated but shall conform
to the provisions of Section 7 .9 of this Ordinance. A wall sign not exceeding one
hundred (100) square feet, stating only the name of the church, school, golf course,
lodge, or public building may be approved by the Advisory Plan Commission not to
exceed one hundred (100) square feet.
4. For commercial uses either permitted or allowed by special exception (not home
occupations) in an R-1 district, an illuminated nameplate of not more that two (2)
square feet and/or ground sign of not more than thirty-two (32) square feet shall be
permitted. ·
5. Any sign as permitted under Sections 7.8 and 7.7 of this Ordinance.
93.
P:\sdsk\WORDPROC\BONAR\ 1567\ZONING\Section 7.doc (1-3-00)
SIGN REGULA T/ONS SECTION VII
6. One (1) subdivision identity sign as permitted under Section 7.8 of this Ordinance.
Such sign shall not be illuminated. In the event the subdivision has entries from
more than one (1) street, additional identity signs may be permitted by the Advisory
Plan Commission.
7. Penmanent or temporary subdivision identity signs shall be permitted. In the event
the subdivision has entries from more than one (1) street, additional signs may be
permitted by the Advisory Plan Commission. Any temporary signs as provided by
Section 7. 7 of this Ordinance shall be removed before a permanent sign may be
erected. A maximum of two (2) signs shall be permitted for the main entryway. Said
signs shall not exceed six (6) feet in height and shall be located at least ten (10) feet
from any street right-of-way. Maximum size shall be one hundred (100) square feet
in area.
B. Two-Family and Multi-Family Residential (R-2 and R-3)
The following signs shall be permitted in -an R-2 or R-3 District:
1. For each duplex and/or multiple-family building, one (1) nameplate per occupancy
not to exceed two (2) square feet in area is penmitted. Such nameplate shall not be
subject to the permit requirements of this Ordinance. No illumination shall be
permitted.
2. Home occupation signage as provided in Section 7.11 A 2 may be utilized.
3. A church, school, golf course, lodge, or public building ground sign, not exceeding
thirty-two (32) square feet in area is permitted-at each major entrance and may be
illuminated but shall confonm to Sections 7.9 and 7.1 O of this Ordinance. An
additional wall sign stating only the name of the church, school, golf course, lodge,
or public building may be approved by the Advisory Plan Commission not to exceed
one hundred (100) square feet.
4. Any sign as penmitted under Sections 7.7 or 7.8 of this Ordinance is permitted. Only
the multi-family project identity sign may be illuminated but shall conform to Section
7.9 of this Ordinance.
5. For commercial uses either permitted or allowed by special exception (not home
occupations) in an R-2 or R-3 district, an illuminated nameplate of not more than two
(2) square feet and/or ground sign of not more than thirty-two (32) square feet shall
be permitted.
6. A maximum of two (2) permanent or temporary multi-family project identity signs
shall be permitted for the main entryway. In the event the project has entries from
more than one (1) street, additional identity signs may be permitted by the Advisory
Plan Commission. Any temporary sign, as provided in Section 7.8 of this Ordinance
shall be removed before a penmanent sign may be erected. Project identity signs
shall not exceed six (6) feet in height and shall be located at least ten ( 10) feet from
any street right-of-way. Maximum size shall be one hundred (100) square feet in
area.
C. Office Residential (R-4)
The following signs shall be permitted in an R-4 District:
1. One (1) nameplate not exceeding a combined area of two (2) square feet in area is
94.
P:\sdsk\WORDPROC\BONAR\ 1567\ZONING\Section 7.doc 11-3-00)
SIGN REGULA TJONS SECTION Vil
permitted for single family homes. Said nameplate shall not be subject to the permit
requirements of this Ordinance, but shall be in conformance with the provisions of
this ordinance and other City standards.
2. For each duplex and/or multiple-family building, one (1) nameplate per occupancy
not to exceed two (2) square feet in area is permitted. Such nameplate shall not be
subject to the permit requirements of this Ordinance. No illumination shall be
permitted.
3. Home occupation signage as provided in Section 7.11 A 2 may be utilized.
4. A church, school, golf course, lodge, or public building ground sign, not exceeding
thirty-two (32) square feet in area is permitted at each major entrance and may be
illuminated but shall conform to Sections 7.9 and 7.1 O of this Ordinance. An
additional wall sign stating only the name of the church, school, golf course, lodge,
or public building may be approved by the Advisory Plan Commission not to exceed
one hundred (100) square feet.
5. For commercial uses either permitted or allowed by special exception (not home
occupations) in an R-4 district, an illuminated nameplate of not more than two (2)
square feet and/or ground sign of not more than thirty-two (32) square feet shall be
permitted.
6. Any sign as permitted under Sections 7.8 and 7.7 of this Ordinance.
D. Location
1. A permanent or temporary identity sign for a single-family subdivision or for a multifamily
project shall be placed a minimum distance of ten (1 O) feet from any street
right-of-way. The face of any such sign shall not exceed one hundred (100) square
feet in area.
2. Building-mounted signs shall be flush mounted. There shall be no projection of any
sign above the roof line.
3. All signs shall be placed a minimum often (10) feetfrom any street right-of-way.
4. Permitted signs shall not be placed on utility easements or drainage easements as
defined on recorded plats or site plans without the express consent of the Advisory
Plan Commission and all applicable utilities or other agencies.
5. Signs shall not be placed as to interfere with the sight path of vehicular traffic.
6. Permanent or temporary identity signs for residential projects shall not exceed six
(6) feet in height and may be constructed as free-standing ground signs or placed
on decorative walls or fences.
7.12 BUSINESS/COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
A. General
The regulations described in this Section shall apply to all uses in B-1 and B-2 Districts.
B. Free-Standing Single Use Buildings
95.
P:\sdsk\WORDPROC\BONAR\ 1567\ZONING\Section 7.doc 11-3-00)
SIGN REGULA TJONS SECTION VII
Permitted signs for free-standing buildings having a single occupant are as follows:
1. Ground or Pole Signs - Either one (1) ground sign or one (1) pole sign (but not both)
indicating o.nly the name and nature of the occupancy shall be permitted for each
business parcel: Such sign shall not exceed one hundred (100) square feet in area
and a pole sign shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height. Such sign shall be
installed in accordance with location criteria as explained in Section 7.11 of this
Ordinance. Such ground sign may be illuminated as provided in Section 7.9 of this
Ordinance. Where the business lot frontage is one hundred (100) feet or less, only
a ground sign shall be permitted. Such ground or pole signs should be adequately
landscaped.
2. Wall Signs - Signage on the wall of a building shall not exceed twenty percent (20%)
of the total area of the wall, up to a maximum of two hundred (200) square feet per
wall. In computing wall area for the purposes of this Section, the areas covered by
doors or windows shall be excluded.
3. Marquee Signs - Marquee signs are permitted on the face of marquees subject to
approval of the Advisory Plan Commission. The lower edge of the marquee sign
shall be no less than eight (8) feet above the sidewalk at any point. Unless
otherwise approved by the Commission, no part of such sign shall project above the
roof line.
4. Bench Signs - Bench signs which are located for the convenience of the public may
be approved by the Plan Commission.
5. Awnings - Awning signs are permitt.ed on awnings subject to approval of the Plan
Commission. The lower edge of the awning shall be no less than eight (8) feet
above the sidewalk at any point, unless approved by the Commission.
C. Shopping Centers
Permitted signs for shopping centers and other multi-occupant commercial/office buildings
are as follows:
1. Pole Signs - Pole signs at shopping centers may be made a part of the site
development plan or erected at a later date, subject to the approval of the Advisory
Plan Commission and shall meet the following requirements:
a. One (1) pole sign shall be permitted; and
b. Such sign shall indicate only the name and location of such business or
businesses; and
c. Such sigh shall have a maximum surface area not exceeding two hundred
(200) square feet;
d. Where a strip shopping center or developed parcel in an industrial zone has
in excess of two hundred (200) feet of street frontage; one (1) additional
free-standing pole sign may be approved by the Advisory Plan Commission;
and
e. Where a strip shopping center or developed parcel in an industrial zone is
authorized by the Advisory Plan Commission to have more than one (1)
free-standing pole sign, the distance between each sign shall be not less
96.
P:\sdsk\WORDPROC\BONAR\ 1567\ZONING\Section 7.doc 11-3-00)
•..
SIGN REGULATIONS SECTION VII
than one hundred (100) feet; and
f. Such signs may be illuminated as provided in Section 7.9 of this Ordinance,
or as approved by the Advisory Plan .commission.
g. Such pole signs should be adequately landscaped.
2. Wall Signs - Sign age on the wall of a building shall not exceed twenty percent (20%)
of the total area of the wall up to a maximum of two hundred (200) square feet per
wall. In computing wall area, the areas covered by door or windows shall be
excluded.
3. Marquee Signs - Marquee signs as provided in Section 7.12 B 3 of this Ordinance
shall be permitted.
4. Bench Signs - Bench signs as Pcovided in Section 7.12 B 4 of this Ordinance shall
be permitted.
D. Signs for Commerce and Industrial Parks
Off-premise signs shall be permitted for directing the traveling public to commerce or
industrial parks (strip shopping center or mall not included), providing the following
requirements are met:
1. A permit shall be obtained prior to the erection of the sign; and
2. Such sign shall indicate only the name, location, and information about the park itself.
Products or services shall not be advertised; and
3. Such sign shall have a maximum sign face area of one hundred (100) square feet,
a maximum height of nine (9) feet above grade level, and a minimum setback of
fifteen (15) feet from street right-of-way; and
4. Such sign shall be .a minimum distance of one hundred (100) feet from any
residential zoning district.
5. Such sign shall be a minimum distance offive hundred (500) feet from any other "offpremises"
sign.
6. Such signs should be adequately landscaped.
7.13 INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
Signs permitted in an industrial district are as follows:
A. Ground Signs
1. Limit of One (1): One (1) ground sign indicating the name and nature of the b.usiness
shall be permitted for each business parcel.
2. Height - The height of any ground sign shall be such that no part of the sign face
shall exceed a maximum height of six (6) feet.
97-A
p,\sdsk\WORDPROC\BONAR\1567\ZONING\Sect;on 7.doc (1-3-00)
SIGN REGULATIONS SECTION VII
3. Size and Location -A ground sign shall be placed a minimum distance of ten (10)
feet from any street right-of-way. The face of any such sign shall not exceed fifty
(50) square feet in area.
4. Illumination - All permitted signs in this district may be internally or externally lit, but
shall not shine directly or indirectly into adjacent residential areas.
5. Landscaping -All permitted ground signs should be adequately landscaped.
B. Wall Signs
One wall sign shall be permitted on each building. Maximum sign area shall be one ang qnehalf
square feet for each lineal foot of building frontage; however, in no instance shall such
signage exceed two hundred (200) square feet for a single business. Wall signs shall be
mounted flush against the building.
C. Entrance Signs
Two (2) on-site entrance signs are permitted at each entrance to an industrial or business
park. Such signs are subject to the provisions of Section 7 .12 D of this Ordinance and may
be internally or externally lit, but shall not shine directly or indirectly into adjacent residential
areas.
97-8
\\BGVALPO\SDSK\sdsk\WORDPROC\BONARI 1567\ZONING\Section 7 .doc (1-3-00)
SUBDIVISION CONTROL SEC770N VIII
8.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
A. Title
This Section of the Nappanee Unified Zoning and Subdivision Control Ordinance shall be
known,. cited, and referred to as the "Subdivision Control Regulations for the City of
Nappanee, Indiana."
B. Intent and Purposes
The purposes of these subdivision regulations are to protect and promote the public health,
safety, and general welfare, and to provide for:
1. Guidance of future growth and development in accordance with the Comprehensive
Plan and other applicable City policies and ordinances.
2. Protection of the character, the social, and the economic stability of all parts of the
area, and to encourage the orderly and beneficial development of all parts of the
jurisdiction.
3. Protection and conservation of the value of land, buildings, and other improvements
upon the land, and to minimize the confiicts among the uses of land and buildings.
4. Avoidance of scattered and uncontrolled subdivisions of land that would result in the
unnecessary imposition of an excessive expenditure of public funds for the supply
of services that are a part of comr:iunity infrastructure.
5. Establishment of reasonable standards and procedures for subdivisions and
resubdivisions, in order to further the orderly layout and use of land; and to ensure
proper legal descriptions and monumenting of subdivided land.
6. Prevention of the pollution of air and water; provision of drainage facilities and
safeguarding of the water table; and the encouragement of wise use and
management of natural resources in order to preserve the integrity, stability, natural
beauty, topography, and the value of land.
7. To guide public and private policy and action to provide adequate and efficient public
and private facilities, the most aesthetically pleasing and beneficial interrelationship
between land use, conserve natural resources such as natural beauty, woodlands,
open spaces, and energy, both during and after development.
8. To cause the cost of design and installation of improvements in new, platted
subdivisions to be borne by the persons purchasing the lots rather than by any direct
or indirect burden upon existing property owners beyond the limits of the subdivision
who have already paid for the improvements servicing their property.
C. Jurisdiction
This ordinance, which was enacted pursuant to Indiana home rule and planning enabling
legislation (Indiana Code, titles Section 36-1-3-4 and the Section 36-7-4-700 series, as
amended), authorizes the Nappanee Adv·1sory Plan Commission to review and approve or
disapprove plats for subdivisions within the corporate limits of the City ofNappanee, Indiana.
98.
\\BGVALPO\SDSK\sdsk\WORDPROC\BONARI 1 567\ZONING\Section 8.doc (1 ·1-00)
SUBDIVISION CONTROL SECTION VIII
D. Policy and Interpretation
1. N_o owner, or agent of the owner, of any parcel of land. located in a proposed·
subdivision shall transfer or sell any such parcel before a plat of such subdivision
has been approved by the Commission, in accordance with the provisions of these
regulations, and filed with the County Recorder.
2. The division of any lot or any parcel of land into a subdivision, as defined in this
ordinance, by the use of metes and bounds description for the purpose of sale,
transfer, or lease resulting in the creation of one (1) or more new building sites shall
not be permitted. All such described divisions shall be subject to all of the
appropriate requirements of this ordinance.
3. Land to be subdivided shall be of such a character that it can be developed without
peril to health, fiood, fire, or other menace; and land shall not be subdivided until
access to available existing pubCTc facilities, improvements, and proper provisions
have been made for drainage, water, sewerage, other necessary new public
improvements such as schools, parks, recreation facilities, and transportation
facilities adequate for serving the subdivision.
4. No plat or re-plat of a subdivision of land located within the jurisdiction of the
Commission shall be recorded until it has been approved by the Commission, and
such approval shall have been entered in writing on the plat by the President and
Secretary of the Commission.
5. No land shall be subdivided unless the intended use of the individual lot is in
confonmance with all provisions of this Ordinance and the Comprehensive Plan, now
or hereafter adopted.
6. In all subdivisions, due regard shall be given to the preservation of historical sites
and natural features such as large trees, water courses, and scenic views.
7. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of these regulations shall be held
to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, and
general welfare.
8. Confiict with Public and Private Provision:
a. Public Provisions: The regulations are not intended to interfere with,
abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule, regulation, statute, or other
provision of law. Where any provision of these regulations imposes
restrictions different from those imposed by any other provision of these
regulations or any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law,
whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher standards shall
control.
b. Private Provisions: These regulations are not intended to abrogate any
easement, covenant, or any other private agreement or restriction, provided
that where the. provisions of these regulations are more restrictive or impose
higher standards or regulations than such easement, covenant, or other
private agreement or restriction, the requirements of these regulations shall
govern. Where the provisions of the easement, covenant, or private
agreement or restriction impose duties and obligations more restrictive, or
higher standards than the requirement of these regulations, or the
99.
\\BGVALPO\SDSK\sdsk\WORDPROC\BONAR\1567\ZONING\Section 8.doc (1-1-001
SUBDIVISION CONTROL SEC770N VIII
E. Replats
determinations of the Commission in providing a subdivision or in enforcing
these regulations, and such private provisions are not inconsistent with
these regulations or determinations thereunder, then such private provisions
shall be operative and supplemental to these regulations and determinations
made thereunder. (Note: Private provisions can only be enforced privately,
unless a public agency has been made party to such agreements).
9. No Improvement Location Penmit or Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued
for any parcel or plat of land which was created by subdivision after the
effective date of, and not in conformity with, the provisions of these
subdivision regulations; and, no excavation of land or construction of any
public or private improvements shall take place or be commenced except
in conformity with the regulations containea herein and in conformity with
City construction standards.
10. These regulations shall not be construed as abating any action now pending
under, or by virtue of, prior existing subdivision regulations.
11. These regulations shall not apply to the following:
a. An adjustment of lot lines as shown on a recorded plat which does
not reduce the area, frontage, width, depth, or building setback lines
of each building site below the minimum zoning requirements, and
does not change the original number of lots in any block of the
recorded plat.
b. A division of land into two (2) or more tracts for an agricultural use.
c. The unwilling sale of land as a result of legal condemnations as
allowed under the provisions of Indiana Code.
d. Widening of existing streets to conform to the Comprehensive Plan,
Thoroughfare Plan, or Capital Improvement Plan.
e. The acquisition of street rights-of-way by a public agency in
confonmance with the Comprehensive Plan, Thoroughfare Plan, or
Capital Improvement Plan.
f. The exchange of land for the purpose of straightening property
boundary lines which does not result in the change of the present
land usage.
For any change in a map of an approved or recorded subdivision plat, if such change affects
any street layout shown on such map, area reserved .. thereon for public use, any lot line, or
if it affects any map or plan legally recorded prior to the adoption of any regulations
controlling subdivisions, such change shall be approved by the Plan Commission by the
same procedure, rules, and regulations as for a subdivision.
100.
\\BGVALPO\SOSK\sdsk\WORDPROC\BONAR\1567\ZONING\Section 8.doc 11-1-00)
SUBDIVISION CONTROL SECllON VIII
1).2 ADMINISTRATION AND DEFINITIONS
A. Inspections· and Permits
1. The develop.er shall notify the Zoning Administrator a minimum of one full business
day (business days are Monday through Friday) prior to the planned installation of
improvements with the development. The Administrator will notify the appropriate
personnel who shall have the responsibility for inspecting and testing street curbs,
subbases, pavement depth and quality, sewer lines, water lines, utilities, and
drainage improvements to see that they conform to the specifications of this
Ordinance and to City Construction Standards.
2. The City of Nappanee shall reserve the right to withhold Improvement Location
Permits for the remaining ten percent (10%) of undeveloped lots in a final subdivision
plat if the developer has failed- to install all of the improvements shown on the
Secondary Plat and Final Construction Plans, except for sidewalks. Sidewalks may
be installed on each lot by individual builders upon development of individual lots.
3. All fees and costs of the City Engineer in review of plats, plans, specifications, field
inspection of improvements, and any other aspects of subdivision review, shall be
paid by the subdivider.
4. Disagreements shall be settled by the Commission by majority vote.
5. Fees shall be paid on a monthly billing cycle unless authorized otherwise by the
Commission, in accordance with the official fee schedule.
B. Definitions
All terms used in this chapter, not otherwise defined herein, shall have the definitions
provided in Section 2 of this Ordinance.
8.3 PROCEDURE
A. General
1. In the development of subdivisions, the capacity of City utilities may be used ta·
restrict the number of developable lots in any given subdivision proposal.
B. Application for Subdivision
1. The subdivider shall consult informally with the Zoning Administrator and if
applicable, the City Engineer, for advice and assistance before filing the application
for a primary, secondary, or minor subdivision plat At this meeting, the developer
should submit a conceptual layout of the plat for review.
2. No application shall be accepted until all items detailed below have been completed
and executed by the person proposing the subdivision, or his designee.
3. When the developer wishes to pursue the plat before the Plan Commission, he shall
complete the requirements of Section 8.3 D and submit eight (8) copies of the
proposed plat, and application to the Zoning Administrator along with the appropriate
101.
\\BGVALPO\SDSK\sdsk\WORDPROCIBONARI 1567\ZONING\Section 8.doc 11-1 ·00I
SUBDIVISION CONTROL SEC770N VIII
fees as specified in the official fee schedule. The Zoning Administrator shall have
twenty-five (25) days in which to review the documents and to determine if there are
any deficiencies of the proposed plat. The deficiencies, if any, shall be submitted to
the developer in writing.
4. All deficiencies shall be corrected and four (4) copies of amended plat shall be
submitted to the Zoning Administrator twenty-five (25) days prior to the next regularly
scheduled meeting of the Plan Commission or it will not be heard at that meeting.
5. Street names shall be proposed, but the final decision of the street names shall be
determined by the Commission.
6. Upon placement on the agenda, and prior to the date of a public hearing, the City
Engineer may review the proposal and prepare a written report to the Commission
and applicant indicating a recommendation with regard to the subdivision being
proposed.
7. The applicant shall pay any and all engineering fees as may be incurred in review
of the application and inspection of the development of the subdivision.
C. Notice of Public Hearing
1. The Zoning Administrator, upon receipt of the proper documents, shall set a date for
a public hearing before the Commission. The developer shall assist the Zoning
Administrator in the preparation of a Notice of Public Hearing to be published in a
local newspaper of general circulation. The legal notice shall appear in the
newspaper ten (10) days prior to the date of the public hearing, and the cost of the
notice shall be borne by the developer. A proof of publication shall be retained by
the Zoning Administrator.
2. A Notice of Public Hearing to property owners shall be sent by the Zoning
Administrator at the expense of the developer to all property owners directly adjacent
to the boundaries of the property to be subdivided at least ten ( 10) days before the
date of the public hearing on the primary plat. The property owners shall be notified
by Certified Mail with Return Receipts Requested. An alternative method of
notification would consist of an affidavit or proof of mailing in which the Zoning
Administrator certifies that he has personally delivered the Notice of Public Hearings
to Property Owners and has obtained the signatures of each property owner to be
notified. This affidavit shall be properly notarized.
3. Legal notices shall include the following:
a. The general location of the proposed subdivision and a legal description of
the land contained therein.
b. · That the primary plat is available for examination at the office of the
Nappanee Clerk-Treasurer.
c. That a public hearing will be held giving the date and hour of the hearing.
d. Written comments on the plat will be accepted prior to the public hearing and
may be submitted to the Zoning Administrator for the Plan Commission.
4. Legal notices shall comply with LC. 5-3-1, et seq.
102.
\\BGVALPO\SDSK\sdsk\WORDPROC\BONAR\ 1567\ZONING\Section B.doc (1-1-00)
SUBDIVISION CONTROL SEC770N VIII
5. Proofs of publication, receipts of mailing, or proofs of mailing shall be retained by the
Zoning Administrator.
6. Names and addresses of property owners adjoining the subdivision site shall be
presented to the Zoning Administrator at the time the primary plat application is filed.
D. Primary Plat Procedures
1. The plat shall be drawn at a scale of one hundred (100) feet to one (1) inch. Sheets
shall not exceed twenty-four (24) inches by thirty-six (36) inches in size. Other
scales and/or sheet sizes are permitted if prior approval is granted by the
Administrator.
2. The primary plat shall be prepared and certified by a land suiveyor registered by the
State of Indiana.
3. The plat shall include a vicinity map showing the following:
a. Location of proposed subdivision.
b. Existing subdivisions and parcels of land adjacent to the proposed
subdivision, including the names of the property owners.
c. Existing schools, parks, playground, or other similar public facilities that will
seive the proposed subdivision.
d. All public thoroughfares/rights-of-way adjacent to the site.
e. Location and size of all utilities adjacent to the subdivision site, including
sanitary and stonm sewers, gas lines, electric lines; telephone lines, water
mains fire hydrants, cable television lines, etc:
f. Existing zoning of the tract and all contiguous tracts surrounding the
proposed subdivision.
g. All section and municipal corporate boundaries lying within or contiguous to
the tract.
h. The location of any streets and alleys in the proposed subdivision showing
the relationship of said streets to any existing or proposed streets in
contiguous subdivisions or undeveloped property to produce the most
advantageous development of the entire neighborhood.
I. The vicinity map may be prepared by indicating the data by notation on
available maps of an appropriate scale.
4. Two copies of a primary subdivision plat shall be submitted showing the following:
a. The proposed name of the subdivision.
b. Names and addresses of the owner, subdivider, consulting engineer, land
suiveyor, or planning firm who p_repared the plat.
c. Legend and notes, including a graphic scale, north point, and date.
103.
\\BGVALPO\SDSK\sdsk\WORDPROC\BONAR\ 1567\ZONING\Section B.doc (1-1-00)
SUBDIVISION CONTROL SECllONV/11
d. Tract boundary lines showing dimensions, bearings, angles, and references
to section, township, range lines or corners, and existing bench marks.
e. Topographic contours at typical intervals of two (2) feet if the general slope
of the tract is less than 10 percent (10%), or intervals of five (5) feet if the
slope is in excess of 10 percent (10%). Said contours shall be referenced
to mean sea level elevations and to U.S. Geological Survey datum plane.
f. Layout of lots, showing dimensions and numbers.
g. Building lines showing setback dimensions throughout the subdivision.
h. Parcels of land proposed to be dedicated or reserved for schools, parks,
playgrounds, or other public, semi-public, or community purposes.
i. Existing and proposed streets and rights-of-way on and adjoining the site of
the proposed subdivision showing the proposed names, roadway widths,
types and widths of pavements, curbs, sidewalks, bikeways, jogging paths,
and other recreational ways. This may be deferred to the Secondary Plat
approval stage if permitted by the Zoning Administrator.
j. Existing and proposed easements including the location, width, and purpose
of each easement.
k. Location and size of utilities existing and proposed and on the site, including
storm and sanitary sewers; water mains; electrical, telephone, and cable
television lines; street lights; fire hydrants; and such other utilities as may be
appropriate. NOTE: All proposed utility services must be underground; and
all .sump-pumps (excluding sanitary pumps for basements) must be
connected to the storm sewer system or as permitted by the. Commission.
This may be deferred to the Secondary Plat approval stage if permitted by
the Zoning Administrator.
I. Location of natural streams, regulated surface drains, legal ditches, flood
plains, drain tiles, etc.
m. A preliminary drainage plan showing the proposed storm water drainage
system to an approved outlet. Data shall be included showing that said
outlet is adequate to accommodate the drainage requirements of the
finished development. The plan shall include surface drainage system,
storm sewer systems, subsurface drainage systems, and storm water
detention facilities. Arrows designating the general drainage of all streets
and lots shall be included.
n. Location of water courses, marshes, wetlands, wooded areas, isolated trees
to be preserved, houses, barns, and other structures and significant
features.
o. Proposed sidewalks.
p. Proposed decorative lighting .
.. q. Type of drainage system(s) proposed to handle surface, underground, and
runoff waters. The coefficient to be used for this determination shall be
approved by the City Engineer.
104.
\\BGVALPO\SDSK\sdsk\WORDPROC\BONAR\ 1567\ZONING\Section 8.doc 11-1-00)
SUBDIVISION CONTROL SECT/ON VIII
r. The existing excess capacity available from the Nappanee Wastewater
Treatment Plant; the nearest location to the building site of a trunk or
connecting sewer line; and the expected demand of the development or
building (numbers to be acquired from the City). ·
s. Preliminary architectural drawings in sufficient detail to show building size,
height, materials, types of units, and location of all buildings (existing and
proposed) on the development site. This requirement may be waived by the
Zoning Administrator until Secondary Plat approval. In housing and large
commercial developments, this information may not be available.
t. Proposed preliminary landscaping, signage, entrance to the development,
screening, and attempts at preserving natural terrain and open space. The
Plan Commission may request a landscaping/screening plan. This
requirement may be wajved by the Zoning Administrator until Secondary
Plat approval.
u. Estimated traffic count increase on adjacent streets resulting from the
proposed development; description of type and condition of roads to serve
such development; total number of motor vehicles expected to use or be
stationed in such development; and on and off-site parking to be supplied.
A full traffic impact study or other detailed engineering studies need not be
conducted unless requested by the Administrator at initial, informal
meetings.
v. Photographs may be requested by the Zoning Administrator for specific
areas or elements on or surrounding the site.
w. If the primary plat is to be divided into sections of phases of development,
the boundaries and numbers of such sections shall be shown, and a
conceptual plan for the entire subdivision shall be submitted as a "phasing
schedule." Due to fluctuations in the economy, the Commission may give
some flexibility to revisions to the phasing schedule throughout the process
of development.
x. Soil map of the site from the Soil Conservation Service.
y. Proposed development schedule.
5. The primary plat and application for approval shall be accompanied by a certified
check or money order in .an amount specified in the official fee schedule of the City
of Nappanee as maintained in the Office of the Clerk-Treasurer.
E. Primary Plat Approval
After submission of the primary plat and application, the Commission shall have twenty-one
(21) days to review the information and accept the primary plat and application, or return
them to the subdivider with a list of additional information needs or suggested changes. No
application will be considered at a meeting unless it is filed with the Commission at least
twenty-five (25) days before the date of such meeting.
1. Hearing
After acceptance of the preliminary plat and application by the Commission, the
105.
l\BGVALPO\SDSK\sdsk\WORDPROC\BONARI 1567\ZONING\Section 8.doc (1-1-00)
SUBDIVISION CONTROL SECllON VIII
Commission shall set a date for a hearing, notify the applicant in writing, and notify
by general publication or otherwise, any person or governmental unit having a
probable interest in the proposed plat. The cost of publication of the Notice of
Hearing shall. be met by the applicant.
2. Approval
a. If the Plan Commission detenmines in the public hearing that the primary plat
complies with the standards set forth in this ordinance, it shall make written
findings and a decision granting primary approval to the plat. This
information shall be sent to the developer in a letter certified by the Zoning
Administrator.
b. Approval of a primary plat by the Commission is strictly tentative, involving
merely the general acceptability of the layout submitted.
c. The Commission may introduce such changes or revisions as are deemed
necessary in the best interest and general welfare of the community, or
request that additional information be provided or addressed by the
applicant prior to review of the secondary plat.
d. The primary approval of a plat by the Plan Commission shall be certified on
behalf of the Plan Commission by the Zoning Administrator, who shall state
the approval in a letter and affix his signature to it.
3. Disapproval
a. If the Commission disapproves a primary plat application, the Commission
shall make written findings and notify the applicant in writing, stating the
specific reasons for disapproval. This written notice shall be certified by the
Zoning Administrator.
b. The applicant may submit a new application for primary plat approval but
must pay all applicable fees as if it were an original application.
F. Secondary Plat Procedure
1. After approval of the primary plat by the Commission and fulfillment of the
requirements of this Ordinance, eight (8) blackline or blueline reproductions of the
secondary plat of the subdivision shall be submitted to the Commission along with
one (1) reproducible mylar transparency. All secondary plats shall be drawn at the
same scale as the primary plat and shall be drawn on a sheet twenty-four (24)
inches by thirty-six (36) inches in size, unless otherwise authorized by the
Commission.
2. If the Commission approves the secondary plat, it shall place a certification thereof
on the reproduced copies. Upon the final approval of the plat, one (1) copy of the
certified plat shall be forwarded to each of the following persons by the developer:
a. County Auditor and Recorder
b. Any corporate utility company that may be affected
c. Subdivider or applicant
106.
\\BGVALPO\SDSK\sdsk\WORDPROC\BONAR\ 1567\ZONJNG\Section 8.doc 11-1-00)
SUBDIVISION CONTROL SEC770N VIII
d. File of Commission
e. County Surveyor
f. Zoning Administrator
3. The secondary plat may include all or only a part of the primary plat which has
received approval and shall be prepared and certified by a land surveyor registered
by the State of Indiana. If the secondary plat does not contain all of the land
approved on the primary plat, it shall be designated by a section number in a
numerical order.
4. The following information shall be shown on or submitted with the secondary plat
a. Accurate boundary lines, with dimensions and angles, which provide a legal
survey per state statutec
b. Accurate distances and directions to the nearest official monuments.
Reference corners shall be accurately described on the plat.
c. Accurate locations of all existing and recorded streets intersecting the
boundaries of the tract.
d. Accurate metes and bounds description of the tract boundary.
e. Source of title of applicant to the land as shown by the last entry in the books
of the County Auditor. ·
f. Name of subdivision followed by the words "Secondary Plat."
g. Name and address of the owner and subdivider.
h. North point, graphic scale, and date.
i. Proposed street names.
j. Complete curve table for all curves included in the plat.
k. Street lines with accurate dimensions in feet and hundredths of feet with.
angles to street, alley, and lot lines. Radii, points of curvatures, tangent
bearings, and lengths of all arcs of street Jines shall be provided.
L Lot numbers and dimensions including the square footage of each lot.
m. Accurate locations of easements, descriptions of their use, and any
limitations on such semi-public or community use.
n. Accurate dimensions for any property to be dedicated or reserved for public,
semi-public, or community use, including sidewalks, bikeways, and other
recreational ways.
o. Building lines and setback dimensions throughout the subdivision.
p. Location, types, material, and size of all monuments and markers.
107.
\\BGVALPO\SDSK\sdsk\WORDPROC\BONAR\ 1 567\ZONING\Section 8.doc 11-1-00)
SUBDIVISION CONTROL SECllON VIII
q. Construction plans and specifications for all improvements required by this
Ordinance or the Commission.
r. Restrictions of all types which will nun with the land and become covenants
in the deeds for lots.
s. Certification by a registered land surveyor.
t. Certification by the owner(s) and lien holder(s) (if any) of dedication of
streets and other public property, and an agreement executed by the
owner(s) and subdivider(s) to make and install all improvements in
accordance with the plans and specifications approved by the Commission
and accompanying the secondary plat. ·
u. Certificate of approval by the Nappanee Plan Commission, if approved.
v. Certificate of approval by the Nappanee City Council, if approved.
w. A final landscaping/buffering plan shall be incorporated in the secondary plat
design plans and a phasing schedule of landscaping/buffering
improvements.
x. Any other information or data requested by the Commission during primary
plat approval or otherwise necessary to clarify conditions and terms of
secondary plat approval.
G. Secondary Plat Approval
1. Within thirty (30) days after application for approval of the secondary plat, the
Commission shall approve or disapprove it. It the Commission determines that the
plat complies with the standards of this Ordinance, it shall make written findings and
render a decision regarding secondary approval to the plat. No notices of public
hearing shall be required for secondary plat approval.
2. The secondary approval of the plat by the Plan Commission shall be certified on
behalf of the Plan Commission by the President and Secretary who shall affix their
signatures to the plat original and all other relevant documents which also may
required such signatures.
3. If the Plan Commission disapproves the secondary plat, it shall make written findings
and notify the applicant in writing, stating the specific reasons for disapproval. This
written notice shall be signed by the President an.d Secretary of the Plan
Commission.
4. Approval of the secondary plat shall be effective for a maximum period of twelve (12)
months from the date of approval. Failure to obtain approval from the Commission,
record the plat with the County Recorder, and commence constnuction of the
subdivision within the twelve (12) month period, shall result in denial of building
penmits until an extension or re-submittal of application is made. For the purpose of
this chapter, "commencing construction" means completion of the construction
survey and staking.
5. A certificate of secondary· plat approval shall not be signed until a performance bond
or proof or surety has been submitted to the Plan Commission if required.
108.
\\BGVALPO\SDSK\sdsk\WORDPROC\BONARI 1567\ZONING\Section 8.doc (1-1-00)
SUBDIVISION CONTROL SEC710N VIII
6. No Improvement Location Permit shall be issued by the Zoning Administrator, or his
agent, for any structures on any subdivision lots prior to the recording of said
subdivision by the County Recorder.
7. No Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued by the Zoning Administrator, or his
agent, for any structure on any subdivision lots prior to installation and completion
of all facilities, including grading, as shown on the development plans and approved
by the Commission; except that in the case of an asphalt road surface, the
installation of the final surface coat may be postponed until the end of the
maintenance period. The final coat of asphalt shall be installed prior to acceptance
of the road for public maintenance.
8. A plat of subdivision may not be filed with the County Auditor, and the County
Recorder may not record it unless it has been granted secondary approval by the
Plan Commission and has been properly signed by the President and Secretary of
the Commission. The filing and_ recording of the plat is without legal effect unless
approved by the Plan Commission.
9. The subdivider shall supply one (1) copy of the recorded plat to the Zoning
Administrator.
H. Construction Plans
·1. It shall be the responsibility of the subdivider of every proposed subdivision to have
prepared and certified by a land surveyor or engineer registered in the State of
Indiana, a complete set of construction plans, including profiles, cross-sections,
specifications, and other supporting-data for all required public streets, utilities, and
other facilities.
2. The final construction plans shall be based on preliminary plans which have been
approved with the primary plat and shall be prepared and submitted in conjunction
with the secondary plat. The plans shall show the following:
a. General construction plans shall be prepared for all required improvements.
Plans shall be drawn on standard twenty-four (24) inch by thirty-six (36)
inch sheets at a scale of no less than one (1) inch equaling fifty (50) feet,
and map sheets shall be the same size as the secondary plat.
b. Topographic contours at intervals of one (1) foot ifthe general slope of the
tract is less than five percent (5%) or intervals of two (2) feet if the slope
exceeds five percent (5%). Contours shall be referenced to USGS datum
plane.
c. Profiles showing existing and proposed elevations along centerlines of all
streets. Where a proposed street intersects an existing street or streets, the
elevation along the centerline of the existing street or streets within one
hundred (100) feet of the intersection. Radii of all curves, lengths of
tangents, and central angles on all streets shall be shown.
d. The Plan Commission may require, where steep slopes exist, the crosssections
of all proposed streets.
e. Plans and profiles showing the location and typical cross-section of streets
including curbs, gutters, sidewalks, rights-of-way, drainage facilities,
manholes, and catch basins. Plans shall show the location, size, and invert
109.
\\BGVALPD\SDSK\sdsk\WDRDPROC\BDNARI 1567\ZONING\Section 8.doc (1-1-00)
SUBDIVISION CONTROL SECTION VIII
elevations of existing and proposed sanitary sewers, stormwater drains,
water lines, gas, and fire hydrants, showing connection to any existing or
proposed utility systems.
f. Location, size, elevation, and other appropriate descriptions of any other
existing physical and natural features or facilities including wetlands, trees,
the points of connection to proposed facilities and utilities, and the
approximate high- and low-water elevations of all ponds, lakes, and
streams. All elevations shall be referenced to the USGS datum plane.
g. Upon completion of the construction, the developer's engineer or land
surveyor shall provide the Plan Commission with a set of "as built"
construction plans showing the location, dimensions, and materials used to
construct all improvements within the subdivision.
I. Minor Plats
1. The division of a tract of land into six (6) residential parcels or less, fronting upon an
existing street and needing no new street or infrastnucture, may be approved as
follows:
The minor plat shall be subject to the same basic procedures as any other
subdivision, provided that the Zoning Administrator may determine in advance of the
filing of an application the details to be required on the plat.
2. The intent of this Section is to eliminate redundant requirements for minor plats which
do not necessitate all of the detail of larger plats. However, the intent of this Section
is not to circumvent good subdivision practices; therefore, the use of this procedure
shall be limited to the creation of six (6) or fewer new parcels from any tract of land
under five (5) acres in size and under single ownership at the time of adoption of this
Ordinance.
3. For the purpose of allowing the early construction of model homes in a subdivision,
the Commission in its discretion may permit a portion of a major subdivision involving
no more than three (3) lots to be created in accordance with the procedures for
minor subdivision, provided that said portion derives access from an existing public
street, and provided that no future road or other improvement is anticipated where
said lots are proposed. The subdivision plat for the "minor'' portion shall be
submitted to the Commission simultaneously with the primary plat for the entire
major subdivision. Subsequent to the primary approval, the model home(s) may be
constructed, subject to such additional requirements that the Commission may
require.
8.4 SURETY
A Performance Bonds
1. At the time when the Secondary Plat is approved by the Plan Commission and before
the plat is signed by the officers of the Plan Commission or is recorded, the
subdivider shall file a performance bond or irrevocable letter of credit with the ClerkTreasurer
and the City Council. The performance bond or letter of credit shall:
a. Be drawn in favor of the City of Nappanee.
110.
\\BGVALPO\SDSK\sdsk\WORDPROC\BONAR\ 1567\ZONING\Secfon 8.doc 11-1-00)
SUBDIVISION CONTROL SEC770N VIII
b. Be in an amount determined by the Commission to be sufficient to complete
the improvements and installations in compliance with this ordinance. The
subdivider's engineer shall supply an estimate of the cost of improvements
and installation on the project to aid the Commission in its determination of
the amount of the bond. The engineer's estimate, however, shall not be
binding upon the Commission.
c. Be with surety satisfactory to the Commission and City Council.
d. Comply with all statutory requirements and shall be satisfactory to the Plan
Commission's Attorney as to form, sufficiency, and manner of execution as
set forth in these regulations.
e. Extend for two (2) years, or 80% complete, or as specified by the
Commission in the resolution approving the secondary subdivision plat.
f. Cover the installation costs of the streets, sanitary sewers, water lines,
curbs, street signs, sidewalks, and other recreational amenities, surface
swales, subsurface and storm drainage systems, seeding/erosion control,
landscaping, and other public improvements.
2. The Plan Commission may, upon proof of difficulty, recommend to the City Council
extension of the completion date set forth in such bond for a maximum period of one
(1) additional year. The City Council may at any time during the period of such bond
accept a substitution of principal or sureties on the bond upon recommendation of
the Plan Commission's Attorney. The City Council shall have the authority to
increase the bond amount to cover increased costs.
3. All required improvements shall be made by the applicant, at his expense, without
reimbursement by the local government or any improvement district therein.
4. The subdivider shall be required to maintain at his expense a licensed civil engineer
or engineering firm to manage the construction of the subdivision improvements. The
managing engineer shall certify that the subdivision construction is in compliance
with the detailed construction plans submitted to the Plan Commission during the
review of the secondary plat. The developer shall submit progress reports to the_
Zoning Administrator as substantial steps are completed and should notify the
Zoning Administrator when important work has been scheduled so that an inspection
can be made. A final report shall be submitted to the Plan Commission and the City
Council by the developer or Mis engineer.
5. If the Zoning Administrator or his authorized representative finds upon inspection that
any of the required improvements have not been constructed in accordance with the
construction standards and specifications, the applicant shall be responsible for
correcting any errors in construction and completing the improvements in
accordance with such standards and specifications. Wherever the cost of
improvements is covered by a performance bond, the applicant and the bonding
company shall be severally and jointly liable for completing the improvements
according to specifications.
6. If a secondary plat is divided into sections, the Plan Commission may allow for
performance bonds to be submitted to cover only the cost of improvements to be
constructed in each section.
111.
\\BGVALPO\SDSK\sdsk\WORDPROC\BONAR\ 1567\ZONING\Section 8.doc 11 ·1-00J
SUBDIVISION CONTROL SEC770N VIII
B. Release of Performance Bond
1. The City Council and Board of Works shall not accept dedication of required
improvements nor release or redu.ce the performance bond amount until the City
Engineer has submitted a final inspection report of the subdivision. The engineer
shall certify that the layout of the public improvements has been completed, properly
inspected, and is ready for acceptance into the City's system.
2. The City Council and Board of Works, upon approval of the City Engineer's
inspection report, shall pass a resolution accepting the improvements in the
subdivision and formally releasing the performance bond.
3. In those cases where a performance bond has been ·posted and required
improvements have not be installed within the terms of such performance bond, the
City Council may thereupon declare the bond to be in default and require that all the
improvements be installed regardless of the extent of the building development at
the time the bond is declared to be in default.
C. Other Forms of Surety
1. The developer shall provide the City with a maintenance bond equal to ten percent
(10%) of the total construction cost of streets, sidewalks, curbs, water system
installations, sanitary sewer system installations, and drainage installations. Such
maintenance bond shall be for a minimum term of three (3) years from the date of
acceptance of the covered installations by the City.
2. The subdivider may provide the City Council with other liquid assets in an amount
equal to the required performance and maintenance bonds. Such liquid assets may
include a cash escrow account, certificate of deposit, irrevocable letter of credit,
money market accounts, etc., so long as the proper documents are presented by the
subdivider to the City Council giving said Council proper signatory access to the
funds upon default.
3. Should the subdivider be required to extend site improvements to the subdivision
such as extensions of water and sewer lines owned by the City of Nappanee which
may provide benefits to other properties in the vicinity of the proposed subdivision,
then the subdivider and the City Council may, by contract, agree that the other
property owners in the vicinity of the subdivision who wish to connect to or utilize the
installation provided by the subdivider shall pay the City over a ten (10) year period
a fee in an amount agreed to by the contract and that portion of said fee shall be
rebated to the subdivider in annual installments. All agreements, as well as a map
showing the specific lots or areas included shall be recorded at the Office of the
County Recorder.
After the installation of any utility by the developer, an expiration date of fifteen (15)
years shall be maintained. Thus, after fifteen (15) years from the time of completion,
no monies shall be paid to the developer.
8.5 PRINCIPLES AND STANDARDS OF DESIGN
A. 'General
1. The subdivision layout shall be of such a characier that it protects the health, safety,
112.
\\BGVALPO\SDSK\sdsk\WORDPROC\BONAR\ 1567\ZONING\Section B.doc (1·1·00)
SUBDIVISION CONTROL SEC7JON VIII
and general welfare of the residents in the jurisdiction of the Plan Commission.
2. Whenever a proposed subdivision borders an existing street, the Commission may
require the reconstruction or widening of such street as a condition of plat approval.
Additional dedication of right-of-way may also be required. ·
3. In designing and approving subdivision streets, the following factors shall receive
consideration:
a. Accessibility for emergency vehicles and school buses;
b. Safety for both vehicular and pedestrian traffic;
c. Efficiency of service for all users;
d. Livability or amenities as affected by traffic elements in the circulation
system; and
e. Economy of both construction and use of land.
4. The designs of single family homes and their aesthetic appearances are encouraged
to conform to the following guidelines:
a. No two homes within two hundred fifty (250) feet of one another's property
and on the same street shall be of the same or relatively the same design
unless separated by two homes.
b. Mirroring of a design or floor plan is considered to be a duplication of design
and will not be permitted.
c. The detenmination of "relatively the same design" if in question shall be
determined by vote of the Commission.
d. In some instances, similar .floor plans may be considered to not be of the
same or relatively the same design if substantial aesthetic differences are
incorporated. Such substantial differences may include several of the
following: roof pitch, architectural style, exterior material, design elements,
color, landscaping, and orientation to the site.
5. When there is a situation of unusual physical conditions or a controlled design
environment in evidence, and it can. be satisfactorily demonstrated to the
Commission that a private street is the only feasible solution, said private streets
may be authorized provided pavement construction standards shall be the same as
the minimum public standards, and adequate covenant provisions are made for
direct responsibility and control by the property owners involved to provide for the
perpetual operation, liability, and maintenance of said private streets at no expense.
to the City of Nappanee.
In addition to the requirements established herein, all subdivision plats shall comply
with the following rules, laws, and regulations:
a. All applicable statutory provisions.
b. The local zoning ordinances, building and housing codes, and all other
applicable laws of the appropriate jurisdiction.
c. The general intent of the Comprehensive Plan, Thoroughfare Plan, and
Capital Improvement Plan of the City of Nappanee, including all public
facilities, open space, and recreation plans, as adopted.
d. The rules and regulations of the Indiana Department of Environmental
Management, the Natural Resources Commission, Aeronautics
113.
l\BGVALPO\SDSK\sdsk\WORDPROCIBONAR\ 1567\ZONING\Section 8.doc (1-1-00)
SUBDIVISION CONTROL SECllONV/11
Commission, County Drainage Board, and other appropriate state agencies.
e. The rules, regulations, and standards of the Indiana Department of
. Transportation if the subdivision or lot contained therein abuts a State
highway.
f. All applicable planning and regulatory guidelines, including access control,
driveway manuals, parking and traffic control ordinances, and other
applicable guides published by the local governmental units.
g. The "Indiana Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices" for installation of
traffic control devices.
B. Street Standards
1. The street and alley layout shall _provide adequate vehicular and pedestrian access
to all lots and parcels of land within the subdivision, and where streets cross other
streets. Streets shall conform to the following principles and standards.
a. Proposed streets shall be adjusted to the contour of the land so as to
produce usable lots and streets of reasonable gradient.
b. Residential street systems shall be designed to minimize through traffic
movement, but certain proposed streets, where appropriate, shall be
extended to the boundary line of the tract to be subdivided so as to provide
for normal circulation of traffic within the vicinity.
c. Wherever there exists a dedicated or platted portion of a street or alley
adjacent to the proposed subdivision, the remainder of the street or alley to
the prescribed width shall be platted within the proposed subdivision.
d. Residential street patterns shall provide reasonably direct access to the
primary circulation system.
e. Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right
angles. A proposed intersection of two (2) new streets at an angle of less
than seventy-five (75) degrees shall not be acceptable. A street should be
approximately at right angles for at least one hundred (100) feet therefrom.
f. Not more than two (2) streets shall intersect at any one (1) point, unless
specifically approved by the Plan Commission.
g. Proposed new intersections along one (1) side of an existing street shall,
wherever practicable, coincide with any existing intersection on the opposite
side of such street. Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than one
hundred fifty (150) feet shall not be permitted except where the intersected
street has separated, dual drives, without median breaks at either such
intersection. Where local streets intersect with arterial or collector streets,
their alignment shall be continuous.
h. All cul-de-sacs shall terminate in a circular right-of-way with a minimum
diameter of one hundred (100) feet and -minimum roadway diameter of
eighty (80) feet. Cul-de-sac streets shall not be longer than five hundred
(500) · feet, unless the Plan Commission shall determine after public
discussion that a greater distance better serves the interest of public health,
114.
\\BGVALPO\SDSK\sdsk\WOROPROC\BONARI 1567\ZONING\Section B.doc 11-1-00)
SUBDIVISION CONTROL SECTlON VIII
safety, and welfare; including traffic ftow considerations; such distance to be
measured from the center of the turning circle to the intersection of the
centerline of the cul-de-sac street and the centerline of a through street
provided, however, that if the residential streets within the subdivision has
only one (1) intersection with a through street, the entire subdivision shall be
considered a cul-de-sac and the distance shall be measured from the point
of intersection of the subdivision street and the through street.
The minimum rights-of-way for new streets shall be as follows:
Type of Street
Local Streets
Collector Streets
Arterial Streets
Right-of-Way Width
Fifty (50) Feet
Sixty-six (66) Feet
Eighty (80) Feet
I. A temporarily dead-end~d street shall be permitted in any case in which a
street is proposed to be and should logically be extended but is not yet
constructed. An adequate easement for a turn-around shall be provided for
any such temporary dead-end street which extends two hundred (200) feet
or more in length. Such easement shall be automatically vacated to abutting
property owners when said dead-ended street is legally extended.
j. At the intersection of any proposed residential street with any existing street,
acceleration and deceleration lanes, and passing or left turn lanes may need
to be provided in accordance with standards established by the handbook,
A Policy of Geometric Design of Highways and Streets, by the American
Association of State Transportation and Highway Officials.
k. All street construction shall conform to adopted City Standards.
C. Block Standards
1. Block length and width or acreage within bounding streets shall be such as to
accommodate the size of lot required by the Zoning Ordinance for the district in
which the subdivision is to be located, and to provide convenient access, circulation
control, and safety of street traffic. Blocks that are unreasonably large or small will
not be approved.
2. Residential blocks should not exceed one thousand, five hundred (1,500) feet in
length. In the design of blocks longer than eight hundred (800) fee~ the Commission
may specify the provision of pedestrian crosswalks near the center of the block, or
wherever would be most useful to facilitate pedestrian circulation to a school, park,
recreation area, shopping center, or other significant neighborhood destination.
Minimum length of blocks shall be three hundred (300) feet.
3. Blocks shall have sufficient width to provide for two (2) tiers of lots of appropriate
length. Exceptions to this prescribed block width shall be permitted in blocks
adjacent to minor transportation facilities, watercourses, and industrial and
commercial areas.
D. Lot Standards
1. Lot dimensions shall comply with minimum. standards as specified in Section 5.2 of
this Ordinance.
115.
\\BGVALPO\SDSK\sdsk\WORDPROC\BONAR\1567\ZONING\Section 8.doc (1-1-00)
.., __
SUBDIVISION CONTROL SEG770N VIII
2. Double frontage lots shall be prohibited except where necessary to provide
separation of residential development from arterial streets or to overcome specific
disadvantages of topography and orientation.
3. The lot size, width, depth, shape, grade location, and orientation shall be in proper
relation to street and block design and to existing and proposed topographical
conditions.
4. All lots shall abut on a public street except where a private street has been specially
approved under Section 8.5 of this Ordinance.
5. Side lines of lots shall be at approximately right angles to straight streets and on
radial lines on curved streets. Some variation from this requirement is permissible,
but pointed or very irregular lots should be avoided.
6. Building setback lines shall conform to the provisions of Section 5.2 of this
Ordinance.
7. Lots abutting a watercourse, drainage way, channel, stream, or flood plain shall have
additional minimum width or depth as required to provide an adequate building site,
accommodate the full width of necessary easements, and conform to the minimum
yard requirements specified in Section 5.2 of this Ordinance.
8. Vehicular access from lots to minor or major arterial streets may be prohibited.
Vehicular access from lots to collector streets may be prohibited if the Design Hour
Volume is determined by the Zoning Administrator or City Engineer to be excessive.
E. Easements
1. Easements to permit access for maintenance and repair of surface and subsurface
drainage improvements and utility installations, shall be provided on the final copies
of the Primary Plat, Secondary Plat, and Constnuction Plans. Location of easements
shall be reviewed by the City Engineer and representatives of local utility companies.
2. Easements shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) feet in width, shall provide continuity
from block to block, and shall be located along rear, side, or front lot lines, one-half
(Yz) the width of the easement shall be taken from each lot. In the case of lots
extending to the boundary of the lands platted and not adjoining another plat, the full
width of the easement shall be provided on such peripheral lots.
3. Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainage way, channel, or
stream, the subdivider shall designate drainage easements on both sides of the
watercourse, the width to be determined by the Plan Commission; and in the case
of a legal drain, the County Drainage Board.
4. When a proposed drainage system shall carry water across private lands outside the
subdivision, appropriate drainage rights must be secured by the subdivider and
indicated on the plat. Appropriate legal documentation must be submitted.
F. Open Space
1. If a proposed development will include at least 40 dwelling units (in one phase or a
combination of phases), the subdivider shall be required to plat a minimum of one
(1) acre of open space for each forty (40) dwelling units to be constructed when the
gross density of such development is 2.5 dwelling units per acre or greater. A
116.
\\BGVALPO\SDSK\sdsk\WOROPROC\BONARI 1567\ZONING\Section 8.doc (1-1-00)
SUBDIVISION CONTROL SEC770N VIII
dwelling unit shall be defined as a single-family home, condominium, or
apartment/rental unit.
2. The subdivider shall permanently dedicate the open space acreage for public use.
The land may be deeded by the subdivider to the City of Nappanee, the School
Corporation, local service clubs, or to a duly organizes homeowners' association
within the subdivision. The Plan Commission shall have final approval as to the use
of dedicated open space.
3. Easements, crosswalks, and road frontage to provide public access to the open
space shall be shown on the Secondary Plat.
4. Existing natural features which add value to residential development and enhance
the attractiveness of the community shall be preserved in the design of the
subdivision and may be incorporated into dedicated open space.
G. Subdivision and Street Names
1. The proposed name of the subdivision shall not duplicate, or too closely approximate
phonetically, the name of any other subdivision in the area covered by these
regulations. The Plan Commission shall have final authority to approve the name
of the subdivision which shall be determined at the time of the preliminary plat
approval.
2. Street names shall not duplicate any existing name within the area covered by these
regulations except where a new street is a continuation of an existing street. Street
names that may be spelled different but sound the same as existing streets shall not
be used.
3. The Plan Commission shall have final authority to name all streets (in case of
confiicts) at the time of preliminary plat approval.
H. Mobile Home or Manufactured Housing Parks
In addition to complying with the standards and procedures of Sections 5 and 8 herein, all
mobile home or manufactured home parks shall be constructed in accordance with the
following minimum requirements:
1. Mobile home or manufactured home parks shall meet the requirements as set forth
in the Indiana Mobile Home Parks Act of 1955, as amended, and all applicable
Indiana State Board of Health Regulations.
2. Each mobile home or manufactured home lot shall be provided with municipal water
and sewage, and be connected to electricity.
3. The minimum area of a mobile home or manufactured home park shall be fifteen (15)
acres with frontage along or having access via a private drive to a major
thoroughfare, per the City's Thoroughfare Plan.
4. The minimum area of a mobile home or manufactured home lot shall be five
thousand (5,000) square feet.
5. The minimum mobile home or manufactured home lot width shall be fifty (50) feet
except around cul-de-sacs where the minimum frontage accepted shall be twentyfive
(25) feet provided that thirty (30) feet, on a radial, from the pavement edge the
117.
\IBGVALPO\SDSK\sdsk\WORDPROC\BONAR\ 1567\ZONING\Section 8.doc (1-1-001
SUBDIVISION CONTROL SEC770N VIII
lot width is fifty (50) feet.
6. Except at established entrances and exits serving the mobile home or manufactured
home park, a dense green belt of evergreen trees ;ind/or shrubs, not less than six
(6) feet high after one full growing season and which, at maturity, is not less than
twelve (12) feet high, or other visual buffer as may be approved by the Plan
Commission, shall be located and effectively maintained at all times along the
boundary of the mobile home or manufactured home park.
7. The mobile home or manufactured home park shall be adequately lighted as
determined by the Zoning Administrator.
8. The minimum distance between any two (2) _structures shall be ten (10) feet at any
one (1) point and average at least twenty (20) feet the entire length or width of each
structure. Each structure shall be at least ten (10) feet back from the edge of the
pavement of a private roadway within the park and at least twenty (20) feet from the
property line of the mobile home or manufactured home park.
9. Each mobile home or manufactured home shall be provided with a foundation
designed to support the maximum anticipated loads during all seasons and approved
by the City's designated inspector.
10. No structure shall be closer to a public right-of-way than forty (40) feet.
11. There shall be provided at least two (2) vehicle parking spaces per mobile home or
manufactured home lot within the mobile home or manufactured home park with a
minimum of tweniy-five (25) spaces provided.
12. All roads within a mobile home or manufactured home park must have a concrete
or hot or cold bituminous concrete surface of at least twenty (20) feet in width, with
the entrance roads having a width of at least thirty (30) feet. Construction of all
streets shall be in accordance with Section 8.6.A.9.
13. An area equaling at least two hundred fifty (250) square feet per mobile home or
manufactured home lot shall be provided in one (1) or more locations on the
premises for recreation purposes. The minimum of such recreation area(s) shall be
twenty thousand (20,000) square feet or the above, whichever is greater.
14. Each mobile home or manufactured home park shall provide waterproof storage
structures for each mobile home or manufactured home by providing one (1) on each
lot or one (1) central waterproof structure with one (1) space per lot.
15. The mobile home or manufactured home park shall be designed so as not to
increase the stormwater run-off to adjoining property that will result from the
development. Curb and gutter shall be required in accordance with Section 8.6.C.2.
16. Concrete sidewalks, a width of four (4) feet minimum, shall be constructed and
located in such a manner as to provide access from all lots to all common use areas
in the park. Also, sidewalks must be provided from all entrances to mobile homes
and manufactured homes to adjacent streets and/or sidewalks.
17. All mobile home and manufactured homes shall be properly secured, anchored and
approved by the City's designated inspector ..
18. There shall be a sufficient off-street storage area for trailers, boats, etc. located in
118.
\\SGVALPO\SDSK\sdsk\WORDPROC\SONAR\ 1567\ZONING\Section 8.doc (1-1-00)
SUBDIVISION CONTROL SECTTON VIII
a common use area in the park.
19. Each mobile home or manufactured home shall be enclosed with foundation siding
which is weather resistant, noncombustible, or self-extinguishing materials that blend
with the exterior siding of the home.
8.6 STANDARDS FOR IMPROVEMENTS AND INSTALLATIONS
A. Street Improvements
1. Streets shall be completed to grades shown on the Construction Plans drawn by the
subdivider's professional engineer or land surveyor and approved by the Plan
Commission.
2. Intersections shall be designed with a flat grade wherever practical. In hilly or rolling
areas, at the approach to an int~rsection, a leveling area shall be provided having
not greater than a two percent (2%) grade at a distance of sixty (60) feet, measured
from the nearest right-of-way line of the intersecting street.
3. At intersections of streets or alleys, property line corners shall be rounded by arcs
of at least twenty (20) feet radii or by chords of such arcs. Arterial and all streets in
commercial and industrial subdivisions shall have a minimum curb radius of thirty
(30) feet. Collector streets shall have a minimum curb radius of twenty-five (25) feet.
Local streets shall have a minimum curb return radius of twenty (20) feet.
4. If the smaller angle of intersection of two (2) streets is less than sixty (60) degrees,
the radius of the arc at the inters!=Ction of property lines shall be increased as
deemed advisable by the Commission.
5. a. Horizontal visibility on curved streets and vertical visibility on all streets must
be maintained along the centerline as follows:
( 1)
(2)
(3)
Arterial Streets
Collector Streets
Local Streets
500 feet
300 feet
150 feet
b. Curvature measured along the centerline shall have a minimum radius as
follows:
(1) Arterial Streets 500 feet min.
(or as determined by design speed standards)
(2) Collector Streets 300 feet
(3) Local Streets 150 feet
c. Between reversed curves there shall be a minimum tangent distance as
follows:
(1)
(2)
(3)
Arterial Streets
Collector Streets
Local Streets
100 feet
40 feet
40 feet
6. Maximum/minimum grades for streets" shall be as follows:
a. Arterial Streets - not greater than six percent (6%).
119.
\\BGVALPO\SDSK\sdsk\WORDPROC\BONARI 1567\ZONING\Section 8.doc 11-1-00)
,,__ _
SUBDIVISION CONTROL SEC770N VJ//
b. Collector Streets - not greater than eight percent (8%).
c. Local Streets - not greater than eight percent (8%).
d. Minimum grade for all streets is four-tenths percent (0.4%).
7. Before any performance bond covering a street installation is released, the Plan
Commission, City Council, or City Engineer may request that core borings of the
street be done at the subdivider's expense. Cores shall be sent to an independent
testing laboratory for analysis.
8. A developer may request permission of the Plan Commission to delay the installation
of the one- (1) inch surface layer of asphalt until the binder layer of asphalt has had
a sufficient time period to prove its durability under the stress of heavy construction
traffic. The developer shall be required to submit a separate performance bond to
cover the cost of the installation _of the one- (1) inch surface layer of asphalt.
9. Design Requirements of Street Pavements:
a. Streets shall be constructed in accordance with the following minimum
specifications:
. ·:1 .
. .... j\lternative Arterial Collector . Local
BITUMINOUS PAVEMENT &
STONE BASE -
#2 Compacted Aggr. Base 6 Inches 61nches 6 Inches
#53 or #73 Compacted Aggr. 41nches 4 Inches 41nches
Base
220 lb/S.Y. #9 Asphalt Binder 3±1nches 3±1nches 2± Inches
110 lb/S.Y. #11 B Asphalt Surface 1± Inch 1±1nch 1±1nch
FULL-DEPTH ASPHALT
PAVEMENT
Asphalt Base 550 lb/S.Y. 550 lb/S.Y. 440 lb/S.Y.
#9 Asphalt Binder 330 lb/S.Y. 330 lb/S.Y. 220 lb/S.Y.
#11 B Asphalt Surface 140 lb/S.Y. 140 lb/S.Y. 140 lb/S.Y.
CONCRETE PAVEMENT
#73 Compacted Aggr. Base 4 Inches Min. 4 Inches Min. 2 Inches Min.
Unreinforced Concrete Pavement 8 Inches 81nches 81nches
b. The earth or stone sub-base beneath the concrete street an\J the stone subbase
beneath the flexible asphalt street shall be compacted to meet
established City Standards.
120.
\\BGVALPO\SDSK\sdsk\WORDPROC\SONAR\ 1567\ZONING\Section 8.doc 11-1-00)
SUBDIVISION CONTROL SECllON VIII
c. Subsurface drainage tile shall be placed under the street base where the
subdivider's engineer or the City Engineer have determined that wet or
unstable soil conditions exist.
d. All materials shall be furnished and installed in accordance with Standard
Specifications, Indiana Department of Transportation, latest edition.
10. Dimensional Requirements of Street Pavements
a.
Street Type
Arterial
Collector
Local
Minimum
Street Width
(Feet)
36
30
27
Minimum
Dedicated
Right-of-Way
Width (Feet)
80
66
50
b. Street width is measured from back to back of a two- (2) foot wide curb and
gutter located on each side of the street unless otherwise approved.
B. Stormwater and Subsurface Drainage
1. The subdivider shall provide the subdivision with an adequate stormwater sewer
system whenever curbs and gutters are installed and whenever the evidence
available to the Commission indicates that natural surface drainage is inadequate.
When the surface drainage is adequate, easements for such surface drainage shall
be provided. Curbs and storm drains along both sides of all streets are required in
all subdivisions.
2. The stormwater drainage system shall be separate and independent of any sanitary
sewer system.
3. Storm drainage facilities shall be located in the street right-of-way, where feasible,
or in perpetual, unobstructed easements of appropriate width, and shall be
constructed in accordance with the details on the Construction Plans provided by the
subdivider's engineer or as approved by the Plan Commission.
4. Storm sewer inlets shall be provided at all low points and so that surface water is not
carried across or around any intersection, nor for a distance of more than three
hundred (3GO) feet in the gutter or as may be approved by the City Engineer.
5. It is the responsibility of the subdivider to keep all major watercourses, drainage
systems, etc., not under the jurisdiction of any public agency, open and free flowing.
6. Drainage facilities shall be capable of accommodating peak runoff from a ten- (10)
year return period storm or greater intensity, without endangering the public safety,
health, or causing significant damage to property.
7. Design Calculations: Design calculations are required as part of the drainage plan
and shall specifically include:
a. Estimate of stormwater runoff:
( 1) Drainage map, including indication of drainage patterns for lots and
blocks of areas affecting the proposed development site.
121.
\\BGVALPO\SDSK\sdsk\WORDPROC\BONAR\ 1567\ZONING\Section 8.doc (1-1-00)
SUBDIVISION CONTROL SECTJON VIII
(2) Weighted runoff coefficient computations.
(3) Time of concentration computation indicating overland flow time and
travel times in swales, gutters, pipes, and/or channels.
b. Closed conduit and open channel design computations:
(1) Size of pipe or channel cross-section.
(2) Pipe and channel slopes in percent.
(3) Roughness coefficient.
(4) Flow velocities in feet per second.
(5) Design capacity in cubic feet per second.
(6) Pipe and channel invert elevations.
c. Head loss computations in manholes and junction chambers.
d. Hydraulic gradient computations, wherever applicable.
8. On-site drainage facilities shall be designed to accommodate:
a. The water runoff from the parcel after development;
b. The present water runoff from developed areas upstream;
c. the present peak water runoff from undeveloped areas upstream;
9. Each applicant or other entity which makes any surface change shall be required to:
a. Collect on-site surface runoff and springs and dispose of it to the point of
discharge into an adequate outlet approved by the City Engineer.
b. Pay his proportionate share of the total cost of off-site improvements to the
common natural watercourse .
. ,_ ..
c. Provide and install at his expense, in accordance with the requirements of
the Ordinance, all drainage and erosion control improvements.
10. The subdivider shall provide a subsurface drainage system, below curbs, to be
placed along both sides of the subdivision streets and wherever else within the
subdivision that it is determined to be necessary, The purpose of the subsurface
piping system is to provide drainage for the street sub-base. The subsurface
drainage system shall discharge to the storm sewer system or to the surface
drainage system upon approval from the City Engineer. No subsurface drainage
system connections will be permitted to the sanitary sewer system.
11. It is illegal for sump pumps, downspouts, or foundation drains to outlet directly to the
street or into the right-of-way of the street, or to be connected to the sanitary sewer.
12. Plans for stormwater drainage shall include details for stormwater detention and
retention. Detention facilities shall be designed using the following guidelines to limit
122.
\\BGVALPO\SDSK\sdsk\WORDPROC\BONARI 1567\ZONING\Section 8.doc 11-1-001
SUBDIVISION CONTROL SECllON VIII
the peak discharge from a development.
a. For developments with a drainage area (tributary to stormwater detention
facilities) equal to or greater _than ten (10) acres, peak discharge from the
detention facility shall be limited to the five- (5) year pre-developed
frequency storm peak discharge, with a duration equal to or slightly greater
than the time of concentration for the drainage area, or the twenty-four (24)
hour duration storm, whichever provides the lesser peak discharge.
b. For developments with drainage area (tributary to detention facilities) less
than ten (10) acres, peak discharge from the detention facility shall be
limited to the ten ( 10) year period pre-developed frequency storm peak
discharge, with the same duration criteria provided in item a. above.
c. The five (5) year/ten (10) year peak discharge shall be based on land use
conditions prior to development, using corresponding runoff coefficients,
time of concentration, and other basin parameters.
d. Inflow (nunoff) to all storrnwater detention facilities shall be determined using
a one hundred (100) year twenty-four (24) hour storm to develop an inflow
hydrograph.
e. The one hundred (100) year twenty-four (24) hour peak discharge (and
inflow hydrograph) shall be based on land use conditions representing fully
developed conditions, using corresponding runoff coefficients, time of
concentration, and other basin parameters.
f. A routing procedure shall be used to demonstrate that the stormwater
detention facility wU\ reduce the one hundred (100) year peak discharge,
from the developed area, to a peak discharge equal to or less than five (5)
year/ten (10) year peak discharge using the pre-developed conditions.
g. The results of the routing procedure shall demonstrate that adequate
storage volume has been provided. The detention facility shall not be
overlapped from the one hundred (100) year twenty-four (24) hour storm
event, and shall have a minimum freeboard of two (2) feet between the
maximum routed pool elevation and the top of the facility embankment.
h. An emergency spillway shall be provided to discharge flow resulting from
pool elevations greater than the one hundred (100) year twenty-four (24)
hour pool elevation. The spillway shall have a minimum size adequate to
pass the routed one hundred (100) year twenty-four (24) hour storm
(assuming that the primary spillway is plugged and non-functional) without
overlapping the detention facility embankment. The elevation of the
emergency spillway shall not be placed lower than the routed one hundred
(100) year twenty-four (24) hour pool elevation.
I. Erosion protection shall be provided for the primary outlet and emergency
spillway so that the detention facility embankment will be adequately
protected. Location of the emergency spillway shall be in undisturbed
material, unless otherwise approved by the City Engineer.
j. The minimum allowable size for the primary outlet conduit, from the
detention facility, shall be twelve (12) inches. If further restriction of the
outlet conduit is required, the restriction shall be made at the head end of
123.
\\BGVALPO\SDSK\sdsk\WOROPROC\BONARI 1567\ZONING\Section 8.doc 11-1-00)
SUBDIVISION CONTROL SECTlON VIII
the outlet conduit.
k. In those instances where the discharge velocity from the primary outlet or
emergency spillway is greater than 6fps or excessive in the opinion of the
City Engineer, energy dissipation may be required. ·
I. Detention facilities, which are designed to have dry bottoms, must be
designed to include underdrains, to drain the bottom of the detention facility,
so that the facility can be maintained. Also, the bottom of the facility shall
be designed to have longitudinal and traverse grade to the outlet, so that the
facility will empty, leaving no ponded water.
m. Methodology for developing peak discharge hydrographs and ftood routing
calculations shall be in accordance with acceptable engineering practice.
Calculations based on the Soil Conservation Service Procedures, the Corps
of Engineers' Procedures, or the Bureau of Reclamation Procedures are
considered acceptable. -All other procedures must be approved by the City
Engineer.
n. Peak discharge calculations shall be submitted for the five (5) year/ten (10)
year pre-development and one hundred (100) year post-development
conditions. The calculations shall show the drainage area, the runoff
coefficients, the time of concentrations, and other basin parameters used to
develop the appropriate peak discharges.
o. Calculations shall be submitted which show stage-discharge relationships
(rating curves) for the primary outlet and emergency spillway, the stagestorage
relationship for the detention facility, the inftow hydrograph for the
one hundred (100) year twenty-four (24) hour storm, and the routed one
hundred (100) year twenty-four (24) hour discharge hydrograph.
C. Curbs and Gutters
1. The Commission shall require curbs and g_utters to be installed on each side of new
streets.
2. The curbs and gutters shall be constructed according to the following specifications:
a. The base for the curbs and gutters shall be well compacted on the existing
base or grade.
b. The minimum grade of any street gutter shall not be less than four-tenths
percent (0.4%).
c. The curbs and gutters shall be roll type, unless otherwise required or
approved by the City Engineer.
d. Inlets shall be located at the low point in the street grade and at other
spacing as stormwater system calculations require. The maximum spacing
between any two inlets shall be .500 feet.
e. Inlet grates should be depressed slightly below the plane of the gutter to
improve removal of runoff water. Inlet grates shall be heavy-duty type and
recommended for bicycle traffic.
124.
\\BGVALPO\SDSK\sdsk\WOROPROC\BONAR\1567\ZONING\Section 8.doc (1-1-00)
SUBDIVISION CONTROL SECTlON VIII
D. Sewers
1. The subdivider shall provide the subdivision with a complete sanitary sewer system
which shall connect with an existing interceptor sewer linking the subdivision to the
Nappanee Wastewater Treatment Plant. If said interceptor is not located adjacent
to the subdivision site, it shall be the responsibility of the subdivider to extend the
interceptor sewer to his property line. The subdivider may be reimbursed for part of
the cost of extending the interceptor sewer.
2. Design plans for installation of a sanitary sewer system shall be provided by the
subdivider and approved by the City Council, Board of Works, the Indiana
Department of Environmental Management, and other appropriate local and State
agencies as required. Upon the completion of the sanitary sewer installation, the
construction plans for such systems as-built shall be filed with the City Council and
Board of Works.
3. Each lot in the subdivision shalrbe required to pay a sewer connection fee to the
Nappanee Clerk-Treasurer, as indicated in the official fee schedule at the time of
obtaining a Location Improvement Permit.
4. Selected Design Criteria
a. Alignment - All sewers shall be laid with a straight alignment between
manholes.
b. Manhole Location - Manhole type, size, location and design shall be
completed in aceordance 'A'ith established City Standards.
c. Manholes - The difference in elevation between any incoming sewer and the
manhole invert shall not exceed twenty-four (24) inches where required to
match crowns. The use of drop manholes will require approval by the City
Engineer. The minimum inside diameter of the manholes shall conform to
those specified by the City Engineer or according to State requirements.
d. Sewer Locations - Sanitary sewers shall be located within street or alley
rights-of-way, unless topography dictates otherwise. When located in
easements on private property, access shall be provided for all manholes
and oversizing may be required in these instances. Where sewer lines in
private easements cross public street or alley rights-of-way, a manhole shall
be provided in such rights-of-way where possible. Imposed loading shall be
considered at all manhole locations. No less than six (6) feet of cover shall
be provided over top of pipe in street and alley rights-of-way or five (5) feet
in all other areas.
e. Relation of Sewers to Water Mains -A minimum horizontal distance of ten
(10) feet shall be maintained between parallel water and sewer lines. A
minimum vertical distance of eighteen (18) inches shall be maintained
between intersecting water and sewer lines.
f. Mandatory Connections to Public Sewers - In accordance with Indiana
Code, if a public sanitary sewer is available within 300 feet of a property, the
owner thereof may be required to connect to said sewer for the purpose of
disposing of waste. It shall be unlawful for any such owner or occupant to
construct or rebuild upon such property an individual sewage disposal
system.
125.
\IBGVALPO\SDSK\sdsk\WORDPROC\BONAR\ 1567\ZONING\Section 8.doc 11-1-00)
SUBDIVISION CONTROL SECllON Viii
E. Water Supply
1. The subdivider shall provide the subdivision with a complete water supply system,
which shall be connected to the existing Nappanee water supply.
2. The plans for the installation of water main supply systems shall be provided by the
subdivider and approved by the City Council and the Indiana Department of
Environmental Management. Upon completion of the water supply installation, the
plans for such system as built shall be filed with the City Council.
3. Approved fire hydrants shall be provided at each street intersection and at
intermediate points between intersections, as recommended by the Water Utility
Superintendent and Fire Chief. Generally, hydrant spacing is five hundred (500)
feet.
F. Monuments and Markers
1. Monuments and markers shall be placed under the supervision of a licensed land
surveyor and according to State Land Surveyor Regulations so that the center of the
pipe or marked point shall coincide exactly with the intersection of lines to be
marked, and shall be set so that the top of the monument or marker is level with the
finished grade.
2. Monuments shall be set:
a. At the intersection of lines forming angles in the-boundary of the subdivision,
at the beginning and end of all curves and points of tangency of the
perimeter of the plat.
b. At the intersection of right-of-way lines within the plat.
3. Markers shall be set:
a. At the intersection of the centerlines of all stre-ets, the center points of all culde-
sac tum arounds, at the beginning and end of all curves and at angle
points.
b. At all points where lot lines intersect curves, either front or rear.
c. At all anglesfn property lines of lots.
d. At all lot corners not established by rnonurnents.
4. Monuments shall be of precast concrete or cast-in-place concrete with minimum
dimensions of four (4) inches by four (4) inches by thirty-six (36) inches set vertically
in place. They shall be marked on top with iron or copper dowels at least three
eighths (3/8) inch in diameter, or deeply scored on top with a right angle cross.
Markers shall consist of iron pipes, steel bars, or copper bars, contain magnetic
qualities, have a distinctive top which will be marked with a deep point or cross at the
correct location, and be thirty-six (36) inches in total length and not less than five- ..
eighths (5/8) inch in diameter.
5. A minimum of one (1) permanent bench mark shall be established for each forty (40)
126.
\\BGVALPO\SDSK\sdsk\WORDPROC\BONAR\ 1 567\ZONING\Section 8.doc (1-1-00)
-,.
SUBDIVISION CONTROL SEC710N VIII
acres or fraction thereof, subdivided and at a location designated by the City
Engineer. The monuments shall be of concrete with a dimension of four (4) inches
by four (4) inches and forty-eight (48) inches long. A brass plate inscribed with the
elevation of the bench mark shall be fastened to the concrete with a minimum of onefourth
(1/4) inch high letters and numbers. Unless otherwise directed by the City
Engineer, bench mark datum shall conform to USGS sea level datum of 1929 and/or
USC and GS datum.
6. It shall be the responsibility of the subdivider to prevent disturbance or destruction
to all existing monuments within the jurisdictional boundaries of the City of those
parties under the direction. of or in the employment by the subdivider. Any activities
relating to the subdivider's improvements which cause disturbance or destruction of
existing monuments shall be reported immediately to the City as well as to the
appropriate county, state, or federal agencies. The subdivider shall be responsible
for the cost of any repair or re-establishment of any existing monument disturbed or
destroyed by his activities. The subdivider shall be aware of fines and penalties in
existence for disturbance or destruction of existing monuments.
7. All Public Land Survey points (section comers, quarter section corners, etc.) within
or on the boundaries of the land to be subdivided shall be shown on the plat and
referenced by no· less than three (3) measurements of angle and distance. Each
measurement of angle and distance shall be made from a separate known point on
the perimeter of the subdivision.
8. Lot corner markers shall be accurate at the time of sale or transfer from the
subdivider to a second party. After sale or transfer is complete, the subdivider, the
City, or other authorized agents shall not be liable for the accuracy of said markers.
9. All documentation necessary for the City Engineer to ascertain the location and
accuracy of the required monuments of this Section shall be submitted by· the
subdivider to the City Engineer.
10. The plat shall indicate the type and location of all required monuments set within the
property being subdivided.
11. Subdivider shall be required to establish the elevation of any bench mark set within
the limit of the project to within one-hundredth (1/100) of a foot of the U.S. Geological
Survey 1929 sea level datum or USC & GS datum. Evidence of the established
elevation shall be certified by a registered land surveyor licensed by the State of
Indiana and shall be submitted to the City Engineer.
12. Subdivider shall be required to establish the location of all horizontal monuments by
means of a traverse of the third order or better. Evidence of successful completion
of the required traverse shall be certified by a registered land surveyor licensed by
the State of Indiana and shall be submitted to the City Engineer.
G. Sidewalks
1. Sidewalks shall be required to be located on both sides of every street within the
subdivision plat, including around cul-de-sacs. Sidewalks shall be six (6) inches thick
· at drives and at least four ( 4) inches thick in all other locations. If driveways cannot
be located, special permission may be obtained by the Commission to deviate from
this standard. Sidewalks shall be a minimum of four (4) feet in width. Sidewalks shall
be Portland Cement type in accordance with the Standard Specifications of the
Indiana Department of Transportation, latest edition, with expansion joints every
127.
\\BGVALPO\SDSK\sdsk\WORDPROC\BONAR\ 1567\ZONING\Section 8.doc (1-1-00)
SUBDIVISION CONTROL SEC770N VIII
forty-eight (48) feet and control joints every six (6) feet.
2. Sidewalks and pathways located away from streets should be properly lighted to
permit visual surveillance of the walk or path from the street.
3. When sidewalks or pathways 9ross major street intersections within or adjacent to
the subdivision, safety devices such as painted crosswalks, signs, or traffic signals
shall be installed.
4. Easements of at least ten (10) feet in width shall be provided for sidewalks,
pedestrian paths, and bicycle paths.
5. ADA-compliant ramps for wheelchairs and bicycles shall be provided on all sidewalks
and pathways. Ramps are to be located at all intersections and other transition
access points. Overhead obstructions shall be cleared to a height of at least eight
(8) feet. Rolled curbs are not a substitute for wheelchair ramps.
H. Street Signs and Street Lighting
1. The subdivider shall be responsible for installing street signs at each intersection
throughout the subdivision. All hardware and fixtures shall be approved by the Plan
Commission. The City of Nappanee shall be responsible for placement of traffic
control signs where deemed necessary in the development by the City Engineer.
2. When the subdivision contains private streets, the subdivider shall be required to
post a sign at the entrance of the development proclaiming the name of the
subdivision with the phrase "Private Streets" placed directly below in ietters of two
(2) inches minimum height.
3. The subdivider shall provide the subdivision with street lights to be installed at
intersections throughout the subdivision or where deemed necessary by the City
Engineer. Street lights shall be pole mounted and conform to the installation
specifications of the Electric Utility. All electric lines are to be buried.
I. Utilities
All utility lines, including electrical power, gas, telephone, CA TV, sewer, and water shall be
located underground throughout the subdivision. The location of utility lines shall be shown
on the Primary Plat and on the Construction Plans. Service connections to the property lines
of each lot in the development shall be provided by the utility or subdivider.
8.7 DRAINAGE, EROSION, AND SEDIMENT CONTROL
A General
1. No changes shall be made in the contour of the land, nor shall grading, excavating,
removal, or destruction of the topsoil, trees, or other vegetative cover of the land be
commenced until such time that a plan for minimizing erosion and sedimentation has
been reviewed by the Zoning Administrator or there has been a determination by the
Zoning Administrator that such plans are not necessary. (Applies only to subdivision
developments.)
2. Measures used to control erosion and reduce sedimentation and to provide drainage
128.
\\BGVALPOISDSK\sdsk\WORDPROC\BONAR\ 1567\ZONING\Secfon 8.doc (1-1-00)
SUBDIVISION CONTROL SEC770N VIII
shall, as a minimum, meet the standards and specifications of the County Storm
Drainage, Erosion, and Sediment Control Ordinance. The Zoning Administrator shall
ensure compliance with all appropriate specifications.
B. Performance Principles
1. The following measures are effective in minimizing erosion and sedimentation and
shall be included where applicable in the overall development plan.
a. Existing features which would add value to residential, commercial, natural,
or manmade assets such as trees, streams, vistas, historically significant
items, and similarly irreplaceable assets shall be preserved through careful
and harmonious design.
b. Stripping of vegetation, regrading, or other development shall be done in
such a way that will minimize erosion.
c. Development plans shall keep cut fill operations to a minimum and ensure
conformity with topography so as to create the least erosion potential and
adequately handle the volume and velocity of surface water runoff.
d. Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected, and
supplemented.
e. The disturbed area and the duration of exposure shall be kept to a practical
minimum.
f. Temporary vegetation and mulching shall be used to protect exposed critical
areas during development.
g. The permanent final vegetation and structural erosion control and drainage
measures shall be installed as soon as practical in the development.
h. Provisions shall be .made to effectively accommodate the increased runoff
caused by changed soil and surface conditions during and after
development. Where necessary, the rate of surface water runoff will be
structurally retarded. · ··
i. Sediment in the runoff water shall be trapped until the disturbed area is
stabilized by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar
measures.
j. Design and construction of the drainage facility shall be such that it will be
durable and easy to maintain.
C. Grading for Drainage
In order to provide more suitable sites for building and other uses, improve surface drainage,
and control erosion, the following requirements shall be met:
1. The locations, grading, and placement of subgrade (base) material of all streets,
public driveway, and public parking areas shall be accomplished second, after
erosion control measures have been taken.
2. All lots, tracts, or parcels shall be graded to provide proper drainage away from the
129.
\\BGVALPO\SDSK\sdsk\WOROPROC\BONAR\ 1567\ZONING\Section 8.doc (1-1-00)
SUBDIVISION CONTROL SEC770N VIII
buildings, dispose of it without ponding. All land within the development shall be
graded to drain and dispose of surface water without ponding, except where
approved by the City Engineer.
3. All drainage provisions shall be of such design to adequately handle the surface
runoff and carry it to the nearest suitable outlet such as a curbed street, storm drain,
or natural watercourse. Where drainage swales are used to divert surface waters
away from buildings, they shall be sodded or planted, as required, and shall be of
such slope, shape, and size as to conform with the requirements of the Commission.
4. Concentration of surface water runoff shall only be permitted in swales,
watercourses, pipes, and detention ponds.
5. Land alteration shall be accomplished in such a way that the grades left at the time
that the work is completed will be permanent and stable.
6. Excavation and Fills
a. Cut and fill slopes shall not be steeper than three to one (3:1 ), unless
stabilized by a retaining wall or cribbing as approved by the City Engineer
when handled under special considerations.
b. Provisions shall be made to prevent surface water from damaging the cut
face of excavations or the sloping surfaces of fills, by installation of
temporary or permanent drainage across or above this area.
c. Cuts and fills shall not endanger adjoining property.
d. Fills shall be placed and compacted so as to minimize sliding or erosion of
the soil.
e. · Fills shall not encroach or impede fiows of natural watercourses or
constructed channels.
f. Fills placed adjacent to natural watercourses or constructed channels shall
have suitable protection against erosion during this period of construction.
g. Grading shall not be done in such a way so as to divert water onto the
property of another land owner without the expressed consent of the land
owner.
h. During grading operations, necessary measures for dust control shall be
exercised ..
i. Grading equipment shall not be allowed to cross live streams. Provisions
shall be made for the installation of temporary or permanent culverts or
bridges.
D. Responsibility for Drainage and Erosion Control
1. Whenever sedimentaiion is caused by stripping of vegetation, regrading, or other
development activities, it shall be the responsibility of the applicant, person,
corporation, or other entity causing such s_edimentation to remove it from all adjoining
surfaces, drainage systems, and watercourses, and to repair any damage at his
expense as quickly as possible.
130.
\\BGVALPO\SDSK\sdsk\WDRDPROC\BONAR\ 1567\ZONING\Secfon 8.doc (1-1-00)
SUBDIVISION CONTROL SECTION VIII
2. Maintenance of all driveways, parking areas, drainage facilities, and watercourses
within any development plan area is the responsibility of the applicant or developer,
provided that said facilities have not been dedicated to the public and accepted by
the appropriate authority for public maintenance.
3. It is the responsibility of the applicant and any person, corporation, or other entity
doing any action on or across a communal stream, watercourse, or swale, or upon
the fiood plain or fioodway area of any watercourse during the period of
development, to return these areas to their original or equal condition upon
completion of said activities.
4. No applicant, person, corporation, or other entity shall block, impede the fiow of,
alter, construct any structure, deposit any material or thing, or commit any act which
will affect normal or fiood flow in any communal stream or watercourse without
having obtained prior approval from the County Drainage Board and/or the Indiana
Department of Natural Resources, Division of Water, whichever may be applicable.
5. On-site drainage facilities shall be sufficient to accept:
a. the water runoff from the parcel after development;
b. the present water runoff from undeveloped areas upstream; and
c. the present water runoff from undeveloped areas upstream; and
d. that part of the water runoff attributable to future development in
undeveloped areas upstream, which is not reasonably likely to be
accommodated in such upstream areas.
6. Each applicant or other entity which makes any surface changes shall be required
to:
a. Collect on-site surface runoff and springs and dispose of it to the point of
discharge into an adequate outlet approved by the City Engineer.
b. Handle existing and potential off-site runoff through the development by
designing to adequately handle storm runoff from a fully developed area
upstream.
c. Pay his proportionate share of the total cost of off-site improvements to the
common natural watercourse, based on a fully developed drainage area.
d. Provide and install at his expense, all necessary drainage and erosion
control improvements (temporary and permanent) or as required by the City
Engineer.
7. It is the responsibility of the applicant or owner to keep all major watercourses, not
under the jurisdiction of any public agency, open and free flowing.
8. The applicant or owner will assume the responsibility for maintaining an open and
free flowing condition in. all minor streams, watercourses, and drainage systems,
constructed or otherwise improved in accordance with this Section, which are
necessary for proper drainage.
131.
l\BGVALPO\SDSK\sdsk\WORDPROC\BONAR\ 1567\ZONING\Section 8.doc 11-1-00)
SUBDIVISION CONTROL SEC770N VIII
E. Compliance with Regulations and Procedures
1. The design, installation, and maintenance of the required drainage facilities and
erosion and sediment control measures shall be in accordance with the standards
and specifications of the County Storm Drainage, Erosion, and Sediment Control
Ordinance.
2. The approval of plans and specifications for the control of erosion and sedimentation
shall be concurrent with the approval of the development and shall become a part
thereof.
3. Permission for clearing and grading prior to the approval of the development plan
may be obtained under temporary easements or other conditions satisfactory to the
City Engineer.
4. In the event the applicant or developer proceeds to clear and grade prior to the
approval of the subdivision or development plan, without satisfying conditions
specified herein, the Plan Commission may revoke the approval of all plans and a
suit for an injunction may be instituted to halt further construction until development
plans are approved.
5. Topsoil shall not be removed from residential lots or used as spoil. No construction
debris, junk, rubbish, or waste material shall be buried in any land or left deposited
on any lot or street within a subdivision.
8.8 COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL SUBDIVISIONS
A General Requirements
1. Land proposed for platting as a commercial or industrial subdivision shall be subject
to all of the requirements of this Ordinance and shall conform to the zoning
requirements of the district in which it is located. A Primary Plat, Secondary Plat,
and Construction Plans shall be submitted to the Plan Commission for review.
2. Lots and block standards for commercial and industrial subdivisions should be
fiexible so that lot sizes may be expanded by the subdivider to meet the
requirements of a prospective buyer or tenant. If, after recording of a Secondary
Plat, the subdivider wishes to amend the lot dimensions, an amended Secondary
Plat shall be presented by the subdivider to the Plan Commission for review.
Substantial changes shall have to go through another public hearing process. The
determination of "substantial changes" and the necessity of a public hearing shall be
made by the Zoning Administrator.
3. Streets located in a commercial or industrial subdivision shall be constructed to the
specifications for collector streets as detailed in this Article. The streets shall have
a minimum width of thirty (30) feet and a minimum right-of-way width of sixty-six (66)
feet. Curb and gutter, storm drainage, and subsurface drainage may be required by
the Plan Commission. Once constructed to the specifications of the City, the
subdivider may dedicate the streets to the City or may, upon approval of the Plan
Commission, elect to keep the streets private to be maintained by the owners andlor
tenants of the subdivision.
4. Every effort. shall be made to protect adjacent residential areas from potential
nuisance from a proposed non-residential subdivision, including the provision of
extra depth in parcels backing up on existing or potential residential development
132.
\\BGVALPO\SDSK\sdsk\WORDPROC\BONAR\ 1567\ZONING\Section 8.doc (1-1-00)
SUBDIVISION CONTROL SECTlON VIII
and provisions for a permanently landscaped buffer strip, when necessary.
5. Truck routes shall be established so as to prevent industrial traffic from encroaching
into adjacent residential areas.
6. The builder shall provide each building or Jot in the subdivision with a paved parking
area with enough marked spaces to meet the requirements of this Ordinance. The
parking area shall have a proper drainage system and should be adequately
landscaped and lighted.
7. Loading areas or loading docks shall be designed so that they do not interfere with
the operation of other lots or buildings. Loading areas shall not encroach on setback
lines.
8. No materials, supplies, motor vehicles, or equipment shall be stored outside oi the
buildings, unless the storage area is properly screened.
9. Frontage roads shall be provided where requested by the Commission to prevent
numerous entrances on existing streets or highways.
10. With respect to traffic and storm drainage, commercial and industrial subdivisions
shall be considered in totality, and individual parcels or lots shall not be considered
separately.
133.
\\BGVALPO\SDSK\sdsk\WORDPROC\SONAR\ 1567\ZONING\Section 8.doc (1-1-00)
BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS SECTION IX
9.1 MEMBERSHIP
A. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall consist of and continue as a five- (5) member Board.
Members shall be appointed pursuant to l.C. 36-7-4-902, as amended.
9.2 TERMS OF OFFICE
A. Each Board member shall be appointed for a term of four (4) years. Each term shall
expire at midnight on December 31 of the fourth year of the four- (41 year term;
however, members of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall serve until his successor is
appointed and seated.
9.3 JURISDICTION
A. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall have jurisdiction over lands subject to the provisions
of this Ordinance as specified in Section 1 .3 herein.
9.4 RULES AND PROCEDURES
A. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall have sole authority to adopt any and all rules under
Indiana Code Section 36-7-4-916 and any and all procedures concerning organization,
selection of officers, forms of applications, filing requirements, procedures, notices for
and con.duct of meetings and public hearings.
B. The City of Nappanee shall provide suitable facilities for the holding of Board of Zoning
Appeals meetings and hearings and the storage of its records, documents, and
accounts, and in its annual budget provide sufficient funds for the functioning of said
Board and its staff.
C. All applications for variances, special exceptions, and requests for appeal shall be filed
by the applicant with the the Board of Zoning Appeals and in the form prescribed by
said Board.
9.5 DUTIES AND POWERS
A. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall have exclusive subject matter jurisdiction for:
1. Variances from Development Standards (dimensional variances);
2. Variances of use (use variances);
3. Special exceptions; and
4. Administrative appeals.
U:ILANTZ\NAPPANEE\SECT.IX 13-21-981 134.
BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS SECTION IX
9.6 CONFLICT OF INTEREST
Pursuant to l.C. 36-7-4-909, a member of an Advisory Board of Zoning Appeals may not
participate in a hearing or decision of that Board concerning a zoning matter in which he has
a direct or indirect financial interest. The Board shall enter in its records the fact that its
member has such a disqualification.
9.7 HEARINGS
A. The Board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of administrative appeals, special
exceptions, and variances.
B. Public notice in accordance with l.C. 5-3-1-2 and l.C. 5-3-1-4 and due notice to
interested parties shall be given at lea"St ten 11 01 days before the date set for the
hearing.
C. The party pursuing the appeal or applying for the special exception or variance shall be
required to assume costs of public notice and notice to interested parties.*
D. The Board may, by rule, determine who are interested parties, how notice is to be given
to them, and who is required to give that notice.
E. Other persons may appear and present relevant evidence at such public hearing.
F. A person may not communicate with any member of the Board before the hearing with
intent to influence the member's action on a matter pending before the Board.
*Interested parties shall include, but are not limited to, all properties adjacent to the subject
site boundaries.
9.8 APPEALS
A. Any decision of the Zoning Administrator made in the enforcement of this Ordinance
may be appealed to the Board by any person claiming to be adversely affected by such
decision.
B. Every decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be subject to review by a writ of
certiorari as prescribed in l.C. 36-7-4-1000 series. Such appeals shall be presented to
a court or jurisdiction within thirty (30) business days of the Board's decision and not
thereafter.
U:\LANTZ\NAPPANEEISECT.IX (3·21-98) 135.
~
ADVISORY PLAN COMMISSION SFCTIONX
10.1 MEMBERSHIP
A. The Nappanee Advisory Plan Commission shall consist of membership as specified in l.C.
36-7-4-207, as amended.
B. If the Nappanee Advisory Plan Commission exercises jurisdiction outside the incorporated
area of the City of Nappanee as provided for in J.C. 36-7-4-205, additional members shall be
appointed to the Commission in accordance with the provisions of J.C. 36-7-4-214, as
amended.
10.2 TERMS OF OFFICE
A. Members of the Nappanee Advisory Plan Commission shall be appointed for tenms of office
as specified in J.C. 36-7-4-217 .. 220, as-amended.
10.3 JURISDICTION
A. The Nappanee Advisory Plan Commission shall have territorial jurisdiction over all lands
within the incorporated area of the City, or as other agreements may allow.
10.4 RULES AND PROCEDURES
A. The Nappanee Advisory Plan Commission shall have the sole authority to adopt any and all
rules for the administration of the affairs of the Commission per J.C. 36-7-4-401.
10.5 DUTIES AND POWERS
A. The Nappanee Advisory Plan Commission shall:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
Keep complete records of all Commission proceedings.
Record and file all bonds and contracts and assume responsibility for the custody
and preservation of all papers and documents of the Commission.
Prepare, publish and distribute reports, ordinances, or other materials relating to
authorized activities.
Certify to all official acts.
Supervise the fiscal affairs of the Commission and prepare, submit, and abide by an
annual budget.
Make recommendations to the legislative body per l.C. 36-7-4-405.
Initiate proposed amendments to this Ordinance.
Review all proposed amendments to this Ordinance initiated by the public.
Review all "HPD" Historic Preservation Overlay Districts.
U:\LANTZ\NAPPANEE\SECT.X (3-21-98) 136.
ADVISORY PLAN COMMISSION SECTIONX
1 O. Review all Development Plans for proposed Planned Unit Developments.
11. Review all parking plans.
10.6 CONFLICT OF INTEREST
Pursuant to l.C. 36-7-4-233, a member of the Plan Commission may not:
A. Participate as a member of the Plan Commission in a hearing or decision of that Commission
concerning a zoning matter in which the member has a direct or indirect financial interest.
The Commission, in such cases, shall enter in its records the fact that its member has such
a disqualification.
8. Directly or personally represent another person in a hearing before that Commission
concerning a zoning matter.
C. Receive any mileage or compensation under l.C. 36-7-4-222.5 for attendance at a meeting
if the member is disqualified under Item A above during any part of the meeting.
10.7 MEETINGS AND MINUTES
A. The Plan Commission shall fix the time for holding regular meetings each month or as
necessary.
8. The Commission shall keep and file minutes for each meeting as a matter of public record.
C. Special meetings of the Plan Commission may be called and held in accordance with the
provisions of l.C. 36-7-4-307.
10.8 PUBLIC HEARINGS
A. If the Plan Commission does not submit a recommendation to the Council within sixty (60)
days after the petition is referred to it, the Common Council may take final action on the
petition without recommendation by the Commission, unless the petitioner requests, in writing
to the Council and the Commission, additional time.
8. If the Common Council fails to act on a report of the Plan Commission recommending
approval or disapproval of a petition within sixty (60) days after such submission by the
Commission, such petition shall be deemed approved or disapproved by the Council as
recommended by the Commission.
C. If the report of the Plan Commission is adverse to a proposed amendment referred to it, the
proposed amendment may not be passed except by an affirmative vote of at least seventyfive
percent (75%) of the members of the Common Council.
D. All proposed amendments disapproved by the Plan Commission and the Common Council
may not be reconsidered by the Commission or Council until the expiration of one (1) year
after the date of its original rejection by the Plan Commission.
U:\LANTZINAPPANEEISECT.X (3-21-98) 137.
ADVISORY PLAN COMMISSION SECT!ONX
10.9 AMENDMENTS
A. Referral by Plan Commission and Approval by City Council
Any and all amendments to this Ordinance or to the official Zoning Map must be approved
by the Common Council after referral to the Plan Commission according to the procedure
established in this Title.
B. Origin of Petition
Petitions, duly signed, shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator requesting an
amendment or repeal of the Ordinance or the official Zoning Map by the Plan Commission
or by the owners of at least fifty-one percent (51 %) of the area involved in the petition.
C. Application Procedures
A proposed Ordinance for amendment or repeal of the Ordinance or the official Zoning Map
that does not originate from petition of the Plan Commission must be referred to the
Commission for consideration and report before any final action is taken by the Common
Council. Before the submission of the petition or its report to the Common Council, the Plan
Commission must give notice and hold a public hearing as required by the Public Law 178,
Acts of 1979, State of Indiana.
D. Minimum Requirements of Petition
All amendment petitions, other than those originating from the Plan Commission, shall consist
of at least the following:
1. Name, address, signature, and telephone number of the petitioner, owner, and any
person(s) holding options on the purchase of the property for the intended use.
2. Legal description and common a.ddress of the property being considered.
3. Identification of the proposed amendment and identification of any intended use of
property, with building square footage and height listed.
4. Current zoning of property being considered.
5. Required number of panking spaces for the identified use, and number of spaces to
be provided.
6. A site plan drawn to scale or with sufficient dimensions labeled to determine size for
all rezonings for other than single-family or two-family residences showing at least
the following: property lines, surrounding streets and alleys, surrounding land uses,
location of all existing and proposed buildings, location of parking and drive areas,
building and parking setbacks, utilities, and any landscaped or buffer areas.
E. Miscellaneous
The Nappanee Advisory Plan Commission may enact, establish, or enforce any other
powers, duties, or appointments as allowed under l.C. 36-7-4-200 .. 499.
U:\LANTZ\NAPPANEE\SECT.X (3-21-98) 138.

l
(
I..
ADMINISTRA T/VE PROCEDURES SECTION XI
1:1.1 IMPROVEMENT LOCATION PERMIT
A. Permits Required
No building or other structure shall be erected, moved, added to, or structurally altered
without an Improvement Location Permit issued by the Zoning Administrator or its staff in
accordance with Commission policies and procedures. No Improvement Location Permit
shall be issued by the Zoning Administrator or its staff except in conformity with the
provisions of this Ordinance, unless by written order from the Board of Zoning Appeals in the
form of an administrative appeal review, special exception, or variance as provided by this
Ordinance .
. B. Application for an Improvement Location Permit
All applications for Improvement Location-Penmits shall be accompanied by plans accurately
drawn, showing the actual dimensions and shape of the lot to be built upon; the exact sizes
and locations on the lot of buildings already existing, if any; and the location and dimensions
of the proposed building or alteration. The application shall include such other infonmation
as lawfully may be required by the Advisory Plan Commission or its staff to determine
conformance with and provide for the enforcement of this Ordinance including: existing or
proposed building or alteration; existing or proposed uses of the building and land; the
number of families, housekeeping units, or rental units the building is designed to
accommodate; conditions existing on the lot; and building setback distances from property
lines. The approved plans shall be retained by the Commission.
C. Expiration of Permits
1. Initiation of Work:
If the work described in any Improvement Location Penmit has not begun within
ninety (90) days from the date of issuance thereof, said permit shall expire; it shall
be canceled by the Commission or Zoning Administrator, and written notice thereof
shall be given to the persons affected. The Zoning Administrator may give a onetime
extension for up to ninety (90) days for work completion.
2. Completion of Work:
If the work described in any Improvement Location Permit has not been completed
within two (2) years of the date of issuance thereof, said permit shall expire and be
canceled by the Commission or Zoning Administrator and written notice thereof shall
be given to the persons affected, together with notice that future work as described
in the canceled permit shall not proceed unless and until a new Improvement
Location Permit has been obtained.
The Zoning Administrator may give a one-time extension for up to six (6) months for
work completion.
D. Construction According to Plans
Improvement Location Permits issued on the basis of plans and applications approved by the
Commission or its staff authorize only the use, arrangement, and construction set forth in
such approved plans and applications; and any other use, arrangement, or construction not
authorized shall be deemed as a violation of this Ordinance.
U:\LANTZ\NAPPANE\SECT.Xl (3-21-98) 139.
ADMINISTRA T/VE PROCEDURES SECTION XI
E. Schedule of Permits
The City of Nappanee hereby requires that an Improvement Location Permit be obtained for
the following:
1. All residential dwellings
2. Mini-barns (without foundation)
3. Other detached residential accessory buildings (with foundation)
4. Detached and attached garages and canports
5. Signs
6. Swimming pools
7. All commercial, industrial, and institutional buildings
8. Structures other than buildings (including satellite dishes, towers, antennas)
9. Conversions of occupancy classification (as per State Building Code)
10. Manufactured or mobile homes
11. Parking lots
12. Any exterior construction that adds to or alters the existing host structure
F. Schedule of Petition
1. The City of Nappanee hereby requires that a formal petition and filing fee be
submitted for the following:
• Zoning Amendments (zoning map change)
• Variances (dimensional or use)
• Special Exceptions
• Subdivision Plats
• Administrative Appeals
• Non-Subdivided Site Development Plans
2. Any petition submitted to the Plan Commission or the Board of Zoning Appeals shall
contain, in addition to the legal description of said property, a statement of the
common address or general location description, whichever is appropriate, as well
as a site location map showing the precise boundary lines and dimensions thereof.
11.2 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY
A. It shall hereby be declared unlawful and in violation of the provisions of this Ordinance for any
builder or property owner to allow any structure to become occupied or utilized prior to the
following:
1. Passing a final inspection; and
2. Receiving a Certificate of Occupancy from the City of Nappanee.
B. In any case involving a new or remodeled structure for which an Improvement Location
Permit has been issued, or any change in use of an existing structure or property, property
owners shall submit an application for a Certificate of Occupancy to the Zoning Administrator.
Upon review of this application and completion of any required inspection(s), the Zoning
Administrator shall issue the applicant a Certificate of Occupancy if it is determined that the
property and/or structure is in conformance with the provisions of this Ordinance.
C. In cases involving only a change in use of an existing structure or property, an inspection of
the property may not be required. Such a decision is at the discretion of the Zoning
Administrator.
U:\LANTZ\NAPPANE\SECT.Xl (3-21-98) 140.
ADMINISTRA T/VE PROCEDURES SECTION XI
D. For the purpose of this paragraph, the term "builder" shall mean the person or firm who
obtained the Improvement Location Permit.
E. The penalty for such a violation shall be as provided in Section 11.6 of this Ordinance.
11.3 SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS
A. A special exception may be permitted if an application for such use is approved by the
Common Council after referred to the Board of Zoning Appeals. Only the special uses listed
in the appropriate zoning district (see Table A in Section 4.6 of the Zoning Ordinance) may
be considered for approval as a special exception. Approval of the special exception shall
run with the property, however, approval of the special exception shall be voided if the use
is discontinued or abandoned for more that one (1) year. Any change to a different special
exception shall require a new petition ancf hearing.
B. The granting of a special exception is unnecessary for a use that existed on the date of this
ordinance, or pertinent amendments to it were passed. Any expansion or enlargement of
such existing use, however, shall require that the procedures set forth herein for the granting
of a special exception be followed.
C. A use authorized by special exception may not be expanded, extended, or enlarged unless
reauthorized by the Board Linder the procedures set forth herein for the granting of a special
exception.
D.
E.
An application for approval of a special exception must be filed with the Zoning Administrator.
The application must consist of at least the following:
1. Name, address, signature, and telephone number of the owner of the property, and
name, address, signature, and telephone number of any person (s) holding options
on the purchase of the property for the intended special use.
2. Legal description and common address of the property being considered.
3. Identification of the proposed special use and all accessory uses or structures, with
square footage and height listed.
4. Current zoning of the property.
5. Required number of parking spaces and number of spaces to be provided.
6. A site plan drawn to scale or with sufficient dimensions labeled to determine size,
showing at least the following: property lines, surrounding streets and alleys,
surrounding land uses, location of all existing and proposed buildings, location of
parking and drive areas, building and parking setbacks, utilities, and any landscaped
or buffer areas.
The Common Council may n'ot take action to permit or refuse to permit any special use until
after the matter has been referred to the Board of Zoning Appeals and said Board has held
a public hearing and reported to the Common Council in writing. The Board shall hold a
hearing and report its recommendation to the Common Council within sixty (60) days after
formal reference to said Board of Zoning Appeals. If no such report is forwarded to the
c·ouncil within sixty (60) days, the Council shall interpret this as a favorable report.
F. In the event the report of the Board is adverse to a proposed special exception referred to
U:ILANTZ\NAPPANEISECT.XI (3-21-98) 141.
ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES SECTION XI
it, the permit shall not be passed except by an affirmative vote of at least seventy-five percent
(75%) of the members of the Common Council.
G. In permitting special exceptions, the Board of Zoning Appeals may recommend and the
Common Council may establish appropriate conditions and safeguards as part of such
permission and the same shall be made a matter of the records in the minutes of the
Common Council and the Board of Zoning Appeals.
H. A special exception may be terminated by the Board upon filing of an application therefor by
an interested person, Board member, or Zoning Administrator, and upon finding at a public
hearing, with notice to the property owner, that the tenms of this Ordinance, or conditions of
approval or specified commitments have not been complied with.
11.4 VARIANCES
A. A variance from the terms of this Ordinance shall not be granted by the Board of Zoning
Appeals unless and until a written application for a variance is submitted to the Zoning
Administrator and the Board of Zoning Appeals containing:
1. Name, address, and phone number of applicants;
2. Legal description .of property;
3. Description of nature of variance requested;
4. A narrative statement demonstrating that the requested variance conforms to each
of the following standards:
a. The strict application of the terms of the Zoning Ordinance will
constitute an unusual and unnecessary hardship as applied to the
property for which a variance is sought;
b. The need for the variance arises from such condition peculiar to the
property involved and does not exist in similar property in the same
zone;
c. The use or value of the area adjacent to the property included in the
variance will not be adversely affected; and
d. The variance will not be injurious to the public health, safety,
morals, and general welfare of the community.
B. The Board may grant a variance from the development standards (such as height, bulk, area) of
the Zoning Ordinance if, after a public hearing on the application, it makes findings of facts in
writing, that:
1. The approval will not be injurious to the public health, safety, morals, and general welfare
of the community; and
2. The use and value of the area adjacent to the property included in the variance will not be
affected in a substantially adverse manner, and
3. The strict application of the terms of this Ordinance will result in a Practical Difficulty. This
situation shall not be self-imposed, nor be based on a perceived reduction of or restriction
on economic gain.
C. If the Board grants the variance, it shall direct the applicant to apply for an Improvement Location
U:\LANTZ\NAPPANE\SECT.XI (3-21-98) 142.
(_-
- l
.
ADMINISTRA TJVE PROCEDURES SECTION XI
Permit. If such application complies with this Ordinance and all other applicable codes or
ordinances, the Zoning Administrator shall issue the Improvement Location Permit for the use
authorized by variance.
D. The Board may permit or require the owner of a parcel of property to make written commitment
concerning the use or development of that parcel or may impose conditions upon that grant of
variance.
E. A variance granted by a Board shall run with the parcel until such time as: (1) the use of the
variance ends, or (2) the property conforms with the Ordinance as written.
F. Where an owner has failed to comply with any condition and/or commitment permitted or required
by the grant of variance, a Board may authorize such action as it may deem appropriate to obtain
compliance by the owner with the condition or commitment of the grant, or with the terms of this
Ordinance in the same manner as if the variance had not been granted.
11.5 SCHEDULE OF FEES
A. The Plan Commission shall maintain the official schedule of fees, charges, and expenses and a
collection procedure for permits, appeals, and other petitions pertaining to this ordinance. The
schedule of fees shall be available to the public in the office of the Clerk-Treasurer and may be
altered or amended only by resolution of the City Council.
B. Until all applicable fees, charges, and expenses have been paid in full, no final action shall be
taken on any permit application, appeal, or petition ..
C. Any person or persons who shall initiate construction of a structure prior to obtaining an
Improvement Location Permit or any other required permit shall pay twice the amount of the
current permit fee as established by the City Council.
11.6 ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
A. The Board of Zoning Appeals by mandatory injunction in the circuit court of the county against
the owner or possessor of the real estate, may require the removal of a structure erected in
violation of this Ordinance, or the removal of any use or condition in violation of this Ordinance.
B. A use that violates this Ordinance or duly made commitment shall be treated as if it were a
common nuisance, and the owner or possessor of the structure, land, or premises upon which
the use is maintained shall be liable for such nuisance.
C. Any person whether owner or possessor, who shall violate, or who permits or allows a violation,
of any of the provisions of this Ordinance or duly made commitment, or who fails to comply
therewith or with any requirements thereunder, or who shall build, reconstruct, or structurally alter
any building in violation of any detailed statement or plan submitted upon which an approval or
grant is given under this Ordinance, shall, upon complaint filed in any court of the county and
upon judgment finding such violation, be fined not less than ten dollars ($10.00) and not more
than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00), and each day that such violation or
noncompliance exists shall constitute a separate violation.
11.7 EFFECT ON ANNEXATION OR VACATION OR ZONING
A After the effective date of this Ordinance, areas annexed by the City of Nappanee shall be zoned
U:ll.ANTZINAPPANEISECT.XI (3-21-98) 143.
ADMJNJSTRA TIVE PROCEDURES SECTION XI
in the following manner:
1. Within sixty (60) days of the effective date of annexation, the Plan Commission shall submit
to the legislative body a recommended plan for zoning the area.
2. An Improvement Location Permit shall not be issued in an area annexed by the legislative
body until a plan for zoning for the area has been adopted, provided, however, that such
a permit may be issued for a single-family dwelling unit on a lot of record in a recorded
subdivision, provided that all other provisions of the Ordinance are complied with.
B. Whenever any street, alley, public way, railroad right-of-way, waterway, or other similar area is
vacated by proper authority, the districts adjoining each side of the street, alley, public way,
railroad right-of-way, or similar areas shall be extended automatically to the center of the vacation
and all areas included in the vacation shall then and henceforth be subject to all appropriate
regulations of the extended districts. In the event of a partial vacation, the adjoining district, or
district nearest the portion vacated, shall be extended automatically to include all of the vacated
area.
11.8 EXCLUSION
A. Nothing in this Ordinance or in any rules, regulations or orders issued pursuant to this Ordinance
shall be deemed to restrict or regulate or to authorize any unit of government, legislative body,
Plan Commission or Board of Zoning Appeals now or hereafter established, to restrict or regulate
the exercise of the power of eminent domain by the State of Indiana or by any state agency, or
the use of property owned or occupied by the State of Indiana or any state agency. As used in
this section, the term "state agency" shall mean and include all agencies, boards, commissions,
departments, and institutions, including state educational institutions of the State of Indiana.
11.9 ESTABLISHMENT OF AN HISTORIC PRESERVATION OVERLAY DISTRICT
A. If it finds that an area of land is of historic and cultural significance and is suitable for
preservation, the Common Council may establish such area by ordinance as an Historic
Preservation Overlay District. In the absence of provisions to the contrary in the ordinance
creating any such area, all regulations of the underlying district within such area is situated shall
continue to apply, however, it is recognized that in order to preserve and protect historic areas,
it may be necessary to regulate such areas with provisions different from those which would
normally apply in the underlying district.
B. Amendment to this Ordinance may be initiated by a request from the Common Council to the
Historic Preservation Commission, or as a petition either by the Plan Commission, Historic
Preservation Commission, or by the owners of at least 51 percent or more of the area involved
in the petition. Petitions shall be filed with the Historic Preservation Commission, and shall
contain the necessary information as prescribed by the Historic Preservation Commission.
C. Upon receipt by the Historic Preservation Commission, such Commission shall investigate the
property which is the subject of such application and shall prepare a written report for the Plan
Commission. At the next regularly scheduled public hearing of the Historic Preservation
Commission, following the completion of this rep.art, such application shall be considered by said
Commission, which shall recommend to the Plan Commission either 1) that such application be
approved as submitted or as modified by the Historic Preservation Commission, or 2) that such
application be denied.
D. The Plan Commission shall hold a public hearing according to the same procedures as a zoning
amendment. Following such hearing, the Plan Commission shall recommend to the Common
U;\LANTZ\NAPPANE\SECT.XI (3-21-98) 144.
(_
_l
ADl\t7JNISTRA T/VE PROCEDURES SECTION XI
Council either 1) that such petition be approved as submitted or as modified by the Plan
Commission, or 2) that such petition be denied.
E Thereafter, the Common Council shall proceed with consideration of such proposed ordinance
in the same manner and subject to the same voting requirements as would apply to a zoning
amendment, provided that the Common Council may amend such proposed ordinance prior to
its adoption in any manner it may deem necessary to accomplish the purposes of this Title.
F. In areas adopted as a Historic Preservation Overlay District, no exterior portion of any structure
or site (including walls, fences, light fixtures, steps, and pavements or other appurtenant
features). nor utility structure, nor any sign shall be erected, altered, restored, moved, or
demolished until an application for a Certificate of Appropriateness has been submitted to and
approved by the Historic Preservation Commission. This shall not apply to any building or
structure which the Building Commissioner or other official has determined to be a hazard to
public safety.
G. A Certificate of Appropriateness shall be filed in one of two ways: first, an application for a
Building Permit, Demolition Permit, Sign Permit, or Moving Permit is automatically an application
for a Certificate of Appropriateness; second, where no other permit is required, an application is
made directly to the Historic Preservation Commission on the form prescribed by the
Commission. The Commission will review the application and either issue a Certificate of
Appropriateness or deny the application, stating in writing the reasons for such denial. Upon such
denial, the applicant may appeal to the Common Council.
H.
I.
J.
11.10
A.
11 11
A.
In making its determination, the Historic Preservation Commission shall consider three (3)
factors: first, appropriateness of the proposed work to the preservation of the building and district;
second, the detriment to the public welfare if the proposed work is permitted even though it is not
deemed appropriate; third, the potential hardship that the denial of the Certificate of
Appropriateness would cause the applicant.
Where the Historic Preservation Commission deems it necessary, the Commission may petition
the Common Council for a temporary delay on proposed construction, reconstruction, alteration,
demolition, or moving, for the purpose of preparing a Historic Preservation Plan for the building
or district. Such a request shall be for a specified period of time and in no case shall the request
exceed one (1) year.
The Historic Preservation Commission may petition the Building Commissioner to use the legal
means available to him to cause the maintenance and/or repair of any building or structure within
the Historic District in accordance with the intent of this Ordinance.
ESTABLISHMENT OF A LOCAL LANDMARK
The establishment of a local landmark may be approved by the Common Council upon
recommendation of the Historic Preservation Commission and the Plan Commission. A petition
to establish a local landmark may be initiated by the owner of the property involved or by petition
of the Historic Preservation Commission, Plan Commission, or Common Council. The local
landmark described may or may not be located within an existing or proposed Historic
Preservation Overlay District.
ESTABLISHMENT OF A REGIONAL CORRIDOR OVERLAY DISTRICT
If it finds that an area of land adjacent to a primary transportation corridor is of regional
importance to transportation or commerce, as may be so designated by the Comprehensive Plan
or any amentment thereof, State of Indiana, Regional Council of Governments, or other
organization representing the regional welfare of the public, the Common Council may establish
U:\LANTZ\NAPPANE\SECT.XI (3-21-98) 145.
ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES SECTION XI
such area by ordinance as a Regional Corridor Overlay District. In the absence of provisions to
the contrary in the ordinance creating any such area, all regulations of the underlying district
within such area is situated shall continue to apply, however, it is recognized that in order to
preserve and protect areas for future development or expansion of critical transportation facilities,
it may be necessary to regulate such areas with provisions different from those which would
normally apply in the underlying district.
B. Amendment to this Ordinance for the purpose of creating a Regional Corridor Overlay District
may be initiated by a request from the Common Council to the Plan Commission, or as a petition
either by the Plan Commission or by the owners of at least 51 percent (51 %)or more of the area
involved in the petition. Petitions shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator, and shall contain
the necessary information as detailed in Section 10.9 herein.
C. Upon receipt of a petition from landowners, the Zoning Administrator shall investigate the property
which is the subject bf such application and shall prepare a written report for the Plan
Commission. At the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Plan Commission, following the
completion of this report, such application shall be considered by the Commission.
D. The Plan Commission shall hold a public hearing according to the same procedures as a zoning
amendment. Following such hearing, the Plan Commission shall recommend to the Common
Council either 1) that such petition be approved as submitted or as modified by the Plan
Commission, or 2) that such petition be denied.
E Thereafter, the Common Council shall proceed with consideration of such proposed ordinance
in the same manner and subject to the same voting requirements as would apply to a zoning
amendment, provided that the Common Council may amend such proposed ordinance prior to
its adoption in any manner it may deem necessary to accomplish the purposes of this Title.
F. On properties existing within a Regional Corridor Overlay District, no variances shall be granted
for any proposed improvements beyond the front building line, nor shall any structure or sign be
erected, altered, restored, moved, or demolished until an application for a Certificate of
Appropriateness has been submitted to and approved by the Plan Commission. This shall not
apply to any building or structure which the Building Commissioner or other official has
determined to be a hazard to public safety. .
G. A Certificate of Appropriateness shall be filed in one of two ways: first, an application for a
Building Permit, Demolition Permit, Sign Permit, or Moving Permit is automatically an application
for a Certificate of Appropriateness; second, where no other permit is required, an application is
made to the Zoning Administrator on the form prescribed by the Commission. The Commission
will review the application and either issue a Certificate of Appropriateness or deny the
application, stating in writing the reasons for such denial. Upon such denial, the applicant may
appeal to the Common Council.
H. In making its determination, the Plan Commission shall consider three (3) factors: first, the
general conformity of the proposed work with any proposals, plans, or policies in place for the
future development of the corridor and adjacent land; second, the detriment to the public welfare
if the proposed work is permitted even though it is not deemed appropriate; third, the potential
hardship that the denial of the Certificate of Appropriateness would cause the applicant.
U:\LANTZ\NAPPANE\SECT.XI (3-21-98) 146.
-·
HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION SECTION XII
12.1 ESTABLISHMENT
A. Within a period of one (1) year after the adoption of this Ordinance, a Historic Preservation
Commission shall be created according to the rules and regulations established under Public
Law IC 18-7-22 of the State of Indiana, effective September 1, 1980, and all amendments
thereto.
12.2 POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE COMMISSION
A. For the purposes of this Ordinance, the Historic Preservation Commission shall have the
following powers and duties: ·
1. Receive and review all proposed "HPD" Historic Preservation Overlay Districts
according to the provisions of Section 11.9.
2. Adopt and amend a "Book of Standards" for each overlay district when required as
described in Section 12.3.
3. Issue all Certificates of Appropriateness as described in Section 11.9.
4. Establish local landmarks as described in Section 11.10.
5. Inform the Zoning Administrator of all violations of Section 11.9 of this Ordinance,
which the Zoning Administrator will then enforce.
12.3 ADOPTION OF BOOK OF STANDARDS
As part of its written report described in Section 11.9, Subsection C, the Historic Preservation
Commission shall adopt a Book of Standards for that specific historic district Such book shall contain
all provisions different from those normally applicable in the underlying district, and all additional
architectural and site development standards to be followed within the historic district. The official
name of the historic neighborhood shall be stated as part of the title of the Book of Standards.
Amendments to the approved Book of Standards shall be made only by the Historic Preservation
Commission after notification of affected property owners and a public hearing on the proposed
changes.
U:ILANTZINAPPANEISECT.Xll (3-21-98) 147.

,.
l
-l
TELECOMMUN!CA TION FA Cl LIT/ES SECTION XIII
13.1 PURPOSE
The purpose and intent of this chapter is to provide a uniform and comprehensive set of standards
for the development of telecommunication facilities and installation of antennas. The regulations
contained herein are designed to protect and promote public health, safety, community welfare and
the aesthetic quality of Nappanee as set forth within the goals, objectives and policies of the
Nappanee Comprehensive Plan; while at the same time not unduly restricting the development of
needed telecommunications facilities and important amateur radio installations and encouraging
managed development of telecommunications infrastructure to insure Nappanee's role in the
evolution of technology. It is also the stated intent of this Chapter to provide a public forum to insure
a balance between public concerns and private interest in establishing telecommunication and related
facilities.
It is furthermore intended that, to all extent permitted by law, the City shall apply these regulations to
specifically accomplish the following:
A.
B.
c.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
-
Protect the visual character of the City from the potential adverse effects of
telecommunication facility development and minor antenna installation;
Insure against the creation of visual blight,
Retain local responsibility for and control over the use of public rights-of-way to protect
citizens and enhance the quality of their lives. ·
Protect the residents of Nappanee from the possible adverse health effects associated with
exposure to high levels of NIER (non-ionizing electromagnetic radiation);
Protect the environmental resources of Nappanee;
Insure that a competitive and broad range of telecommunications services and high quality
telecommunications infrastructure are provided to serve the business community;
Create and preserve telecommunication facilities that will serve as an important and effective
part of Nappanee's emergency response network;
Simplify and shorten the process for obtaining necessary permits for telecommunication
facilities while at the same time protecting the legitimate interests of Nappanee citizens; and,
Provide for the charging of reasonable, competitively neutral, non-discriminatory fees for use
of the public right-of-way by telecommunication providers.
13.2 DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning respectively
ascribed to them in this Section 2.2 of this Ordinance.
13.3 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
The following requirements shall be met for all Telecommunications Facilities in any zoning district:
A. Any applicable Comprehensive Plan Goals, Objectives, Programs and Policies, Specific Plan,
PUD Standards, Design Guidelines, and the permit requirements of any agencies which have
jurisdiction over the project;
U:\LANTZ\NAPPANEE\SECXlll.WPD (3·21·98) 148
TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES SECTION XIII
B. All the requirements established by the other chapters of the Nappanee Municipal Code and
Nappanee Zoning Ordinance that are not in conflict with the requirements contained in this
chapter;
C. Any applicable Airport land use compatibility criteria/policies and Federal Aviation
Administration regulations;
D. Any applicable easements or similar restrictions on the subject property, including adopted
PUD standards;
E. Facilities and minor antennas cannot be located in any required yard setback area of the
zoning district in which it is located with the exception of possible encroachment of the
antenna array into airspace over said setback;
F. All setbacks shall be measured from the base of the tower or structure closest to the
applicable property line or structure;
G. All commercial telecommunication facilities and minor antenna shall comply at all times with
all FCC rules, regulations, and standards;
H. All telecommunication facilities shall maintain in place a security program, when determined
necessary by and subject to the review .and approval of the Police Chief that will prevent
unauthorized access and vandalism; and
I. Satellite dish and parabolic antennas shall be situated as close to the ground as possible to
reduce visual impact without compromising their function.
J. · All telecommunications carriers and providers engaged in the business of transmitting,
supplying or furnishing of telecommunications originating or terminating in the City of
Nappanee shall register with the City pursuant to Section 13.4 of this Ordinance.
13.4 REGISTRATION OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS CARRIERS AND PROVIDERS
A. Registration Required. All telecommunications carriers and providers that offer or provide any
telecommunications services for a fee directly to the public, either within the City of
Nappanee, or outside the corporate limits from telecommunications facilities within the City,
shall register with the City pursuant to this Article on forms to be provided by the Zoning
Administrator, which shall include the following:
1. The identity and legal status of the registrant, including any affiliates.
2. The name, address and telephone number of the officer, agent or employee
responsible for the accuracy of the registration statement.
3. A narrative and map description of registrant's existing or proposed
telecommunications facilities within the City of Nappanee.
4. A description of the telecommunications services that the registrant intends to offer
or provide, or is currently offering or providing, to persons, firms, businesses or
institutions within the City.
5. Information sufficient to determine that the applicant has applied for and receiving
any certificate of authority required by the State of Indiana to provide
telecommunications services or facilities within the City.
U:ILANTZ\NAPPANEE\SECXlll.WPO (3-21-98) 149
TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES SECTION XIII
6. Information sufficient to determine that the applicant has applied for and received
any construction permit, operating license or other approvals required by the Federal
Communications Commission (FCC) to provide telecommunications services or
facilities within the City.
7. Such other information as the Plan Commission may reasonably require.
B. Registration fee. Each application for registration as a telecommunications carrier or provider
shall be accompanied by a fee as set forth in the Official Fee Schedule of Nappanee·.
C. Purpose of Registration. The purpose of registration under this Section is to:
1. Provide the City with accurate and current information concerning the
telecommunications carriers and providers who offer or provide telecommunications
services within the City, or that own or operate telecommunication facilities with the
City;
2. assist the City in enforcement of this Chapter;
3. assist the City in the collection and enforcement of any license fees or charges that
may be due the City; and assist the City is monitoring compliance with local, State
and Federal laws.
D. Amendment. Each registrant shall inform the City, within sixty (60) days of any change of the
information set forth in Section 13.4.
-c 13.5 AGREEMENT
l ..
No approval granted hereunder shall be effective until the applicant and the City have executed a
written agreement setting forth the particular terms and provisions under which the approval to occupy
and use public ways of the City will be granted.
13.6 NONEXCLUSIVE GRANT
No approval granted under this Article shall confer any exclusive right, privilege, license or franchise
to occupy or use the public ways of the City for delivery of telecommunications services or any other
purposes.
13.7 RIGHTS GRANTED
13.8
No approval granted under this Article shall convey any right, title or interest in the public ways, but
shall be deemed approval only to use and occupy the public ways for the limited purposes and term
stated in the approval. Further, no approval shall be construed as any warranty of title.
EXEMPT FACILITIES - BASIC REQUIREMENTS
Exempt facilities defined in Section 2.2 of this Ordinance may be installed, erected, maintained and/or
operated in any residential zoning district, except recognized Historic Districts, where such antennas
are permitted under this title, without benefit of a building permit or other entitlement process, so long
as all the following conditions are met:
U:\LANTZ\NAPPANEE\SECXlll.WPD (3-21-98) 150
TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES SECTION XIII
A. The antenna use involved is accessory to the primary use of the property which· is not a
telecommunications facility;
B. In a residential zone, no more than one (1) support structure for licensed amateur radio
operator, satellite dish eight feet (8') or less in diameter, is allowed on the parcel;
C. Sufficient anti-climbing measures have been incorporated into the facility, as needed, to
reduce potential for trespass and injury.
13.9 MINI FACILITIES - BASIC REQUIREMENTS
Mini facilities defined in Section 2.2 of this Ordinance may be installed, erected, maintained and/or
operated in any residential, commercial or industrial zoning district where ~uch antennas are
permitted under this title, upon the issuance of a building permit which has received site plan approval
by the Zoning Administrator, so long as all the following conditions are met:
A. In a commercial or industrial zone, no more than three (3) antenna, satellite dish eight feet
(8') or less in diameter; where adequate screening, at the discretion of the Zoning
Administrator, is provided; and the telecommunication facilities are solely for the use of the
project site tenants - location subject to the discretional review and approval of the Zoning
Administrator.
B. Replacement of pre-existing telecommunication facilities, installed under a prior approval
under this Chapter which is being proposed for replacement by equipment of identical or a
smaller size, at the discretion of the Zoning Administrator.
C. In a residential zone, where more than one (1) but no more than three (3) antenna or satellite
dishes (3' or less in diameter) are proposed.
D. Sufficient anti-climbing measures have been incorporated into the facility, as needed, to
reduce potential for trespass and injury.
13.10 MINOR FACILITIES- BASIC REQUIREMENTS
Minor facilities as defined in Section 2.2 of this Ordinance may be installed, erected, maintained
and/or operated in ariy commercial or industrial zoning district where such antennas are permitted
under this title, upon the issuance of a minor conditional use permit, so long as all the following
conditions are met:
A. The minor antenna use involved is accessory to the primary use of the property which is not
a telecommunications facility.
B, The combined effective radiated power radiated by all the antenna present on the parcel is
less than 1500 watts.
C. The combined NIER levels produced by all the antenna present on the parcel does not
exceed the NIER standard established in Section 13.28 of this Chapter. ·
D. The antenna is not situated between the primary building on the parcel and any public or
private street adjoining the parcel, so as to create a negative visual impact.
E. The antenna is located outside all yard and street setbacks specified in the zoning district in
which the antenna is to be located and no closer than twenty feet (20') to any property line.
U:ILANTZINAPPANEEISECXlll.WPD (3-21-98) 151
l
TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES SECTION XIII ,_
F. None of the guy wires employed are anchored within the area in front of the primary structure
on the parcel.
G. No portion of the antenna array extends beyond the property lines or into the area in front of
the primary building on the parcel, so as to create a negative visual impact
H_ At least ten feet (1 O') of horizontal clearance exists between the antenna and any power
lines, unless more clearance is required to meet CPUC standards.
I. All towers, masts and booms are made of a noncombustible material and all hardware such
as brackets, turnbuckles, clips, and similar type equipment subject to rust or corrosion has
been protected either by galvanizing or sheradizing after forming.
J. The materials employed are not unnecessarily bright, shiny or reflective and are of a color
and type that blends with the surroundings to the greatest extent possible.
K. The installation is in compliance with the manufacturer's structural specifications and the
requirements of the Nappanee Building Code.
L. The height of the facility shall include the height of any structure upon which it is placed,
unless otherwise defined within this Chapter.
M. No more than two (2) satellite dishes are allowed on the parcel, one of which may be over
three feet (3') in diameter, but no larger than eight feet (8') in diameter, with adequate
screening, at the discretion of the Zoning Administrator;
N. Any ground mounted satellite dish with a diameter greater than four feet (4') that is situated
less than five (5) times its actual diameter from adjoining property lines has screening
treatments located along the antenna's non-reception window axes and low-level landscape
treatments along its reception window axes. ·
0. Any roof mounted panel antenna with a face area greater than three and one-half (3 1/2)
square feet shall be located so as to be effectively unnoticeable.
P. Sufficient anti-climbing measures have been incorporated into the facility, as needed, to
reduce potential for trespass and injury.
Q. The facility is located more than seventy-five feet (75') from any residential dwelling unit,
unless recognized as an exempt facility as set forth in Section 2.2 of this Ordinance.
R. No trees larger than twenty inches (20") in diameter measured at four and one-half feet (4
1/2') high on the tree would have to be removed.
S. Any new building(s), structure(s), control panel(s), etc. shall be effectively screened from
view from off-site.
T. The site has an average cross slope of 10% or less.
U. All utility lines to the facility from public or private streets shall be undergrounded.
V. If located within a recognized Historic District, or on a structure recognized as a Historic
landmark, that adequate screening has been provided.
w. The general criteria set forth in this Chapter are met.
U:\LANTZ\NAPPANEE\SECXlll.WPD (3-21-98) 152
TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES SECTION XIII
13.11 MINOR FACILITIES - REFERRAL
The Zoning Administrator may refer a conditional use permit for a minor telecommunications facility
that meets all of the above standards if he/she determines, in his/her sole discretion, that the public
interest would be furthered by having the Planning Commission review this matter. In that case and
the case of any proposed facility that fails to meet one or more of the standards listed above, a use
permit approved by the Planning Commission shall be required to construct the facility in question.
13.12 APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS
The following are the minimum criteria applicable to all telecommunication facilities, except exempt
facilities as defined in Section 2.2 of this Ordinance. In the event that a project is subject to
discretionary and/or environmental review, mitigation measures or other conditions may also be
necessary. All Telecommunications Facilities shall comply with the following:
A The Zoning Administrator shall establish and maintain a list of information that must
accompany every application for the installation of a telecommunications facility. Said
information may include, but shall not be limited to, completed supplemental project
information forms, a specific maximum requested gross cross-sectional area, or silhouette,
of the facility; service area maps, network maps, alternative site analysis, visual impact
demonstrations including mock-ups and/or photo-montages, visual impact analysis, NIER
(non-ionizing electromagnetic radiation) exposure studies, title reports identifying legal
access, security considerations, lists of other nearby telecommunication facilities known to
the City, master plan for all related facilities within the city limits of Nappanee and within
one-quarter (1/4) mile therefrom; and facility design alternatives to the proposal and deposits
for peer review, if deemed necessary by the.Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator
may release an applicant from having to provide one or more of the pieces of information on
this list upon a finding that in the specific case involved said information is not necessary to
process or make a decision on the application being submitted; and
B. The Zoning Administrator is explicitly authorized at his/her discretion to employ on behalf of
the City an independent technical expert to review any technical materials submitted
including, but not limited to, those required under this Section and in those cases where a
technical demonstration of unavoidable need or unavailability of alternatives is required. The
applicant shall pay all the costs of said review, including any administrative costs incurred by
the city. Any proprietary information disclosed to the City or the expert hired shall remain
confidential and shall not be disclosed to any third party.
13.13 STANDARD AGREEMENTS REQUIRED
A A maintenance/facility removal agreement signed by the applicant shall be submitted to the
Zoning Administrator prior to approval of the use penmit or other entitlement for use
authorizing the establishment or modification of any telecommunications facility which
includes a telecommunication tower, one (1) or more new buildings/equipment enclosures
larger in aggregate than three hundred (300) square feet, more than three (3) satellite dishes
of any size, or a satellite dish larger than four feet (4') in diameter. Said agreement shall bind
the applicant and the applicant's successors-in-interest to properly maintain the exterior
appearance of and ultimately removal of the facility in compliance with the provisions of this
chapter and any conditions of approval. It shall further bind them to pay all costs for
monitoring compliance with, _and enforcement of, the agreement and to reimburse the City
for all costs incurred to perform any work required of the applicant by this agreement that the
applicant fails to perform. It shall also specifically authorize the City and/or its agents to enter
onto the property and undertake said work so long as:
U:\LANTZINAPPANEEISECXlll.WPD (3-21-98) 153
TELECOM MUN/CATION FACILITIES SECTION Xiii
1. The Zoning Administrator has first provided the applicant the following written
notices:
a. An initial compliance request identifying the work needed to comply with the
agreement and providing the applicant at least forty-five (45) calendar days
to complete it; and
b. A follow-up notice of default specifying the applicanfs failure to comply with
the work within the time period specified and indicating the city's intent to
commence the required working with ten (10) working days;
2. The applicant has not filed an appeal pursuant to Section 13.32 within fourteen (14)
working days of the notice required under Section 13.13 above. If an appeal is filed,
the City shall be authorized to enter the property and perfonm the necessary work
if the appeal is dismissed or final_action on it taken in favor of the City;
3. All costs incurred by the City to undertake any work required to be performed by the
applicant pursuant to the agreement referred to in Section 13.13 including, but not
limited to, administrative and job supervision costs, shall be borne solely by the
applicant The applicant shall deposit within ten (10) working days of written request
therefor such costs as the City reasonably estimates or has actually incurred to
complete such work. When estimates are employed, additional moneys shall be
deposited as need~d within ten (10) working days of demand to cover actual costs.
The agreement shall specifically require the applicant to immediately cease
operation of the telecommunication facility involved if the applicant fails to pay the
moneys demanded within ten (10) working days. It shall further require that operation
remain suspended until such costs are paid in full.
B. Standard agreement required by Section 13.13 shall be accompanied by the payment of a
fee, as established by Resolution of the City Council, into a trust fund established to cover
expenditures for the removal, screening, enhancement or similar activities relating to the
existence of telecommunication facilities within the City.
C. Standard agreement required by Section 13.13 shall include, but not be limited to, the
following stipulations agreed to by the applicant
1. Telecommunication facilities lessors shall be strictly libel for any and all sudden and
accidental pollution and gradual pollution resulting from their use within the City of
Nappanee. This liability shall include cleanup, intentionally injury or damage to
persons or property. Additionally, telecommunication facilities lessors shall be
responsible for any sanctions, fines, or other monetary costs imposed as a result of
the.release of pollutants from their operations. Pollutants means any solid, liquid,
gaseous or thermal irritant or contaminant, include smoke, vapor, soot, fumes, acids,
alkalis, chemicals, electromagnetic waves and waste. Waste includes materials to
be recycled, reconditioned or reclaimed.
2. The telecommunication facility provider shall defend, indemnify, and hold harmless
the City or any of its boards, commissions, agents, officers, and employees from any
claim, action or proceeding against the City, its boards, commission, agents, officers,
or employees to attack, set aside, void, or annul, the approval of the project when
such claim or action is brought within the time period provided for in applicable State
and/or local statutes. The City shall prompUy notify the provider(s) of any such claim,
action or proceeding. The City shall have the option of coordinating in the defense.
Nothing contained in this stipulation shall prohibit the City from participating in a
defense of any claim, action, or proceeding if the City bears its own attorney's fees
U:ILANTZINAPPANEEISECXlll.WPD (3-21-98) 154
TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES SECTION XIII
and costs, and the City defends the action in good faith.
13.14 LIFE OF PERMITS
A. A use permit issued pursuant to this chapter or a site plan approval issued pursuant to this
chapter authorizing establishment of a telecommunication facility, except exempt facilities as
defined in Section 2.2 of this Ordinance shall be reviewed every ten (10) years. Costs
associated with the review process shall be borne by the telecommunication facility
owner/provider. Grounds for revocation of the conditional use permit shall be limited to a
finding that (1) the use involved is no longer allowed in the applicable zoning district, (2) the
facility fails to comply with the relevant requirements of this chapter as they exist at the time
of renewal and the permittee has failed to supply assurances acceptable to the Zoning
Administrator that the facility will be brought into compliance within one hundred twenty (120)
days, (3) the permittee has failed to comply with the conditions-of-approval imposed, (4) the
facility has not been properly maintainea, or (5) the facility has not been upgraded to
minimize its impact, including community aesthetics, to the greatest extent permitted by the
technology that exists at the time of renewal and is consistent with the provisions of universal
service at affordable rates. The grounds for appeal of issuance of a renewal shall be limited
to a showing that one or more of the situations listed above do in fact exist or that the notice
required under Section 13.30 was not provided.
B. If a use permit or other entitlement for use is not renewed, it shall automatically become null
and void without notice or hearing ten (10) years after it is issued or upon cessation of use
for more than a year and a day, whichever comes first. Unless a new use permit or
entitlement of use is issued, within one hundred. twenty (120) days thereafter all
improvements installed including their foundations down to three feet (3' below ground
surface) shall be removed from the property and the site restored to its natural
pre-construction state within one hundred eighty (180) days of non-renewal or abandonment.
Any access road installed shall also be removed and the ground returned to its natural
condition unless the property owner establishes to the satisfaction of the Zoning
Administrator that these sections of road are necessary to serve some other allowed use of
the property that is permitted or is currently" present or to provide access to adjoining parcels.
13.15 STRUCTURAL REQUIREMENTS
No telecommunication facility shall be designed and/or sited such that it poses a potential hazard to
nearby residences or surrounding properties or improvements. To this end, any telecommunication
tower, except exempt facilities as defined in Section 2.2 of this Ordinance, located at a distance of
less than 110% of its height from a habitable structure, property line, or other tower shall be designed
and maintained to withstand without failure the maximum forces expected from wind and earthquakes
when the tower is fully loaded with antennas, transmitters and other equipment, and camouflaging.
Initial demonstration of compliance with this requirement shall be provided via submission of a report
to the Zoning Administrator prepared by a structural engineer licensed by the State of Indiana
describing the tower structure, specifying the number and type of antennas it is designed to
accommodate, providing the basis for the calculations done, and documenting the actual calculations
performed. Proof of ongoing compliance shall be provided via submission to the Zoning Administrator
at least every five (5) (self-supporting and guyed towers)/ten (10) (monopoles) years of an inspection
report prepared by an Indiana-licensed structural engineer indicating the number and types of
antennas and related equipment actually present and indicating the structural integrity of the tower.
Based on this report, the Zoning Administrator may require repair or; if a serious safety problem
exists, removal of the tower.
U:\LANTZ\NAPPANEE\SECXlll.WPD (3-21-98) 155
(_
_(
TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES SECTION XIII
13.16 BASIC TOWER AND BUILDING DESIGN
All telecommunication facilities, except exempt facilities as defined in Section 2.2 of this Ordinance,
shall be designed to blend into the surrounding environment to the greatest extent feasible. To this
end all the. following measures shall be implemented:
A. Telecommunication towers shall be constructed out of metal or other non-flammable material,
unless specifically conditioned by the City to be otherwise.
B. Telecommunication towers taller than thirty-five feet (35') shall be monopoles or guyed/lattice
towers except where satisfactory evidence is submitted to the Zoning Administrator or
Planning Commission, as appropriate, that a self-supporting tower is required to provide the
height and/or capacity necessary for the proposed telecommunication use to minimize the
need for screening from adjacent properties, or to reduce the potential for bird strikes.
C. Satellite dishes other than microwave dishes shall be of mesh construction, except where
technical evidence is acceptable to the Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission, as
appropriate, is submitted showing that this is infeasible.
D. Telecommunication support facilities (i.e., vaults, equipment. rooms, utilities, and equipment
enclosures) shall be constructed out of non-reflective materials (visible exterior.surfaces only)
and shall be placed in underground vaults to all extent possible.
E. Telecommunication support facilities shall be no taller than one story (fifteen feet) in height
and shall be treated to look like a building or facility typically found in the area.
F. Telecommunication support facilities in areas of high visibility shall, where possible, be sited
below the ridgeline or designed (i.e., placed underground, depressed, or located behind earth
bemns) to minimize their profile.
G. All buildings, poles, towers, antenna supports, antennas, and other components of each
telecommunications site shall be initially painted and thereafter repainted as necessary with
a "flaf' paint The color selected shall be o'ne that in the opinion of the Zoning Administrator
or Planning Commission, as appropriate, will minimize their visibility to the greatest extent
feasible. To this end, improvements which will be primarily viewed against soils, trees or
grasslands shall be painted colors matching these landscapes while elements which rise
above the horizon shall be painted a blue gray that matches the typical sky color at that
location.
H. The project description and permit shall include a specific maximum allowable gross
cross-sectional area, or silhouette, of the facility. The silhouette shall be measured from the
"worst case" elevation perspective.
I. The City shall have the authority to require special design of the telecommunication facilities
where findings of particular sensitivity are made (e.g. proximity to historic or aesthetically
significant structures, views and/or community features).
J. Telecommunication facilities shall insure that sufficient anti-climbing measures have been
·incorporated into the facility, as needed, to reduce potential for trespass and injury.
13.17 CRITICAL DISASTER RESPONSE FACILITIES
A. All radio, television and voice communication facilities providing service to government or the
general public shall be designed to survive a natural disaster without interruption in operation.
U:ILANTZINAPPANEEISECXlll.WPD (3-21-98) 156
TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES SECTION XIII
To this end all the following measures shall be implemented:
1. Non-flammable exterior wall and roof covering shall be used in the construction of
all buildings;
2. Openings in all buildings shall be protected against penetration by fire and
windblown embers;
3. The telecommunication tower when fully loaded with antennas, transmitters, other
equipment and camouflaging shall be designed to withstand the forces expected
during the "maximum credible earthquake". All equipment mounting racks and
equipment used shall be anchored in such a manner that such a quake will not tip
them over, throw the equipment off its shelves, or otherwise act to damage it;
4. All connections between various components of the facility and with necessary
power and telephone lines shall be protected against damage by fire, flooding, and
earthquake; and
5. Measures shall be taken to keep the facility operation in the event of disaster.
B. Demonstration of compliance with requirements A.1., 2., 4. and 5. (fire only) shall be
evidenced by a certified signed by the City Fire Chief on the building plans submitted.
C. Demonstration of compliance with requirements A.3. through 5. (earthquake only) shall be
provided via a second certification ori said plans signed by a structural engineer or other
appropriate professional licensed by the State of Indiana.
13.18 LOCATION
All telecommunication facilities shall be located so as to minimize their visibility and the number of
distinct facilities present. To this end all of the following measures shall be implemented for all
telecommunications facilities, except exempt facilities as defined in Section 2.2 of this Ordinance:
A. No telecommunication facility shall be installed within the safety zone of the Nappanee
Municipal Airport or any helipad unless the airport owner/operator indicates that it will not
adversely affect the operation of the airport or helipad;
B. No telecommunication facility shall be installed at a location where special painting or lighting
will be required by the FAA regulations unless technical evidence acceptable to the Zoning
Administrator or Planning Commission, as appropriate, is submitted showing that this is the
only technically feasible location for this facility;
C. No telecommunication facility that is readily visible from off-site shall be installed closer than
one-half mile from another readily visible uncamouftaged or unscreened telecommunication
facility unless it is a co-located facility, situated on a multiple-user site, or blends with the
surrounding existing natural and man-made environment in such a manner as to be
effectively unnoticeable; or technical evidence acceptable to the Zoning Administrator or
Planning Commission, as appropriate, is submitted showing a clear need for this facility and
the infeasibility of co-locating it on one of these former sites;
D. No telecommunication facility that is readily visible from off-site shall be installed on a site that
is not already developed with telecommunication facilities or other public or quasi-public uses
unless it blends with the surrounding existing natural and man-made environment in such a
manner so as to be effectively unnoticeable or technical evidence acceptable to the Zoning
U:\LANTZ\NAPPANEE\SECXlll.WPD (3-21-98) 157
(_
_l
TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES SECTION XIII -·
Administrator or Planning Commission, as appropriate, is submitted showing a clear need
for this facility and the unfeasibility of co-locating it on one of these former sites; and
E. Telecommunication towers shall be set back at least twenty percent (20%) of the tower
height from all property lines and at least one hundred feet (100') from any public trail, park
or outdoor recreation area. Guy wire anchors shall be set back at least twenty feet (20') from
any property line.
13.19 HEIGHT
The height of a telecommunication tower shall be measured from the natural undisturbed ground
surface below the center of the base of said tower to the top of the tower itself or, if higher, to the tip
of the highest antenna or piece of equipment attached thereto. In the case of building-mounted towers
the height of the tower includes the height of the pqrtion of the building on which it is mounted. In the
case of "crank-up" or other similar towers whose height can be adjusted, the height of the tower shall
be the maximum height to which it is capable of being raised.
13.20 CO-LOCATED AND MULTIPLE USER FACILITIES
A. An analysis shall be prepared by or on behalf of the applicant, subject to the approval of the
decision making body, which identifies all reasonable, technically feasible, alternative
locations and/or facilities which would provide the proposed telecommunication service. The
intention of the alternatives analysis is to present alternative strategies which would minimize
the number, size, and adverse environmental impacts of facilities necessary to provide the
needed services to the City and surrounding rural and urban areas. The analysis shall
address the potential for co-location at an existing or a new site and the potential to locate
facilities as close as possible to the intended service area. It shall also explain the rationale
for selection of the proposed site in view of the relative merits of any of the feasible
alternatives. Approval of the project is subject to the decision making body making a finding
that the proposed site results in fewer or Jess severe environmental impacts than any feasible
alternative site. The City may require i·ndependent verification of this analysis at the
applicant's expense.
Facilities which are not proposed to be co-located with another telecommunication facility
shall provide a written explanation why the subject facility is not a candidate for co-location.
B. All co-located and multiple-user telecommunication facilities shall be designed to promote
facility and site sharing. To this end telecommunication towers and necessary
appurtenances, including but not limited to, parking areas, access roads, utilities and
equipment buildings shall be shared by site users when in the determination of the Zoning
Administrator or Planning Commission, as appropriate, this will minimize overall visual impact
to the community.
C. The facility shall make available unutilized space for co-location of other telecommunication
facilities, including space for these entities providing similar, competing services. A good faith
effort in achieving co-location shall be required of the host entity. Requests for utilization of
facility space and responses to such requests shall be made in a timely manner and in writing
and copies shall be provided to the City's permit files. Unresolved disputes may be med·1ated
by the Planning Commission or City Council. Co-location is not required in cases where the
addition of the new service or facilities would cause quality of service impairment to the
existing facility or if it became necessary for the host to go off-line for a significant period of
time.
U:ILANTZINAPPANEE\SECXlll.WPD (3-21·98) 158
TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES SECTION XIII
D. Approval for the establishment of facilities improved with an existing microwave band or other
public service use or facility, which creates interference or interference is anticipated as a
result of said establishment of additional facilities, shall include provisions for the relocation
of said existing public use facilities. All costs associated with said relocation shall be borne
by the applicant for the additional facilities.
13.21 LIGHTING
All telecommunication facilities shall be unlit except for the following:
A. A manually-operated or motion-detector controlled light above the equipment shed door
which shall be kept off except when personnel are actually present at night; and
B. the minimum tower lighting required under FAA regulation; and
C. where tower lighting is required, it shall be shielded or directed to the greatest extent possible
in such a manner as to minimize the amount of light that falls onto nearby properties,
particularly residences.
13.22 ACCESS AND PARKING
All telecommunication facilities, except exempt facilities as defined in Section 2.2 of this Ordinance,
shall be served by the minimum roads and parking areas necessary. To this end all the following
measures shall be implemented:
A. Existing roads shall be used for access, whenever possible, and be upgraded the minimum
amount necessary to meet standards specified by the Fire Chief and City Engineer. Any new
roads or parking areas built shall, whenever feasible, be shared with subsequent
telecommunication facilities and/or other penmitted uses. In addition, they shall meet the width
and structural requirements of the Fire Ch_ief and City Engineer;
B. Existing parking areas shall, whenever possible, be used; and
C. Any new parking areas constructed shall be no larger than three hundred fifty (350) square
feet.
13.23 VEGETATION PROTECTION AND SCREENING
All telecommunications facilities shall be installed in such a manner so as to maintain and enhance
existing native vegetation and to install suitable landscaping to screen the facility, where necessary.
To this end all of the following measures shall be implemented for all telecommunication facilities,
except exempt facilities as defined in Section 2.2 of this Ordinance::
A. A landscape plan shall be submitted with project application submittal indicating all existing
vegetation, identifying landscaping that is to be retained on the site and any additional
vegetation that is needed to satisfactorily screen the facility from adjacent land uses and
public view areas. The landscape plan shall be subject to review and approval of the Plan
Commission. All trees, larger than four inches (4"} in diameter shall be identified in the
landscape plan with indication of species type, diameter at four and one-half feet (4 1/2'} high,
and whether it is to be retained or removed with project development;
B. Existing trees and other screening vegetation in the vicinity of the facility and along the
U:\LANTZ\NAPPANEE\SECXlll.WPD (3-21-98) 159
- (.
TELECOMMUNJCA TION FACILITIES SECTION XIII __
access roads and power/telecommunication line routes involved shall be protected from
damage, both during the construction period and thereafter. To this end, the following
measures shall be implemented:
1. A Tree Protection Plan shall be submitted with building permtt or improvement plan.
This Plan shall be prepared by a certified arborist and give specific measures to
protect trees during project construction;
2. Grading, cutting/filling, and the storage/parking of equipment/vehicles shall be
prohibited in landscaped areas to be protected and the drip line of any trees required
to be preserved. Such areas shall be fenced to the satisfaction of the Zoning
Administrator or Commission, as appropriate. Trash, debris, or spoils shall not be
placed within these fences nor shall the fences henceforth be opened or moved until
the project is complete and written approval to take the fences down has been
received from the Zoning Administrator; and
3. All underground lines shall be routed such that a minimum amount of damage is
done to tree root systems.
C. All areas disturbed during project construction other than the access road and parking areas
required under Section 13.22 shall be replanted with vegetation compatible with the
vegetation in the surrounding area (e.g., ornamental shrubs or natural brush, depending upon
the circumstances) to the ~atisfaction of the Zoning Administrator;
D.
E.
Any existing trees or significant vegetation, on the facilities site or along the affected access
area that die shall be replaced with native trees and vegetation of a size and species
acceptable to the Zoning Administrator; ·
No actions shall be taken subsequent to project completion with respect to the vegetation
present that would increase the visibility of the facility itself or the access road and
power/telecommunication lines serving it.
13.24 FIRE PREVENTION
A. All telecommunication facilities shall be designed and operated in such a manner so as to
minimize the risk of igniting a fire or intensifying one that otherwise occurs. To this end all of
the following measures shall be implemented for all telecommunication facilities, when
determined necessary by the Fire Chief, except exempt facilities as defined in Section 2.2
of this Ordinance:
1. At least one-hour fire resistant interior surfaces shall be used in the construction of
all buildings;
2. Monitored automatic fire extinguishing systems approved by the Fire Chief shall be
installed in all equipment buildings and enclosures;
3. Rapid entry (KNOX) systems shall be installed as required by the Fire Chief;
4. Type and location of vegetation and other materials within ten feet (1 O') of the facility
and all new structures, including telecommunication towers, shall have review for fire
safety purposes by the Fire Chief. Requirements established by the Fire Chief shall
be followed; and
5. All tree trimmings and trash generated by construction of the facility shall be
U:ILANTZINAPPANEEISECXlll.WPD (3·21-98) 160
TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES SECTION XI/I
removed from the property and properly disposed of prior to building permit
finalization or commencement of operation, whichever comes first.
B. Demonstration of compliance with requirements A.1. through A.5. shall be evidenced by a
certificate signed by the Fire Chief on the building plans submitted.
13.25 ENVIRONMENTAL RESOURCE PROTECTION
All telecommunication facilities shall be sited so as to minimize the effect on environmental resources.
To that end the following measures shall be implemented for all telecommunication facilities, except
exempt facilities as defined in Section 2.2 of this Ordinance:
A No telecommunications facility or related improvements including but not limited to access
roads and power lines shall be sited so as to create a significant threat to the health or
survival of rare, threatened or endangered plant or animal species;
B. No telecommunications facility or related improvements shall be sited such that their
construction will damage an archaeological site or have an adverse effect on the historic
character of a historic feature or site;
C. No telecommunications facility shall be sited such that its presence threatens the health or
safety of migratory birds;
D. The facility shall comply with all applicable Floodplain, Floodway and Storm Drainage and
Erosion Control regulations;
E. Potential adverse visual impacts which might result from project related grading or road
constnuction shall be minimized;
F. Potential adverse impacts upon nearby public use areas such as parks or trails shall be
minimized; and
G. Drainage, erosion, and sediment controls shall be required as necessary to abide soil erosion
and sedimentation of waterways. Structures and roads on slopes of 10% or greater shall be
avoided. Erosion control measures shall be incorporated for any proposed facility which
involves grading or construction near a waterway or on lands with slopes over 10%. Natural
vegetation and topography shall be retained to the extent feasible.
13.26 NOISE AND TRAFFIC
All telecommunication facilities shall be constructed and operated in such a manner as to minimize
the amount of disruption caused to the residents of nearby homes and the users of nearby
recreational areas such as public parks and trails. To that end all the following measures shall be
implemented for all telecommunication facilities, except exempt facilities as defined in Section 2.2 of
this Ordinance:
A Outdoor noise producing construction activities shall only take place on weekdays (Monday
through Friday, non-holiday) between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 5:30 p.m. unless allowed
at other times by the .Plan Commission;
B. Backup generators shall only be operated during power outages and for testing and
maintenance purposes. If the facility is located within one hundred feet (100') of a residential
dwelling unit, noise attenuation measures shall be included to reduce noise levels to an
U:\LANTZ\NAPPANEE\SECXllLWPD (3-21-98) 161
'·
(_
l-
TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES SECTION Xfll __
exterior noise level of at least a Ldn of 60 dB at the property line and an interior noise level
of a Ldn of 45 dB. Testing and maintenance shall only take place on weekdays between the
hours of 8:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m.; and
C. Traffic, at all times, shall be kept to an absolute minimum, but in no case more than two
round trips per day on an average annualized basis once construction is complete.
13.27 VISUAL COMPATIBILITY
A. Facility structures and equipment shall be located, designed and screened to blend with the
existing natural or built surroundings so as to reduce visual impacts to the extent feasible
considering the technological requirements of the proposed telecommunication service and
the need to be compatible with neighboring residences and the character of the community.
B. The facility is designed- to blend with the any existing supporting structure and does not
substantially alter the character of the structure or local area.
C. Following assembly and installation of the facility, all waste and debris shall be removed and
disposed of in a lawful manner; and
D. A visual analysis, which may include photo montage, field mock up, or other techniques shall
be prepared by or on behalf of the applicant which identifies the potential visual impacts, at
design capacity, of the proposed facility to the satisfaction of the Zoning Administrator.
Consideration shall be given to views from public areas as well as from private residences.
The analysis shall assess the cumulative impacts of the proposed facility and other existing
and foreseeable telecommunication facilities in the area, and shall identify and include all
feasible mitigation measures consistent with the technological requirements of the proposed
telecommunication service. All costs for the visual analysis, and applicable administrative
costs, shall be borne by the applicant. ·
13.28 NIER EXPOSURE
A. No telecommunication facility shall be sited or operated in such a manner that it poses, either
by itself or in combination with other such facilities, a potential threat to public health. To that
end no telecommunication facility or combination of facilities shall produce at any time power
densities in any inhabited area as this term is defined in Section 2.2 of this Ordinance that
exceed the ANSI (American National Standards Institute) C95.1-1992 standard for human
exposure or any more restrictive standard subsequently adopted or promulgated by the City,
County, the State of Indiana, or the federal government.
B. Initial compliance with this requirement shall be demonstrated for any facility within four
hundred feet (400') of residential uses or sensitive receptors such as schools, churches,
hospitals, etc. and all b_roadcast radio and television facilities, regardless of adjacent land
uses, through submission, at the time of application for the necessary permit or entitlement,
of NIER (Nonionizing Electromagnetic Radiation calculations) specifying NIER levels in the
inhabited area where the levels produced are projected to be highest. If these calculated
NIER levels exceed 80% of the NIER standard established by this Section, the applicant shall
hire a qualified electrical engineer licensed by the State of Indiana to measure NIER levels
at said location after the facility is in operation. A report of these measurements and his/her
findings with respect to compliance with the established NIER standard shall be submitted
to the Zoning Administrator. Said facility shall not commence normal operations until it
complies with, or has been modified, to comply with this standard. Proof of said compliance
shall be a certification provided by the engineer who prepared the original report. In order to
U:\LANTZ\NAPPANEE\SECXl!l.WPD (3-21-98) 162
TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES . SECTION XIII
assure the objectivity of the analysis, the City may require, at the applicant's expense,
independent verification of the results of the analysis.
C. Every telecommunication facility within four hundred feet (400') of an inhabited area and all
broadcast radio and television facilities shall demonstrate continued compliance with the
NIER standard established by this Section. Every five (5) years ·a report listing each
transmitter and antenna present at the facility and the effective radiated power radiated shall
be submitted to the Zoning Administrator. If either the equipment or effective radiated power
has changed, calculations specifying NIER levels in the inhabited areas where said levels are
projected to be highest shall be prepared. NIER calculations shall also be prepared every
time the adopted NI ER standard changes. If calculated levels in either of these cases exceed
80% of the standard established by this Section, the operator of the facility shall hire a
qualified electrical engineer licensed by the State of Indiana to measure the actual NIER
levels produced. A report of these calculations, required measurements, if any, and the
author's/engineer's findings with respect to compliance with the current NIER standard shall
be submitted to the Zoning Administrator within five (5) years of facility approval and every
five (5) years thereafter. In the case of a change in the standard, the required report shall be
submitted within ninety (90) days of the date said change becomes effective.
D. Failure to supply the required reports or to remain in continued compliance with the NIER
standard established by this Section shall be grounds for revocation of the use permit or
other entitlement.
13.29 TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES - EXCEPTIONS
A Exceptions to the requirements specified within this Chapter may be granted through
issuance of a conditional use permit by the Plan Commission. Such a permit may only be
approved if the Plan Commission finds, after receipt of sufficient e'lidence, that failure to
adhere to the standard under consideration in the specific instance will not increase the
visibility of the facility or decrease public safety .
. B. An exception to the requirements of Sections 13.17 and 13.24 may only be granted upon
written concurrence by the Fire Chief.
C. Tower setback requirements may be waived under any of the following circumstances:
1. The facility is proposed to be co-located onto an existing, legally-established
telecommunication tower; and
2. Overall, the reduced setback enables further.mitigation of adverse visual and other
environmental impacts than would otherwise be possible.
13.30 PUBLIC NOTICE
In addition to the public notice required within this Chapter, the following special noticing shall be
provided:
A Notice of consideration or a public hearing, as appropriate, on a minor or major-use permit
authorizing the establishment or modification of a telecommunication facility shall be provided
to the operators of all telecommunication facilities, registered with the City of Nappanee
pursuant to Section 13.4, within one mile of the subject parcel via mailing of the standard
legal notice prepared, and
U:ILANTZINAPPANEEISECXlll.WPD (3·21-98) 163
[
- \:_...-
TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES SECTION XIII
B. Notice of the approval of a minor use permit by the Zoning Administrator authorizing the
establishment or modification of, or the renewal of a permit for, a telecommunication facility
or minor antenna needing site plan review, shall be mailed to all adjacent property owners
within three hundred feet (300'). Mailing of said notice shall start a fourteen (14) calendar day
appeal period.
13.31 APPEAL
Any person who disagrees with a ruling or interpretation of the Zoning Administrator regarding this
Chapter may appeal the matter to the Plan Commission. Such appeal shall be made in writing and
filed with the City Clerk within fourteen (14) calendar days of the ruling or interpretation. The City
Clerk will then transmit the appeal to the Zoning Administrator, who will cause the matter to be placed
on the agenda of the Plan Commission. If no appeal is made within that time, the ruling or
interpretation shall be final. The appeal shall be addressed to the City Clerk and shall set forth in
writing the grounds for the appeal and the relief sought by the appellant. The hearing shall be
scheduled within two regularly scheduled meetings. The Zoning Administrator shall notify in writing
all persons who have demonstrated their interest in this matter of the time and place of the meeting
on the appeal at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the meeting. The Zoning Administrator shall
transmit the application and all exhibits therewith to the Plan Commission for consideration. For the
purposes of this section, a ruling is a discretionary action and an interpretation refers to the
detenmination of the intent and application of provisions of this Chapter. Application or enforcement
of provisions of this Chapter shall n.ot be considered interpretations or rulings and are not subject to
appeal. Notwithstanding this section, an individual may file for an exception from the provisions of this
Chapter pursuant to Section 13.29.
13.32 SEVERABILITY
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase or word of this ordinance is for any reason held
to be unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity
of the remaining portions of this ordinance. The City Council of the City of Nappanee hereby declares
that it would have passed and adopted this ordinance and each and all provisions thereof irrespective
of the fact that any one or more of said provisions be declared unconstitutional.
U:ILANTZINAPPANEEISECXlll.WPO (3-21-98) 164


